CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF FARRAGUT, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
TOWN OF 
FARRAGUT, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Ron Williams (Mayor) 
Louise Povlin, (Vice-Mayor) (North Ward) 
Scott Meyer (North Ward) 
Ron Pinchok (South Ward) 
Drew Burnette (South Ward) 
Board of Mayor and Aldermen 
____________ 
David Smoak 
Town Administrator 
____________ 
Thomas M. Hale 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Allison Myers 
Town Recorder/Treasurer 
____________ OFFICIALS 
OF THE TOWN OF 
FARRAGUT, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
OFFICIALS of the AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ralph McGill (Mayor) 
Ron Pinchok (Vice-Mayor) (South Ward) 
Louise Povlin (North Ward) 
Robert "Bob" Markli (North Ward) 
Ron Williams (South Ward) 
Board of Mayor and Aldermen 
____________ 
David Smoak 
Town Administrator 
____________ 
Thomas M. Hale 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Allison Myers 
Town Recorder/Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2007 Code, as supplemented through January 22, 2015, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2007 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kellyn Wilcox, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Allison Myers, Town Recorder/Treasurer, and Mr. Thomas M. Hale, Town Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 17-13 
ORDINANCE OF SEPTEMBER 28, 2017 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF FARRAGUT, TENNESSEE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 113, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 27, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Except as otherwise provided: (i) with respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and (ii) with respect to violations that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 27, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its final passage and publication, the public welfare requiring it. 
      Dr. Ralph McGill, Mayor   ;sigl; \Allison Myers, Town Recorder 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 Res. PC-17-01  2-16-2017 Included 17-10  8-10-2017 Omitted 17-11  8-10-2017 Included 17-13  9-28-2017 Included 17-15 11- 9-2017 Included 17-19  1-11-2018 Included 18-01  3-22-2018 Included Supp. No. 3 Res. PC-18-03  1-18-2018 Included Res. PC-18-04  1-18-2018 Included 18-03  6-28-2018 Included 18-05  6-28-2018 Included 18-07  6-28-2018 Included 18-08  6-28-2018 Included Supp. No. 4 19-01  1-24-2019 Included 19-02  1-24-2019 Included  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This part contains T.C.A. title 6, chs. 1-17, current through the end of the 2016 Second Regular Session of the 109th Tennessee General Assembly, being the statutory charter under which the town operates. The source of each section is indicated in parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - ADOPTION AND SURRENDER 
PART 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6-1-101. - Charter definitions. 
    As used in chapters 1-4 of this title, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Board means the mayor and the aldermen; 
(2)  Department head means the city administrator, city recorder, treasurer, police chief and any other department heads appointed by the board or mayor; 
(3)  Officer means the mayor, aldermen, city attorney and city judge; 
(4)  This Charter refers to chapters 1-4 of this title; and 
(5)  Ward means a geographical subdivision of the municipality established for the purpose of securing representation on the board. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-102. - Use of "shall" and "may." 
    As used in this Charter, "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
PART 2. - ADOPTION OF CHARTER 

Sec. 6-1-201. - Right to adopt Charter; incorporation within specified distances from existing cities. 
(a)  (1)  The residents of any incorporated municipality or of any territory wanting to incorporate under this Charter may adopt chapters 1-4 of this title in the manner provided in this chapter. Thereupon, the municipality or territory shall be and become incorporated and be governed as set forth in this chapter. No unincorporated territory shall be incorporated under this Charter unless such territory contains not fewer than 1,500 persons, who shall be actual residents of the territory. 
(2)  No unincorporated territory shall be allowed to hold a referendum on the question of whether or not to incorporate under this Charter until a plan of services is documented, setting forth the identification and projected timing of municipal services proposed to be provided and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. The plan of services shall be attached to the petition to incorporate when such petition is filed with the county election commission. The plan of services shall include, but not be limited to, police protection, fire protection, water service, sanitary sewage system, solid waste disposal, road and street construction and repair, recreational facilities, a proposed five-year operational budget, including projected revenues and expenditures, and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. Municipalities that are first incorporated on or after July 1, 1993, and that produce no local own-source revenues in any fiscal year, shall not receive any state-shared revenues during the next fiscal year. 
(3)  Prior to filing the petition with the county election commission, a public hearing on the referendum on the question of whether or not to incorporate under this Charter and plan of services shall be conducted. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation for two consecutive weeks. 
(b)  (1)  (A) Except as provided in subdivision (b)(2), no unincorporated territory shall be incorporated within three miles of an existing municipality or within five miles of an existing municipality of 100,000 or more in population according to the latest census certified by the department of economic and community development. "Existing municipality" and "existing municipality of 100,000 or more in population" do not include any county with a metropolitan form of government with a population of 100,000 or more, according to the 1990 Federal Census or any subsequent census. 
(B)  If any part of the unincorporated territory proposed for incorporation is within five miles of an existing municipality of 100,000 or more, according to the most recent federal census, and if the governing body of such municipality adopts a resolution by a two-thirds vote indicating that the municipality has no desire to annex the territory, such territory may be included in a proposed new municipality. A petition for incorporation shall include a certified copy of such resolution from the affected municipality. 
(2)  In any county having a population of more than 18,200 and less than 18,500, according to the latest census certified by the department of economic and community development, if any part of the unincorporated territory proposed for incorporation is within five miles of an existing municipality of 100,000 or more in population or within two miles of an existing municipality of more than 1,000 and fewer than 100,000 in population, according to the 1990 Federal Census or any subsequent census, then action on the petition as provided in §§ 6-1-202 and 6-1-204 shall be held in abeyance for 15 months from the date of filing the petition. If, within this period, the existing municipality does not annex at least 20 percent of the land area or 20 percent of the population of the territory proposed for incorporation, then proceedings shall be continued as provided in §§ 6-1-202 and 6-1-204 as though the petition had been filed at the conclusion of the 15-month period. If the existing municipality annexes at least that part of the territory within this period, then the petition shall be null and void. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) or (b) to the contrary, a territory may be incorporated if the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1)  The territory contains 225 residents or more; 
(2)  The territory is composed of property that is 1,600 feet or more above sea level on the western border of the territory and contiguous with a county boundary on the eastern border of the territory; 
(3)  The territory is located within an area that is bordered on the west, north and east by the Tennessee River and on the south by the border between this state and another state; and 
(4)  The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a)-(c) to the contrary, a territory may be incorporated that meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The territory contains 300 residents or more; 
(2)  The territory's western boundary is contiguous with the western boundary of the county in which it is located; 
(3)  The territory is located within an area bordered on the north by the Loosahatchie River and on the south by the Wolf River; 
(4)  The territory's eastern boundary is approximately parallel with the western boundary, but in no place is more than eight miles from the western boundary; and 
(5)  The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, or §§ 6-1-202, 6-1-203, and 6-1-209, or any other law to the contrary, the petition for incorporation of the territory described in this subsection (e) may consist of a letter from a resident of the territory desiring to incorporate to the county election commission requesting that the question of incorporating the territory be placed on the ballot. The letter shall describe the exact boundaries of the proposed municipality, indicate the name of the proposed municipality, and indicate under which charter the territory desires to incorporate. The letter shall be treated as a petition meeting all the requirements of law. 
(f)  (1)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, whenever the governing body of any existing city affected by this section, by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of its governing body, indicates that it has no interest in annexing the property to be incorporated, and when a certified copy of such resolution and a petition requesting that an incorporation election be held are filed with the county election commission, then the proceedings shall continue as provided in this chapter as though the proposed new incorporation was not within the specified distance of such existing city as provided in this section. 
(2)  Subdivision (f)(1) shall only apply in counties having a population of not less than 80,000 nor more than 83,000, according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census; provided, that in an adjoining county an existing municipality that is within the specified distance may also use the procedure authorized by subdivision (f)(1). 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, §§ 1, 2; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 202, § 1; Acts 1996, ch. 666, §§ 1, 4; Acts 1996, ch. 708, §§ 1, 3; Acts 1997, ch. 98, §§ 7-10; Acts 1998, ch. 1101, § 27) 
Sec. 6-1-202. - Election to adopt Charter. 
(a)  The county election commission shall hold an election for the purpose of determining whether this Charter shall become effective for any municipality or newly incorporating territory upon the petition in writing of at least 33 1/3 percent of the registered voters of the municipality or territory. The petition shall include a current list of the registered voters who live within the proposed territory. The petition shall state in a sufficient manner the boundaries of the proposed municipal corporation, which may be done by a general reference to the boundaries then existing if there is one. Upon receipt of the petition, the county election commission shall examine the petition to determine the validity of the signatures in accordance with § 2-1-107. The county election commission shall have a period of 20 days to certify whether the petition has the sufficient number of signatures of registered voters. If the petition is sufficient to call for an election on the issue of incorporation, the county election commission shall hold an election, providing options to vote "FOR" or "AGAINST" the incorporation of the new charter, not less than 45 days nor more than 60 days after the petition is certified. The date of the election shall be set in accordance with § 2-3-204. The county election commission shall, in addition to all other notices required by law, publish one notice of the election in a newspaper of general circulation within the territory of the municipality or of the proposed municipality, and post the notice in at least three places in the territory. 
(b)  At any time not less than 30 days prior to the election provided for in this part, the petition may be withdrawn or may be amended to call for a smaller territory for the proposed municipal corporation so long as all of the proposed smaller territory is contained within the boundaries of the territory described in the first petition. The withdrawal or amendment shall be valid if filed with the county election commission in writing, and if signed by not fewer than 51 percent of those who signed the original petition. In the event such an amended petition is filed, all provisions relating to time periods in § 6-1-201 shall be controlled by the date of the filing of the original petition, notwithstanding the filing of the amended petition, and the county election commission shall publish the notice of election as provided for in subsection (a). A petition to withdraw, when filed with and validated by the county election commission, shall render the original petition null and void. 
(c)  A cash bond equivalent to the costs of the election to incorporate under this Charter shall be filed by the petitioners with the county election commission together with the petition for incorporation. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1997, ch. 98, § 4; Acts 1998, ch. 1101, § 28) 
Sec. 6-1-203. - Petition to incorporate under this Charter. 
    The petition filed in accordance with § 6-1-202 shall be in substantially the form provided in § 6-1-209 and shall include a description of the boundaries of the proposed municipal corporation and the boundaries of the proposed wards, if there is only one alderman to be elected per ward, the wards that will carry the initial two-year term, the proposed name of the municipality and whether it is a city or town. The petition shall include a plan of services setting forth the identification and projected timing of municipal services proposed to be provided and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. The plan of services shall include, but not be limited to, police protection, fire protection, water service, sanitary sewage system, solid waste disposal, road and street construction and repair, recreational facilities, a proposed five-year operational budget, including projected revenues and expenditures, and a property tax rate to be annually levied upon all taxable property in the area to be incorporated. Boundary descriptions shall contain references to tax maps kept in the office of the county assessor of property. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, § 3; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 2; Acts 2008, ch. 971, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-204. - Registration of voters; certification of result. 
(a)  All registered voters of the municipality or of the territory of the proposed municipality are eligible to vote in the election. 
(b)  The county election commission shall determine and declare the result of the election and shall certify the result in accordance with § 2-8-105(3) within 48 hours after the election. It shall publish the results in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or territory and, if the municipality is already incorporated, shall file the results with the legislative body of the municipality at its first meeting after the certification. The results shall be entered at large on the minutes of the body with which it is filed. 
(c)  In any election held by municipalities incorporated under this Charter, registered voters of the municipality may vote in accordance with this subsection (c). Upon adoption of a resolution approved by a two-thirds vote of the board of commissioners of any municipality incorporated under this Charter that has a population of not less than 7,710 nor more than 7,720, according to the 2000 Federal Census or any subsequent federal census, registered voters who own real property located in the municipality shall be entitled to vote in all municipal elections and municipal referenda held in the municipality. Section 2-2-107(a)(3) shall apply to the property rights voting within the municipality. The approval or nonapproval of the resolution shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of the board and certified by the presiding officer to the secretary of state. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 2007, ch. 88, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-205. - Effect of vote. 
(a)  If the majority of the votes cast are in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall be deemed to have been adopted. The newly adopted charter shall not be effective until the first board takes office as provided in § 6-1-207. Except for the provisions of this Charter that are adopted by reference in other municipal charters, the provisions of this Charter apply only to those municipalities that have adopted this Charter by referendum as authorized by law. 
(b)  Following the defeat of an incorporation in an election held pursuant to § 6-1-202, no new petition for an election may be filed until after the expiration of four years; provided, however, that if the territory included in the boundaries of the newly proposed municipal corporation includes less than 50 percent of the actual territory subject to incorporation in the previous election, the new petition may be filed after the expiration of two years. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 3) 
Sec. 6-1-206. - Certification to secretary of state. 
    After certification of the election results, if at least a majority of the votes cast are "for charter," the county election commission shall certify to the secretary of state that notice was duly given, and application in due form of law made, the description of boundaries, the entire number of votes cast, the number of votes cast "for charter," the number of votes cast "against charter," and the corporate name of the municipality. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-207. - Election of officers upon incorporation. 
(a)  The county election commission shall call an election not later than 62 days following the election for adoption of this Charter, at which time municipal officials shall be chosen who shall take office immediately following the election. The qualifying deadline for filing nominating petitions shall be as described in § 2-5-101. 
(b)  In the election held pursuant to subsection (a), where there is more than one alderman to be elected per ward, the alderman receiving the higher number of votes in each ward shall serve a four-year term. The alderman receiving the second higher number of votes shall serve an initial two-year term. All terms thereafter will be four years. 
(c)  The mayor and each alderman shall serve the term for which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-208. - Succession to old corporation. 
(a)  (1)  This Charter shall take effect in any municipality immediately after the election and qualification of the first board of mayor and aldermen, and any then-existing charter of the municipality shall immediately become null and void. 
(2)  The right, title and ownership of all property of the municipality and all of its uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, and choses in action, and all of its rights of every kind whatsoever, shall immediately become vested in the new corporation chartered under chapters 1-4 of this title. 
(3)  The new corporation shall answer and be liable for all debts, contracts and obligations of the corporation it succeeds in the same manner and proportion and to the same extent as the former corporation was liable under existing laws. 
(4)  All ordinances, resolutions and bylaws duly enacted and in force under the preexisting charter and not inconsistent with this Charter shall remain in full force until repealed, modified or amended. 
(b)  Any zoning ordinance applicable to any territory incorporated under this Charter shall continue to apply to that territory until the municipality enacts a zoning ordinance, or enacts an ordinance rescinding the zoning that applied to such territory. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-209. - Sample petition for adoption. 
    Petitions for adoption of this Charter shall be in substantially the following form: 
    PETITION FOR INCORPORATION ELECTION FOR TOWN (CITY)___________, TENNESSEE 
    TO: The County Election Commission, ___________ County, Tennessee 
    We the undersigned, being registered voters and residents of the territory herein proposed for incorporation, and being in number in excess of thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/3 %) of the registered voters of the herein described territory hereby request the county election commission to hold an election on the question of whether or not the herein described territory shall be incorporated under the terms of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, chapters 1-4, and be known by the name and style of the "Town (City) of ___________, Tennessee," all as prescribed in Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, chapters 1-4. 
    The territory in question, being part of the ___________, Civil District(s) of ___________ County, Tennessee is further described as: 
    (Here insert a description of boundaries with references to tax maps) 
    The wards of the Town (City) shall be as follows: 
    (Here insert a description of wards, and if there is only one ward state that the boundaries are as described above) 
    Wards that will carry an initial two-year term: (For those municipalities incorporating with more than four wards.) 
    The proposed plan of services is as follows: (Here insert a description of the Plan of Services as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-1-203). 
    PETITIONERS' SIGNATURES 
_____
Name _____
Residence Address _____
Date  
    (List name and residence as on registration records) 
    Certificate 
    I, ___________, hereby certify that I, personally, solicited the signatures of the persons appearing on this page and that they, in fact, signed their names to this petition in my presence. 
_____
 Name _____
 Address _____
 Date  
STATE OF TENNESSEE ) COUNTY OF ___________ )  
    On this _____ day of _______, 20___, before me personally appeared ___________, to me known to be the person described in, and who executed, the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged that he (she) executed it as such person's free act and deed. 
_____
Signature and Seal of Notary Public My commission expires: _____  
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, § 4) 
Sec. 6-1-210. - General validation provision. 
(a)  The adoption, heretofore accomplished, of chapters 1 and 2 of this title, before June 30, 1991, by any territory or municipality is hereby ratified and validated in all respects. No flaw or defect or failure to comply with any technical requirement of incorporation shall invalidate any ordinance passed by any municipality incorporating under chapters 1-4 of this title, after June 30, 1991. 
(b)  (1)  Notwithstanding this chapter or any other law to the contrary, 
(A)  If the registered voters of any unincorporated territory approved a mayor-aldermanic charter and elected municipal officials, acting pursuant to this chapter on or before December 31, 1999; 
(B)  If, from the election of such officials until April 26, 2001, the territory has continuously functioned as a mayor-aldermanic municipality; and 
(C)  If the territory, between the date of such election and April 26, 2001, received and expended state funding allocated for municipalities; then 
(2)  The adoption of such charter, the incorporation of such territory as a mayor-aldermanic municipality and the election of such officials are hereby ratified and validated in all respects; and no flaw or defect or failure to comply with any requirement of incorporation, set forth in § 6-1-201(b), shall invalidate the territory's status as an incorporated municipality or invalidate any ordinance passed by the board. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 2001, ch. 129, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-211. - Elections valid despite informalities. 
    No informalities in conducting any election held under this chapter shall invalidate it if the election is conducted fairly and in substantial conformity with the requirements of this chapter and the general election law. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Secs. 6-1-212-6-1-218. - [Repealed.] 
Sec. 6-1-219. - [Unconstitutional.] 
Sec. 6-1-220. - County of situs to continue receiving tax revenues from new municipality until July 1; exception; notice to department. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, whenever a new municipality incorporates under any form of charter, the county or counties in which the new municipality is located shall continue to receive the revenue from all state and local taxes distributed on the basis of situs of collection, generated within the newly incorporated area, until July 1 following the incorporation, unless the incorporation takes effect on July 1. 
(b)  If the incorporation takes effect on July 1, then the municipality shall begin receiving revenue from such taxes generated within its corporate boundaries for the period beginning July 1. 
(c)  Whenever a municipality incorporates, the municipality shall notify the department of revenue of such incorporation prior to the incorporation becoming effective for the purpose of tax administration. 
(d)  Such taxes shall include the local sales tax authorized in § 67-6-103, the income tax on dividends authorized in § 67-2-102, and all other such taxes distributed to counties and municipalities based on the situs of their collection. 
(Acts 1998, ch. 651, § 1) 
PART 3. - SURRENDER 

Sec. 6-1-301. - Surrender of Charter. 
(a)  After the adoption of this Charter and the election of the first board of mayor and aldermen, no election for the surrender of this Charter shall be called or held for a period of four years from the date the first board takes office. 
(b)  After the expiration of the four-year period, an election to surrender the charter may be held. In order for a surrender election to be held, a petition requesting surrender of the charter must be filed in the same manner and contain the signatures of the same number of registered voters as provided for the adoption of this Charter. The petition must pray for a surrender of the charter and must be accompanied by a cash bond to be posted by the petitioners to cover the cost of the election. In case of a failure to surrender the charter, future elections to surrender it shall not be held more frequently than at four-year intervals. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-302. - Conduct of surrender election. 
    The county election commission has the same duties with respect to an election for the surrender of a charter as it has with respect to an election to adopt a charter under this title. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-303. - Termination of charter; new charter. 
    If a majority of the votes cast in the election favor the termination of this form of government, this Charter shall terminate at one minute after midnight (12:01 a.m.) on the 60th day next following the date of the election, unless this falls upon Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall terminate at one minute after midnight (12:01 a.m.) on the next day. If, before the adoption of this Charter, the municipality functioned under a different charter, then, upon termination of this Charter, the prior charter shall become effective at the time provided for in this section. Territory previously unincorporated shall revert to that status. Another charter, however, may be adopted, and the question of whether or not another charter shall be adopted may be placed on the ballots used in the election mentioned in this section, if the petition filed requests that, and if all other necessary legal steps to adopt the other charter have been taken. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-304. - Election of new officers when charter is surrendered. 
(a)  If there was a previously incorporated municipality or if a new charter is adopted as provided in § 6-1-303, the county election commission shall call an election not more than 62 days following the election for surrender of this Charter, at which time municipal officials for the newly adopted form of government shall be chosen who shall take office immediately after the election. 
(b)  The previous board shall hold over until the newly elected officers take office. 
(c)  The qualifying deadline for filing nominating petitions shall be as described in § 2-5-101. 
(d)  All registered voters of the municipality may vote in the election. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-305. - Succession to assets and liabilities after surrender of charter. 
(a)  In case of a reversion to a former charter or adoption of a new one simultaneously with the surrender of the old, all assets, liabilities and obligations of the old municipality shall become those of the new municipality. 
(b)  In the event a municipality reverts to unincorporated status, the board of mayor and aldermen shall become trustees of the property and funds of the former municipality, and, under such bonds as may be required by the county legislative body, shall proceed to terminate the affairs of the municipality and dispose of its property. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-306. - Liquidation of affairs. 
(a)  If the property and funds are more than sufficient to meet the municipality's obligations, the surplus shall be paid into the treasury of the county to become a part of its general fund. 
(b)  If the property and funds are insufficient to meet all the municipality's current obligations, the county legislative body may levy and collect taxes upon the property within the boundaries of the former municipality and pay the revenue to the trustees for the purpose of meeting the current deficit. 
(c)  The trustees shall terminate the affairs of the municipality as soon as possible, but in no event shall the trusteeship continue for more than 36 months. Any matters, including obligations maturing after 36 months, not disposed of within the 36-month period shall become the responsibility of the county legislative body of the county in which the municipality is located. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
PART 4. - OFFICERS 

Secs. 6-1-401-6-1-406. - [Repealed.] 
PART 5. - CHANGE OF CORPORATE NAME 

Sec. 6-1-501. - Right to change corporate name. 
    A municipality may amend this Charter for the sole purpose of changing the corporate name of the municipality, including the municipality's designation as a town or city in the manner provided in § 6-1-502. 
(Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-502. - Approval by resolution; notice; effect of majority vote. 
    The corporate name of a municipality may be changed only in the following manner: 
(1)  The proposed name change must be approved by resolution by a vote of not less than two thirds of the board in the manner provided for ordinances in § 6-2-102; 
(2)  If approved by the board, the resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality within 14 days of final approval by the board or the first available opportunity for publication, whichever is sooner. Such resolution shall become operative 60 days after its adoption by the board unless ten percent of the qualified electors of the municipality sign a petition and present it to the board during such 60-day period requesting that the resolution be referred to the electors, in which case it must receive the approval of a majority of the electors voting thereon at an election held as provided in subdivision (3). If such a petition is not received within such 60-day period, the resolution shall become operative at the end of such 60-day period and the mayor shall file a copy of the resolution indicating the new corporate name of the municipality with the secretary of state; 
(3)  Upon receipt of a petition filed in the manner provided in subdivision (2), a certified copy of the resolution shall be sent to the county election commission, which shall place the question whether to approve the resolution on the ballot of the next scheduled municipal election or general election at which members of the general assembly are chosen, whichever is sooner. The ballot shall provide options to vote "for" or "against" the resolution. The qualifications for voting shall be the same as otherwise provided in § 6-1-204 in the election to adopt the original charter under this chapter; 
(4)  If the majority vote is for the resolution, it shall be deemed to be operative on the date that the county election commission makes its official canvas of the election returns. The county election commission shall then promptly certify the results of the election to the secretary of state and the new corporate name of the municipality; and 
(5)  If the majority vote is against the election, the question of approving the resolution shall not be included on any subsequent election ballot unless a new resolution is first approved by the board in the manner provided in this section. 
(Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1) 
Sec. 6-1-503. - Effect on civil liability. 
    Any change in the name of any municipality under this part shall have no effect whatever on any obligations or liabilities of the municipality, in contract, tort, or otherwise, all of which shall remain the same as prior to the name change. 
(Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES WITH MAYOR-ALDERMANIC CHARTER 
PART 1. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 6-2-101. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance, or the caption of each ordinance, shall be published after its final passage in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. No ordinance shall take effect until the ordinance or its caption is published. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 621, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-102. - Ordinance procedure. 
    An ordinance shall be considered and adopted on two (2) separate days; any other form of board action shall be considered and adopted in one (1) day. Any form of board action shall be passed by a majority of the members present, if there is a quorum. A quorum is a majority of the members to which the board is entitled. All ayes and nays on all votes on all forms of board action shall be recorded. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 621, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2-103. - Annual operating budget and budgetary comparisons; publication. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the governing body shall publish the annual operating budget and budgetary comparisons of the proposed budget with the prior year's actual figures and the current year's estimated figures, which information shall include the following: 
(1)  Revenues and expenditures for the following governmental funds: general, streets/public works, general purpose school and debt service; 
(2)  Revenues for each fund shall be listed separately by local taxes, state, federal government and other sources; 
(3)  Expenditures for each fund shall be listed separately by salaries and other costs; 
(4)  Beginning and ending fund balances shall be shown for each fund; and 
(5)  The number of full-time equivalent employee positions shall be shown for each fund. 
(b)  The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation and shall be published not less than ten days prior to the meeting where the governing body will consider final passage of the budget. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 484, § 8; Acts 1992, ch. 760, § 2) 
Sec. 6-2-104. - [Repealed.] 
Sec. 6-2-105. - Ordinances prior to June 30, 1991, ratified. 
    All ordinances adopted on or prior to June 30, 1991, are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 2) 
PART 2. - MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-2-201. - General powers. 
    Every municipality incorporated under this Charter may: 
(1)  Assess, levy and collect taxes for all general and special purposes on all subjects or objects of taxation, and privileges taxable by law for municipal purposes; 
(2)  Adopt classifications of the subjects and objects of taxation that are not contrary to law; 
(3)  Make special assessments for local improvements; 
(4)  Contract and be contracted with; 
(5)  Incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise, and give any appropriate evidence thereof, in the manner provided for in this section; 
(6)  Issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner dispose of, negotiable or nonnegotiable interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing bonds, warrants, promissory notes or orders of the municipality, upon the credit of the municipality or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the municipality or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the municipality, or solely upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local improvements, or upon any two or more such credits; 
(7)  Expend the money of the municipality for all lawful purposes; 
(8)  Acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of property, real or personal, and any estate or interest therein, within or without the municipality or state; 
(9)  Condemn property, real or personal, or any easement, interest, or estate or use therein, either within or without the municipality, for present or future public use; the condemnation shall be effected in accordance with the terms and provisions of title 29, chapter 16, or in any other manner provided by law; 
(10)  Take and hold property within or without the municipality or state upon trust, and administer trusts for the public benefit; 
(11)  Acquire, construct, own, operate and maintain, or sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any estate or interest therein, or any other utility that is of service to the municipality, its inhabitants, or any part of the municipality, and further, may issue debt for these purposes under the Local Government Public Obligations Act, compiled in title 9, chapter 21; 
(12)  Grant to any person, firm, association or municipality, franchises for public utilities and public services to be furnished the municipality and those in the municipality. The power to grant franchises embraces the power to grant exclusive franchises. When an exclusive franchise is granted, it shall be exclusive not only as against any other person, firm, association, or corporation, but also against the municipality itself. Franchises may be granted for a period of 25 years or less, but not longer, except as provided in § 65-4-107(b). The board may prescribe, in each grant of a franchise, the rates, fares, charges and regulations that may be made by the grantee of the franchise in accordance with state and federal law. Franchises may by their terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the municipality at the date of the franchises, and as the corporate limits may be enlarged, and to the existing streets, alleys and thoroughfares that may be opened after the grant of the franchise; 
(13)  Make contracts with any person, firm, association or corporation for public utilities and public services to be furnished the municipality and those in the municipality. The power to make contracts embraces the power to make exclusive contracts. When an exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive against any other person, firm, association or corporation. These contracts may be entered into for a period of 25 years or less, but not longer. The board may prescribe in each such contract entered into the rates, fares, charges, and regulations that may be made by the person, firm, association or corporation with whom the contract is made. Such contracts may by their terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the municipality at the date of the contract, and as the corporate limits may be enlarged, and to the then existing streets, alleys and thoroughfares and to any other streets, alleys and other thoroughfares that may be opened after the grant of the contract; 
(14)  Prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the construction, maintenance, equipment, operation and service of public utilities, compel reasonable extensions of facilities for these services, and assess fees for the use of or impact upon these services. Nothing in this subdivision (14) shall be construed to permit the alteration or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any exclusive franchise granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under subdivisions (12) and (13); 
(15)  Establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter, widen, extend, grade, improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light, sprinkle and clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public grounds, public facilities, libraries and squares, wharves, bridges, viaducts, subways, tunnels, sewers and drains within or without the corporate limits, regulate their use within the corporate limits, assess fees for the use of or impact upon such property and facilities, and take and appropriate property therefor under §§ 7-31-107-7-31-111 and 29-16-203, or any other manner provided by general laws; 
(16)  (A)  Construct, improve, reconstruct and reimprove by opening, extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling, macadamizing, draining or otherwise improving any streets, highways, avenues, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits, and assess a portion of the cost of these improvements on the property abutting on or adjacent to these streets, highways or alleys under, and as provided by, title 7, chapters 32 and 33; 
(B)  Subdivision (16)(A) may not be construed to prohibit a municipality with a population of not less than 700 nor more than 705, according to the 1990 Federal Census or any subsequent federal census, from installing and maintaining a traffic control signal within its corporate limits, and any such municipality is expressly so authorized; provided, that no device shall be installed to control traffic on a state highway without the approval of the commissioner of transportation; 
(17)  Assess against abutting property within the corporate limits the cost of planting shade trees, removing from sidewalks all accumulations of snow, ice and earth, cutting and removing obnoxious weeds and rubbish, street lighting, street sweeping, street sprinkling, street flushing, and street oiling, the cleaning and rendering sanitary or removing, abolishing and prohibiting of closets and privies, in such manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the board; 
(18)  Acquire, purchase, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain and do all things relating to all marketplaces, public buildings, bridges, sewers and other structures, works and improvements; 
(19)  Collect and dispose of drainage, sewage, ashes, garbage, refuse or other waste, or license and regulate their collection and disposal, and the cost of collection, regulation or disposal may be funded by taxation, special assessment to the property owner, user fees or other charges; 
(20)  License and regulate all persons, firms, corporations, companies and associations engaged in any business, occupation, calling, profession or trade not prohibited by law; 
(21)  Impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business, vocation, pursuit, privilege or calling not prohibited by law; 
(22)  Define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent and regulate all acts, practices, conduct, businesses, occupations, callings, trades, uses of property and all other things whatsoever detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality, and exercise general police powers; 
(23)  Prescribe limits within which business occupations and practices liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the health, morals, security or general welfare of the people may lawfully be established, conducted or maintained; 
(24)  Inspect, test, measure and weigh any article for consumption or use within the municipality, and charge reasonable fees therefor, and provide standards of weights, tests and measures in such manner as may be provided pursuant to title 47, chapter 26, part 9; 
(25)  Regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area, lot, location, height, construction and materials of all buildings and structures in accordance with general law, and inspect all buildings, lands and places as to their condition for health, cleanliness and safety, and when necessary, prevent their use and require any alteration or changes necessary to make them healthful, clean or safe; 
(26)  Provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive, or penal institutions, departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences and services; 
(27)  Purchase or construct, maintain and establish a correctional facility for the confinement and detention of persons who violate laws within the corporate limits of the city, or to contract with the county to keep these persons in the correctional facility of the county and to enforce the payment of fines and costs in accordance with §§ 40-24-104 and 40-24-105 or through contempt proceedings in accordance with general law; 
(28)  (A)  Enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by fines, forfeitures and penalties, and by other actions or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction; 
(B)  Provide by ordinance for court costs as provided in the Municipal Court Reform Act, compiled in title 16, chapter 18, part 3; 
(29)  Establish schools, to the extent authorized pursuant to general law, determine the necessary boards, officers and teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation, purchase or otherwise acquire land for or assess a fee for use of, or impact upon, schoolhouses, playgrounds and other purposes connected with the schools, purchase or erect all necessary buildings and do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain and operate a complete educational system within the municipality; 
(30)  Regulate, tax, license or suppress the keeping or going at large of animals within the municipality, impound them, and in default of redemption, sell or kill them; 
(31)  Call elections as provided in this Charter; 
(32)  Have and exercise all powers that now or hereafter it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate, as fully and completely as though these powers were specifically enumerated; and 
(33)  Create a design review commission, which shall have the authority to develop general guidelines and to develop procedures for the approval of the guidelines for the exterior appearance of all nonresidential property, multiple family residential property, and any entrance to nonresidential developments within the municipality; provided, that the authority is subordinate to and in no way exceeds the authority delegated to a municipal planning commission pursuant to title 13, chapter 4. Any property owner affected by the guidelines may appeal a decision by the design review commission to the municipality's planning commission or, if there is no planning commission, to the entire municipal legislative body. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 4; Acts 1998, ch. 621, § 2; Acts 1998, ch. 1126, § 1; Acts 2006, ch. 796, § 1; Acts 2011, ch. 453, § 1; Acts 2014, ch. 927, § 6; Acts 2016, ch. 645, § 2) 
CHAPTER 3. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN 

Sec. 6-3-101. - Election of board; municipalities incorporating under chapters 1-4 of this title after June 30, 1991; ward boundaries. 
(a)  Any municipality incorporating under this Charter after June 30, 1991, shall have at least one ward but not more than eight wards. Any municipality having a population of less than 5,000 shall, upon incorporation, have one ward, and its board shall consist of a mayor and two aldermen elected at large. Any municipality having a population of more than 5,000 shall, upon incorporation, have two wards, and its board shall consist of a mayor to be elected at large and two aldermen elected from each ward. The mayor and aldermen elected to the first board shall serve the four-year and two-year terms prescribed by § 6-1-207(b). At each election thereafter the mayor and aldermen shall be elected to four-year terms, except in transitional elections prescribed by subsection (c). Any municipality that incorporated under this Charter after June 30, 1991, and that has a population of less than 5,000 and has only one ward, may by ordinance increase the number of aldermen to a maximum of four without increasing the number of wards. The ordinance shall provide for staggered four-year terms in accordance with § 6-1-207(b), but may provide for transitional terms of less than four years. 
(b)  (1)  Any municipality incorporated after June 30, 1991, may increase or reduce the number of wards, except that municipalities having a population of more than 5,000 shall not reduce the number of wards below two. The board of any municipality having between one and four wards shall consist of a mayor elected at large and two aldermen elected from each ward, except that municipalities having more than one ward may reduce the number of aldermen from each ward from two to one. The board of any municipality having between five and eight wards shall consist of a mayor elected at large and one alderman elected from each ward. In wards having more than one alderman, the aldermen shall serve staggered terms of office within their wards. 
(2)  Any municipality that has only one ward may provide by ordinance for numerical designations for aldermanic positions. After numerical positions have been designated, candidates for alderman shall qualify by indicating on the qualifying petition the position the candidate is seeking. Ballots shall indicate the position to be filled by the selection of candidates listed under "Alderman, position 1," "Alderman, position 2," and so on. Any qualified person residing in the municipality may seek an open aldermanic position, but may qualify in any election for only one position. 
(c)  All increases and reductions in the number of wards and aldermen under this section shall be accomplished only by ordinance passed by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership to which the board is entitled. The ordinance shall: 
(1)  Take effect at the next municipal election, but shall not affect the present terms of members of the board of mayor and aldermen; 
(2)  Where appropriate, establish and describe the new ward boundaries; 
(3)  Provide for a transitional election following the adoption of the ordinance in which the mayor or aldermen, or both, running for office shall be elected for terms that will expire at the next municipal election; 
(4)  At the second municipal election following the adoption of the ordinance provide for a system of staggered terms of office under which the mayor is elected for a term of four years, in cities with an even number of wards one half the total number of mayor and aldermen running for office are elected to four-year terms, in cities with an uneven number of wards one more or one less than one half the total number of mayor and aldermen running for office, are elected to four-year terms, in both classes of cities the remaining aldermen are elected to two-year terms, and following which all aldermen shall be elected for four-year terms; and 
(5)  In the case of a ward that has been abolished, provide that any alderman whose term extends past the life of a ward shall serve as an alderman at large for the remainder of the term. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, §§ 3, 4; Acts 1996, ch. 652, § 1; Acts 1997, ch. 77; Acts 2003, ch. 261, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-102. - Election of board by municipalities incorporated under chapters 1 and 2 of this title, on or prior to June 30, 1991. 
(a)  Any municipality incorporating under this Charter after June 30, 1991, shall have at least one ward but not more than eight wards. Any municipality having a population of less than 5,000 shall, upon incorporation, have one ward, and its board shall consist of a mayor and two aldermen elected at large. Any municipality having a population of more than 5,000 shall, upon incorporation, have two wards, and its board shall consist of a mayor to be elected at large and two aldermen elected from each ward. The mayor and aldermen elected to the first board shall serve the four-year and two-year terms prescribed by § 6-1-207(b). At each election thereafter the mayor and aldermen shall be elected to four-year terms, except in transitional elections prescribed by subsection (c). Any municipality that incorporated under this Charter after June 30, 1991, and that has a population of less than 5,000 and has only one ward, may by ordinance increase the number of aldermen to a maximum of four without increasing the number of wards. The ordinance shall provide for staggered four-year terms in accordance with § 6-1-207(b), but may provide for transitional terms of less than four years. 
(b)  (1)  Any municipality incorporated after June 30, 1991, may increase or reduce the number of wards, except that municipalities having a population of more than 5,000 shall not reduce the number of wards below two. The board of any municipality having between one and four wards shall consist of a mayor elected at large and two aldermen elected from each ward, except that municipalities having more than one ward may reduce the number of aldermen from each ward from two to one. The board of any municipality having between five and eight wards shall consist of a mayor elected at large and one alderman elected from each ward. In wards having more than one alderman, the aldermen shall serve staggered terms of office within their wards. 
(2)  Any municipality that has only one ward may provide by ordinance for numerical designations for aldermanic positions. After numerical positions have been designated, candidates for alderman shall qualify by indicating on the qualifying petition the position the candidate is seeking. Ballots shall indicate the position to be filled by the selection of candidates listed under "Alderman, position 1," "Alderman, position 2," and so on. Any qualified person residing in the municipality may seek an open aldermanic position, but may qualify in any election for only one position. 
(c)  All increases and reductions in the number of wards and aldermen under this section shall be accomplished only by ordinance passed by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership to which the board is entitled. The ordinance shall: 
(1)  Take effect at the next municipal election, but shall not affect the present terms of members of the board of mayor and aldermen; 
(2)  Where appropriate, establish and describe the new ward boundaries; 
(3)  Provide for a transitional election following the adoption of the ordinance in which the mayor or aldermen, or both, running for office shall be elected for terms that will expire at the next municipal election; 
(4)  At the second municipal election following the adoption of the ordinance, provide for a system of staggered terms of office under which the mayor is elected for a term of four years, in cities with an even number of wards one half the total number of mayor and aldermen running for office are elected to four-year terms, in cities with an uneven number of wards one more or one less than one half the total number of mayor and aldermen running for office, are elected to four-year terms, in both classes of cities the remaining aldermen are elected to two-year terms, and following which all aldermen shall be elected for four-year terms; and 
(5)  In the case of a ward that has been abolished, provide that any alderman whose term extends past the life of a ward shall serve as an alderman at large for the remainder of the term. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, §§ 5, 6, 7; Acts 1994, ch. 574, §§ 1, 2; Acts 1998, ch. 691, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 954, § 1; Acts 2000, ch. 613, §§ 1, 2; Acts 2003, ch. 261, § 2; Acts 2007, ch. 90, § 1) 
Editor's note- Acts 2000, ch. 613, § 2 provides as follows: "This act shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-thirds vote of any municipality within two counties and has a population of not less than 1,450 nor more than 1,475 according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of such municipality and certified to the Secretary of State." proclaimed by the presiding officer of such municipality and certified to the Secretary of State." Section 1 of such act amended subsection (c) of the above section. 
Sec. 6-3-103. - Residence requirements for officers. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor unless such person has resided within the municipality for at least one year next preceding the election. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible for the office of alderman unless such person has resided within the ward for at least one year next preceding the election. 
(c)  Residence within any area annexed in a year preceding an election shall be counted in meeting the residence requirement of this section. 
(d)  Any officer moving from such officer's ward, in the case of an alderman, or moving from the municipality, in the case of the mayor, during the term of office shall be presumed to have vacated the office, and it shall be declared vacant, and filled as provided in § 6-3-107. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-104. - Dates for municipal elections. 
(a)  The board may by ordinance change the date of municipal elections to coincide with the August or November general election. The ordinance changing the election date shall provide for the extension of the terms of members of the board necessary to meet the election date, but no term may be extended for more than two years beyond its regular expiration date. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to remove any incumbent from office or abridge the term of any incumbent prior to the end of the term for which an elected official was selected. 
(c)  If the board changes the date of municipal elections pursuant to subsection (a), the board may at a later date change the election date back to what such date was prior to moving the election date to coincide with the August or November general election. The board may only make an election date change under this subsection (c) one time. Terms of incumbent members of the board shall not be abridged to accomplish an election date change under this subsection (c); however, members elected at a date change pursuant to this subsection (c) may take office at a later date so as to not abridge terms of incumbent members. If such members take office at a later date, their term may be abridged due to such members having to take office at the later date. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 2010, ch. 1008, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-105. - Oaths of office. 
    The mayor, after the mayor's election, shall take an oath of office to support the constitution of the state and faithfully discharge the duties of the mayor's office, before any officer authorized to administer oaths. This officer or the mayor shall then induct the aldermen into office by administering to them a similar oath of office. Oaths of office shall be filed in the archives of the municipality. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-106. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor: 
(1)  Shall be the chief executive officer of the municipality and shall preside at meetings of the board; 
(2)  Shall communicate any information needed, and recommend measures the mayor deems expedient to the board; 
(3)  (A)  Shall make temporary appointments of any officer or department head as those terms are defined in § 6-1-101, except that of alderman, arising from the absence, sickness or disability of any such officer or department head, and shall report such appointment to the board at its next regular meeting; 
(B)  The board may confirm or reject the mayor's temporary appointments, or, at its discretion, make its own temporary appointments. The board shall make appointments to fill vacancies in office; 
(4)  (A)  May call special meetings of the board upon adequate notice to the board and adequate public notice; 
(B)  Shall state the matters to be considered at the special meeting and the action of the board shall be limited to those matters submitted; 
(5)  Shall countersign checks and drafts drawn upon the treasury by the treasurer and sign all contracts to which the municipality is a party; 
(6)  As a member of the board, may make motions and shall have a vote on all matters coming before the board; and 
(7)  Shall make appointments to boards and commissions as authorized by law. 
(b)  Unless otherwise designated by the board by ordinance, the mayor shall perform the following duties or may designate a department head or department heads to perform any of the following duties: 
(1)  Those duties set forth in § 6-4-101, if the board does not appoint a city administrator, or if someone else is not designated by the board to perform those duties; 
(2)  (A)  Employ, promote, discipline, suspend and discharge all employees and department heads, in accordance with personnel policies and procedures, if any, adopted by the board; 
(B)  Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as granting a property interest to employees or department heads in their continued employment; 
(3)  Act as purchasing agent for the municipality in the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for the proper conduct of the municipality's business; provided, that all purchases shall be made in accordance with policies, practices and procedures established by the board; 
(4)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the board for their adoption by ordinance; and 
(5)  Such other duties as may be designated or required by the board. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 8; Acts 1997, ch. 27, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 6-3-107. - Vice mayor; vacancies in office. 
(a)  The board shall elect an alderman to the office of vice mayor, who shall serve as mayor when the mayor is absent or unable to discharge the duties of the mayor's office, and, in case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, until the next regular municipal election. 
(b)  (1)  By affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members, the board shall fill a vacancy in the office of alderman for the unexpired term, but any portion of an unexpired four-year term for alderman or mayor that remains beyond the next municipal election shall be filled by the voters at that election, if the vacancy occurs at least 20 days before the latest time for filing nominating petitions for candidates in that election. 
(2)  All such elections by the board shall be made by voice vote, on the calling of the roll. If a tie vote occurs in filling a vacancy on the board, the presiding officer shall vote a second time to break the tie. 
Sec. 6-3-108. - Election of alderman as presiding officer. 
    In the absence of the mayor and vice-mayor, the board may elect an alderman to act as presiding officer. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1997, ch. 27, § 2) 
Sec. 6-3-109. - Compensation. 
(a)  The compensation of all officers shall be established in the ordinance adopting the annual budget and capital program. 
(b)  The compensation of the mayor may not be diminished during the mayor's term of office. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-3-110. - Establishment of term limits for the mayor and board of mayor and aldermen of certain municipalities by ordinance. 
(a)  Subject to the further provisions of this section, the board of mayor and aldermen of any municipality incorporated under this Charter which is located within a county that has adopted a charter form of government is authorized upon its own initiative and upon the adoption of an ordinance by a two-thirds vote at two separate meetings to establish term limits for the mayor and board of mayor and aldermen of such municipality in such manner as shall be designated by the ordinance. The operation of the ordinance shall be subject to approval of the voters as required in subsection (b). 
(b)  (1)  Any ordinance to establish term limits for the mayor and board of mayor and alderman of any municipality to which subsection (a) applies shall not become operative until approved in an election herein provided in the municipality. Upon the adoption of the ordinance, the mayor shall notify the county election commission to hold an election as provided in this subsection (b). 
(2)  After the receipt of a certified copy of such ordinance, the county election commission shall hold an election on the question pursuant to § 2-3-204, providing options to vote "for" or "against" the ordinance, and a majority vote of those voting in the election shall determine whether the ordinance is to be operative. 
(3)  If the majority vote is for the ordinance, it shall be deemed to be operative on the date that the county election commission makes its official canvass of the election returns; provided, however, that no term limits shall apply until the election of the mayor and board of mayor and aldermen held after the ordinance is operative. 
(4)  If the majority vote is against the ordinance, no further elections on the question of term limits shall be held until at least four years have expired from the previous election and only after the board of mayor and aldermen adopts a new ordinance for such purposes in accordance with subsection (a). 
(Acts 2010, ch. 999, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS 
PART 1. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 6-4-101. - Duties of city administrator. 
(a)  The board may appoint a city administrator who shall be under the control and direction of the board. The city administrator shall report and be responsible to the board. 
(b)  The board may, by ordinance, require the city administrator to perform any or all the following duties: 
(1)  Administer the business of the municipality; 
(2)  Make recommendations to the board for improving the quality and quantity of public services to be rendered by the officers and employees to the inhabitants of the municipality; 
(3)  Keep the board fully advised as to the conditions and needs of the municipality; 
(4)  Report to the board the condition of all property, real and personal, owned by the municipality and recommend repairs or replacements as needed; 
(5)  Recommend to the board and suggest the priority of programs or projects involving public works or public improvements that should be undertaken by the municipality; 
(6)  Recommend specific personnel positions, as may be required for the needs and operations of the municipality, and propose personnel policies and procedures for approval of the board; and 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may from time to time be designated or required by the board. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
PART 2. - CITY RECORDER 

Sec. 6-4-201. - City recorder; appointment. 
    The board shall appoint a city recorder, who also may be appointed to the positions of finance director or treasurer, or both. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-202. - Recorder's functions at board meeting. 
    The recorder or his designee shall be present at all meetings of the board, and keep a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the board to be preserved in permanent form. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-203. - Custody of official records. 
(a)  The recorder or the recorder's designee shall have custody of, and preserve in the recorder's office, the city seal, the public records, original rolls of ordinance, ordinance books, minutes of the board, contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates, and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds, except the recorder's bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor, and all other bonds, oaths and affirmations and all other records, papers and documents not required by this Charter or by ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates and contents, and keep an accurate and modern index of such material. 
(b)  All such records shall be the property of the municipality. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-204. - Copies of records and ordinances. 
(a)  The recorder shall provide, copy, and, when required by any officer or person, certify copies or records, papers and documents in the recorder's office. 
(b)  Fees for copying and certification shall be charged as established by ordinance. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
PART 3. - CITY JUDGE; CITY COURT 

Sec. 6-4-301. - City judge; jurisdiction; appointment; qualifications and compensation; elections. 
(a)  There shall be a city court presided over by a city judge appointed by the board or elected as provided in subsection (c). 
(b)  (1)  (A) Where the city judge is appointed, the city judge shall have the qualifications, term of office, if any, and receive the compensation the board may provide by ordinance. 
(B)  The board may appoint the general sessions court judge of the county or counties in which the municipality lies to act as city judge. 
(2)  In the absence or disability of the city judge, the mayor may designate a qualified person to serve as city judge or may designate the general sessions court judge of the county or counties in which the municipality lies to be acting city judge until one can be appointed at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, or as otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(c)  (1)  The board may require, by ordinance, that the city judge meet the constitutional qualifications and be elected in the same manner as a judge of an inferior court. Constitutional provisions applicable to judges of inferior courts shall apply to the elected city judge. 
(2)  If an elected city judge is unable, temporarily, to preside over city court for any reason, then the judge shall appoint a general sessions judge of the county or counties within which the municipality lies to sit in the judge's place. If no general sessions judge is available, then the city judge shall appoint an attorney, meeting the same qualifications as a general sessions judge, to sit temporarily. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 10; Acts 1996, ch. 652, §§ 2, 3; Acts 2004, ch. 914, § 6a; Acts 2011, ch. 453, §§ 2-4) 
Sec. 6-4-302. - Power to enforce ordinances. 
(a)  The city judge may impose fines, costs and forfeitures, and punish by fine for violation of city ordinances. 
(b)  The judge may preserve and enforce order in the court and enforce the collection of all fines, costs and forfeitures imposed. 
(c)  (1)  In default of payment, or good and sufficient security given for the payment of any fines or forfeitures imposed, if: 
(A)  The court has concurrent jurisdiction with the general sessions court, the judge is authorized to enter an order in accordance with § 40-24-104 which, in accordance with such section, may include imprisonment until the fine, or any portion of it, is paid. No such imprisonment shall exceed the period of time established in § 40-24-104, for any one offense or violation; 
(B)  The court does not have concurrent jurisdiction with the general sessions court, the judge is authorized to enter an order for contempt of court for the payment of the fine in the amount established pursuant to § 16-18-306. 
(2)  Fines may be paid in installments in the manner provided by ordinance or in accordance with § 40-24-104. Any court is authorized to enforce the collection of unpaid fines or forfeitures as a judgment in a civil action in any court with competent jurisdiction in accordance with § 40-24-105. The city judge may remit, with or without condition, fines and costs imposed for violation of any ordinance provision. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 5; Acts 2011, ch. 453, § 5) 
PART 4. - TREASURER; DEPOSITS OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS 

Sec. 6-4-401. - Appointment and duties of treasurer. 
(a)  The board shall appoint a treasurer. 
(b)  The treasurer shall collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and all other revenue (and bonds) of the municipality, and the proceeds of its bond issues, and disburse them. 
(c)  The board may appoint the recorder as treasurer. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1) 
Sec. 6-4-402. - Depositories of municipal funds. 
    Depositories of the municipal funds shall be designated by ordinance. The board shall require any financial institution that becomes a depository of municipal funds to secure such funds by collateral in the same manner and under the same conditions as state deposits under title 9, chapter 4, parts 1 and 4, or as provided in a collateral pool created under title 9, chapter 4, part 5. 
(Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1994, ch. 752, § 4) 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee." Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Farragut Code." The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, T.C.A. § 6-54-508 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of mayor and aldermen: 
    Generally. Words and phrases shall be construed in their plain, ordinary and usual sense, except that technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
    Agent or employee. Whenever the Code requires an act to be done, which act may legally be done by an agent or employee as well as by the principal, such requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or employee. 
    Board of mayor and aldermen. The term "board of mayor and aldermen" means the board of mayor and aldermen of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of subparts A and B. Subpart A is a codification of general ordinances. Subpart B is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development or land use. 
(1)  Inclusion of provisions in subpart A that pertain to land development or land use does not invalidate such provisions or excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
(2)  Inclusion of provisions in subpart B that do not pertain to land development or land use does not invalidate such provisions or excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
    Computation of time. The time within which any act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. 
    County. The term "county" means Knox County, Tennessee. 
    Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to firms, partnerships and corporations. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. A term importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural, and vice versa. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the town is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency means and includes such officer or any designee or authorized subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, clubs, limited liability companies, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place subject to the primary control of any public agency, including, but not limited to, any park, street, public way, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be interpreted as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Tennessee. 
    Street. The term "street" embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the town. 
    T.C.A., state act. The abbreviation "T.C.A." means the Tennessee Code Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. All references to state acts, whether by titles or session law chapters, are to such acts as now or hereafter amended. 
    Tenant; occupant; lessee. The term "tenant," "occupant" or "lessee," when applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "town" means the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, state law references and similar references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeals. 
    Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of mayor and aldermen to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:...." The new section may then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of mayor and aldermen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of mayor and aldermen or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," or "this section," as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of mayor and aldermen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties and rights. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  A violation of this Code shall be punished by a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
State Law reference- Authorized penalty for ordinance violations, T.C.A. § 6-54-308. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatement and continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed in this section. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Annexing property. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property. 
(3)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Vacating any easement or parkland. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(15)  Establishing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code. 
(16)  Pertaining to zoning, subdivision or general design standards. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, T.C.A. title 6; mayor-aldermanic charter, T.C.A. § 6-1-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Board of mayor and aldermen, T.C.A. § 6-3-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-19. - Elections. 
    Effective after the regular municipal election in April 2011, the next regular municipal election shall be in August 2014, and, thereafter, the regular municipal elections shall be held in August of each even numbered year on a day to be set biannually by the board of mayor and aldermen. At the elections held in April 2011, two aldermen (one from the ward made up of the territory lying within the town south of Kingston Pike (the "South Ward") and one from the ward made up of the territory lying within the town lying north of Kingston Pike (the "North Ward")), shall be elected for a term to extend until the general election for Knox County held in August 2016. At the elections held in August 2014, and each successive fourth year anniversary thereof, a mayor and two other aldermen (one from the South Ward and one from the North Ward) shall be elected for a four-year term. 
(Code 1985, § 1-101; Code 2007, § 1-101; Ord. No. 09-13, § 1, 7-9-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority relative to wards, T.C.A. § 6-3-101. 
Sec. 2-20. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall hold regular monthly meetings at 7:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month at the town hall unless otherwise directed by the board. 
(Code 1985, § 1-102; Code 2007, § 1-102) 
Sec. 2-21. - Special meetings. 
    The charter authorizes the mayor to call special meetings of the board. Special meetings shall also be called by the recorder on the written request of any two aldermen. Such written request shall state the reason for the special meeting, and the action of the board shall be limited to that matter and that only. 
(Code 1985, § 1-103; Code 2007, § 1-103) 
State Law reference- Calling of special meetings by mayor, T.C.A. § 6-3-106(4). 
Sec. 2-22. - Term limits. 
(a)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and as qualifications to hold the elective offices of mayor and alderman: 
a.  No person shall be eligible to serve for more than eight elected years in either the office of mayor or alderman; and 
b.  No person shall be eligible to serve for more than 12 elected years in any combination of the office of mayor and the office of alderman. 
(2)  The term "elected year" herein shall mean service to which the person was elected and shall not include service during a portion of a term by appointment. 
(3)  Years of service served prior to the adoption of this measure by a majority of the voters voting in the election or referendum required by subsection (c) of this section shall not count in determining years of service. 
(b)  The foregoing qualifications upon those who are eligible to serve in an elective office of the town will not become effective unless and until: 
(1)  The ordinance providing for these term limits has been approved at two separate meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen by votes of at least two-thirds of the full membership of that legislative body; 
(2)  The ordinance providing for these term limits has been approved by a majority of the voters voting in an election conducted by the county election commission in accordance with and pursuant to T.C.A. § 2-3-204; and 
(3)  The county election commission has reported its official canvass affirming that a majority of the voters in the election voted "for" the approval of the ordinance providing for these term limits. 
(c)  Upon the passage of this ordinance providing for term limits as required by subsection (b)(1) of this section, the mayor of the town shall immediately notify the county election commission of the passage of the ordinance, deliver a certified copy of the ordinance, as approved, and request the holding as soon as possible of the election or referendum of the citizens of the town required by subsection (b)(2) of this section on the question of whether they are "for" or "against" the ordinance making a person ineligible to qualify for an elected office if that person has ever served as an elected official of the town as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  These qualifications upon eligibility to hold elective office in the town shall not apply until the next election at which both mayor and board of mayor and aldermen are on the ballot after the county election commission has reported its official canvass affirming that a majority of the voters approved the ordinance providing for these term limits as required by subsection (b)(3) of this section, which election shall not occur until 2014. 
(e)  If in an election held pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section, the majority of voters vote "against" the approval of the term limits ordinance, then another election on a term limits ordinance shall not be held until: 
(1)  The board of mayor and aldermen of the town has again adopted an ordinance as required by subsection (b)(1) of this section calling for an election pursuant to T.C.A. § 2-3-204 on the ordinance providing for term limits; and 
(2)  Four years have lapsed from the previous election during which the majority of the voters of the town voted against the ordinance. 
(f)  If subsequent to the adoption of a term limits ordinance as provided herein, the board of mayor and aldermen adopt an ordinance seeking to repeal term limits, said ordinance will only be effective if it is passed in like manner at two separate meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen by votes of two-thirds of its members, and if it requires notification of the county election commission and the holding of a referendum under T.C.A. § 2-3-204 pursuant to which a majority of the voters in the town approve the ordinance repealing term limits. 
(Code 2007, § 1-104; Ord. No. 10-13, § 1, 8-26-2010) 
State Law reference- Term limits authorized, T.C.A. § 6-3-110. 
Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Officers and department heads, T.C.A. § 6-4-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-48. - Legal defense and indemnification for personnel. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "employee," as used herein, shall mean and include any official, whether elected or appointed, officer, employee or any member of any board or commission of the town or any former such employee with respect to matters occurring while such employee was acting in an official capacity for the town. 
(b)  The town shall, at its cost and expense, provide defense counsel to any employee sued for damages for an act or omission of any kind or nature in any way connected with or arising out of the performance of such employee's duties for the town, provided such employee promptly notifies the town administrator in the event any suit is served upon him, makes a request for defense counsel, and cooperates with the defense counsel furnished; provided further, that there is no insurance coverage protecting the employee from said damages to the amount provided by the Tennessee Governmental Tort Liability Act (T.C.A. § 29-20-101 et seq.) or other applicable state law. 
(c)  The town shall indemnify an employee from any judgment rendered against such employee in that amount of money which the judgment creditor could collect from the employee as authorized by law; provided, however, that the amount of indemnity shall not exceed those amounts prescribed by the Tennessee Governmental Tort Liability Act (T.C.A. § 29-20-101 et seq.) or other applicable state law. 
(d)  The indemnity herein authorized shall be payable only if the judgment results from an act or omission as described in subsection (b) of this section and does not result from willful, wanton, or malicious wrong doings; the employee has fully cooperated in the defense of the litigation; and the total judgment does not include an award for punitive damages. 
(Code 1985, § 1-1101; Code 2007, § 4-201) 
Sec. 2-49. - Political activity. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen, as well as the administration of the town, will at all times comply with regulations as set forth in the Hatch Act (5 USC 1501-1508) in that federal funds cannot be used for partisan political purposes of any kind by any person or organization involved in the administration of federally-assisted programs. 
(Code 2007, § 4-202; Ord. No. 96-05, 3-1996) 
Secs. 2-50-2-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN ADMINISTRATOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Town administrator, T.C.A. § 6-4-101. 

Sec. 2-72. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created the office and official position of town administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 1-201; Code 2007, § 1-201) 
Sec. 2-73. - Qualifications for and selection. 
    The town administrator shall be an adult capable of being bonded and shall be selected by majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-202; Code 2007, § 1-202) 
Sec. 2-74. - Bond. 
    The town administrator may be bonded in such sum as may be fixed by, and with such surety as may be acceptable to, the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-203; Code 2007, § 1-203) 
Sec. 2-75. - Compensation, etc. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall determine appropriate employee benefits and compensation of the town administrator, which may, but not necessarily shall, be set after consultation with and negotiation between the board and the candidate for or incumbent town administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 1-204; Code 2007, § 1-204) 
Sec. 2-76. - Tenure. 
    The town administrator shall be a contract employee and serve at the pleasure of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-205; Code 2007, § 1-205; Ord. No. 09-20, § 1, 8-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-77. - Duties. 
    The office of the town administrator shall be subordinate to the board of mayor and aldermen and the town administrator shall report and be responsible to said board. The town administrator shall perform and discharge the following: 
(1)  Devote his full time to administering the business of the town under the supervision and direction of the board of mayor and aldermen, subject to any exceptions provided in the contract of employment. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the board for improving the quality and quantity of public services to be rendered by the officers and employees to the inhabitants of the town. 
(3)  Keep the board fully advised as to the conditions and needs of the town. 
(4)  Report to the board the condition of all property, real and personal, owned by the town and recommend repairs or replacements as needed. 
(5)  Act as purchasing agent for the town in the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for the proper conduct of the town's business, provided that all purchases shall be made in accordance with policy practices, procedures, and approvals as established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(6)  Supervise and coordinate all administrative activities of each department of the town under the policies of the board. 
(7)  Recommend to the board programs or projects involving public works or public improvements which should be undertaken by the town and the priority of the same. 
(8)  Recommend to the board for the authorization of specific personnel positions, as may be required for the needs and operations of the town. 
(9)  Authorize the appointment, dismissal, promotion, or demotion of any classified employee of the town in accordance with the personnel policies adopted by the board and keep personnel files on all employees. 
(10)  Perform an annual performance evaluation on each full-time classified employee. 
(11)  Act as an officer of the municipal court for the purpose of serving any process, documents, notices, warrants, writs, citations, and other official instruments of and from the municipal court. 
(12)  Perform such duties as may be required to ensure compliance with the ordinances of the town. 
(13)  Assist and provide input as necessary, and cause other personnel of the town under his supervision to assist and provide input as necessary for the preparation of the annual budget and capital program. 
(14)  Inspect buildings, roads, and perform such other acts as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the ordinances of the town. 
(15)  Perform such other duties as may from time to time be designated or required by the board. 
(Code 1985, § 1-206; Code 2007, § 1-206; Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-12-2009) 
Secs. 2-78-2-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECORDER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Recorder, T.C.A. § 6-4-201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-98. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created the office and official position of recorder. 
(Code 1985, § 1-301; Code 2007, § 1-301) 
Sec. 2-99. - Qualifications and selection. 
    The recorder shall be an adult capable of being bonded and shall be selected by majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-302; Code 2007, § 1-302) 
Sec. 2-100. - Bond. 
    The recorder shall be bonded in such sum as may be fixed by, and with such surety as may be acceptable to, the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-303; Code 2007, § 1-303) 
Sec. 2-101. - General duties. 
(a)  Functions at board meeting. The recorder or designee shall be present at all meetings of the board, and keep a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the board to be preserved in permanent form. 
(b)  Custody of official records. 
(1)  The recorder or the recorder's designee shall have custody of, and preserve in the recorder's office, the town seal, the public records, original rolls of ordinances, ordinance books, minutes of the board, contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates, and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds, except the recorder's bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor, and all other bonds, oaths and affirmations and all other records, papers and documents not required by law or by ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates and contents, and keep an accurate and modern index of such material. 
(2)  All such records shall be the property of the town. 
(c)  Copies, certification of records and ordinances. 
(1)  The recorder shall provide, copy, and, when required by any officer or person, certify copies or records, papers and documents in the recorder's office. 
(2)  Fees for copying and certification shall be charged as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 1-304; Code 2007, § 1-304) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 6-4-202-6-4-204. 
Sec. 2-102. - Other duties. 
    The recorder shall perform all administrative duties for the board of mayor and aldermen and for the municipality which are not assigned by the charter, ordinance, or the governing body to another corporate office. The recorder shall also carry out the duties assigned to him from time to time by the town administrator and the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-305; Code 2007, § 1-305) 
Sec. 2-103. - Town treasurer. 
(a)  There is hereby established the office of town treasurer. It shall be the duty of the town treasurer to collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and all other revenue (and bonds) of the municipality, and the proceeds of its bond issues, and to disburse them, and to perform such other duties attendant to the office as may from time to time by ordinance or resolution be assigned by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The person appointed as and serving in the official capacity of town recorder shall fill and occupy the office of, and shall be, the town treasurer. The board of mayor and aldermen may, by resolution, appoint such number and persons as assistant town treasurers as it may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1985, § 1-306; Code 2007, § 1-306) 
State Law reference- Town treasurer and authority to appoint recorder as treasurer, T.C.A. § 6-4-401. 
Sec. 2-104. - Copies of records and ordinances. 
(a)  Public records. The Tennessee Public Records Act provides that all town records shall at all times, during business hours, be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state, unless otherwise provided by law, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-503(a). It is the policy of the town to comply with the Tennessee Public Records Act as well as the laws of the state applicable to municipalities governing public records contained in T.C.A. title 10, ch. 7 (T.C.A. § 10-7-101 et seq.). 
(1)  Records open to public inspection. Public records have been defined to mean all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, photographs, microfilms, electronic data processing files and output, films, sound recordings, or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with a transaction of official business by any governmental agency, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-301(6). All records of the town meeting this description will be open to public inspection unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Records not open to public inspection. Some records maintained by the town are determined by law to be confidential records and not open for public inspection. Those records include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  All contingency plans of law enforcement agencies prepared to respond to any violent incident, bomb threat, ongoing act of violence at a school or business, ongoing act of violence at a place of public gathering, threat involving a weapon of mass destruction, or terrorist incident pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-503(e). 
b.  Records of students in public educational institutions, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(a)(4)(A). 
c.  All riot, escape, and emergency transport plans which are incorporated in a policy and procedures manual of town jails, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(a)(14). 
d.  Records containing the credit card numbers of persons doing business with the town and any related personal identification numbers or authorization codes, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(a)(19). 
e.  Records related to any town employee's identity, diagnosis, treatment or referral for treatment that are maintained by an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(d). 
f.  Records related to town employee medical treatment or medical testing, including drug testing at the expense of the town, pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(a)(1) and (d). 
g.  Information compiled and maintained by the town concerning a person who has obtained a valid protection document pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(a)(15). 
h.  Certain information about town employees considered by state laws to be private, including unpublished telephone numbers, bank account information, social security numbers, and driver license information (unless driving a vehicle is part of the employee's job duties), pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504(f)(1). 
i.  Other records deemed confidential and not open to public inspection pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-7-504 or other law. 
(b)  Rules for access to public records. 
(1)  Proof of citizenship. The Tennessee Public Records Act only applies to citizens of the state. A person seeking access to public records of the town must provide proper identification to establish state citizenship. 
(2)  Requests for records. 
a.  Persons wishing to inspect the public records are not required to fill out a written request. Persons wishing to make copies of records shall make a request to the town recorder's office. The request for copies shall be made in writing on the inspection/duplication of records request form attached hereto with instructions as provided by the office of open records counsel. If the person requesting copies of records or inspection fails, is unable, or refuses to complete the form, the employee handling the request shall complete it with information provided by the requesting party. The form will be distributed by the town recorder's office to a department head or employee who has responsibility for the maintenance of the subject requested public records, and they shall process the request. It is the responsibility of the requestor to provide sufficient details to enable the records custodian to identify the records being requested. 
b.  If the requested records are knowingly available, the department head or employee shall provide the requestor with assistance in accessing the records in order for the requestor to inspect. If the public records are not readily accessible, the public records shall be provided to the requestor within seven business days, or the department head or employee shall explain to the requestor in a records request denial letter, form attached hereto with instructions, as to the reason for denial of access to the public records or to the requestor in a records production letter, form attached hereto with instructions, as to the reason for the delay of access to the public records. Reasons for the delay or denial may be based on the following criteria or circumstances: 
1.  The kind, amount, and nature of the records requested; 
2.  Uncertainty as to what records are requested; 
3.  The location of the records requested; 
4.  The format in which the records are requested; 
5.  The extent of the department head's or employee's resources to locate such records at the time the request is made; 
6.  Intervening emergencies, problems, and other events that might reasonably delay the delivery of the records for inspection; and 
7.  The extent to which the request creates undue disruption on other essential functions of the department. 
(3)  Electronic records. 
a.  Some public records stored, contained or available as data or information within the memory or storage facilities of computer or electronic equipment might be subject to inspection (and copying) only through the services of town employees familiar with the equipment that facilitates such inspection (or copying), or services of the town's subcontractor. The department head or employee shall make a reasonable effort to ensure that such records are available for inspection under the same rules governing inspection above (see subsection (b)(2) of this section). However, where such records create special problems of determining confidentiality of all or some of their parts before they are viewed, or if the requestor wants the records in a format different than that contained in the computer, additional delay in the delivery of such records may occur. The department head or employee shall keep such delays to a minimum. The department head or employee shall notify the requester of the approximate length of delay in the delivery of the records for inspection. 
b.  The requestor shall have the following options when requesting public records: 
1.  View the information on the town's computer equipment in read only format if it is reasonably available. 
2.  Have any digital records transferred to a diskette or other compatible storage medium. 
3.  Request paper copies of requested records. 
4.  Transferred electronically (email, facsimile) if feasible. 
(4)  Limitations on disclosure of confidential records. 
a.  Upon receiving a request to inspect public records, the department head or employee shall grant the request unless the record requested is confidential, in whole or in part, under the Tennessee Public Records Act and/or any other applicable law. In cases of public records that are confidential in part, the department head or employee shall deliver for inspection that part of the record that is not confidential. If it is necessary to redact confidential information from a record, the requestor must pay the town's costs associated with redacting the records as provided in by this division. Where the department head or employee is uncertain whether a requested record is confidential, he shall consult with the town administrator or his designee, and the town administrator or his designee shall make the final determination. The department head or employee shall inform the requestor in a records production letter that uncertainty exists as to the confidentiality of the record, and write the approximate date the uncertainty will be resolved. 
b.  If the town administrator's or his designee's final determination is that the record is confidential, the department head or employee handling the request shall notify the requestor in a records request denial letter, stating the reason that the record is confidential, and citing, if possible, the statute or reasoning supporting the determination. 
(5)  Costs of inspection. Generally, there is no charge for on-site, visual inspection of public records. However, where the public records requested are electronic records, and the records are not in the format requested by the requestor, and a special computer program must be created to retrieve such records in the requested format, the department head or employee shall estimate the cost of creating such program, including the time and labor of town employees, and/or the town's sub-contractor, based upon an average hourly pay rate for the town's clerical employees, including social security, insurance and other benefits, and/or the town's subcontractor's cost. There will be no charge for the first one hour of labor in producing the requested records of the highest paid employee. The requestor shall pay to the town the estimated cost of the special programs before the public records are compiled in the requested format. If the cost of the special programs exceeds the amount previously paid, the requestor shall pay the balance to the town prior to the inspection of the public records in the requested format. If the cost of the special programs is less than the amount previously paid by the requestor, the balance shall be refunded upon the delivery of the public records for inspection. 
(6)  Custody of records. Public records shall at all times remain in the physical custody of the department head or employee. Public records shall also remain on the town's premises unless sent to a commercial copying service under the direction of a department head or employee. 
(7)  Procedure for copying public records. Except for exempt records, requestors shall be entitled to a copy of any public record and copies shall be made on the town's copying equipment. Where such equipment does not exist, is inoperative, is not designed to copy the records requested, or the requestor wants the copies in a format the town equipment cannot duplicate, such copies may be made on commercial copying equipment. 
(c)  Cost of copies. The following fees shall be applied in accordance with the schedule of reasonable charges for copies of public records produced by the office of open records counsel on October 1, 2008. The town's fee schedule of public records is as follows in subsection (d) of this section. 
(1)  Town's equipment and labor cost. Any citizen requesting copies of public records will be charged based on the town's fee schedule of public records, as follows in subsection (d) of this section, which is subject to revision from time to time by the town administrator to reflect a change in costs as advised by the office of open records counsel. Costs include per page costs for ink, toner, paper, copier lease, cost of media (diskette, CD, DVD, etc.), plus the time and labor of town employees based upon an average hourly pay rate for the town's clerical employees, including insurance and other benefits, and/or the town's subcontractor's cost. However, there shall be no charge for the first one hour incurred by the highest paid employee in producing the requested records, including the redaction of confidential or privileged information. Payment for the cost of copies shall be made by the requestor before the copies are made. The payment shall be based on the approximate number of copies requested. If the actual cost of the copies exceeds the amount previously paid by the requestor, the balance shall be paid by the requestor before delivery of the copies. If the previous payment made by the requestor exceeds the cost of the copies, the balance shall be refunded to the requestor upon the delivery of the copies. 
(2)  Commercial equipment. Where the town's copying equipment is incapable of making copies of the public records requested, or its copying equipment is inoperative, the department head or employee shall notify the requestor. If the requestor decides that he wants a commercially-made copy of the records, he shall notify the department head or employee, who shall determine the estimated cost of such copies by the most cost efficient method. If the requestor desires to obtain the commercial copies, he shall pay the estimated cost of the copies. If the actual cost of the copies exceeds the amount previously paid by the requestor, he shall pay the balance to the town before delivery of the copies. If the previous payment made by the requestor exceeds the cost of the copies, the balance shall be refunded upon delivery of the copies. 
(d)  Fee schedule for copies of public records. 
(1)  Costs charged to requestor. A requestor will be charged all actual costs in the production of requested records to include $0.15 per black and white page copied and $0.50 per color page copied. Duplex or double-sided copies will be charged as two copies. Actual costs include the making of copies of the requested records, any special expenses incurred in the production and mailing of the records and the hourly wages of employees reasonably necessary to produce the requested information. The cost of labor by the staff time to produce the record request cannot be assessed for the first one hour that the highest paid employee works to produce the requested material. 
a.  Example: The hourly wage of employee #1 is $15.00. The hourly wage of employee #2 is $20.00. Employee #1 spends two hours on a request. Employee #2 spends two hours on the same request. Because employee #2 is the highest paid employee, subtract the one-hour threshold from the hours employee #2 spent producing the request. Multiply the number of hours each employee is able to charge for producing the request by that employee's hourly wage and then add the amounts together for the total amount of labor that can be charged (i.e., (2 × 15) + (1 × 20) = $50.00). For this request, $50.00 could be assessed for the labor. 
b.  The hourly wages for a records custodian or staff time for the production of copies for a records request shall be based on the current hourly rate for the employees responding to the request. 
(2)  Frequent and multiple requests for public records. When the total number of requests made by a requestor within a calendar month exceeds four, a records custodian will begin to charge the requestor a fee for any and all labor that is reasonably necessary to produce the copies of the requested records after informing the requestor that the aggregation limit has been met. Request for items that are routinely released and readily accessible, such as agendas for current calendar month meetings and approved minutes from meetings held in the previous calendar month, are exempt from this policy. Disputes as to aggregation shall be brought to the office of open records counsel. Additionally, a records custodian may aggregate the total number of public records requests made by a requestor and by any other individual, if the records custodian reasonably believes the requestor to be acting in concert with or as the agent of another person, entity or organization. A records custodian choosing to aggregate requests by multiple requestors must inform the requestors of the determination to aggregate and that they have the right to appeal the decision to aggregate to the office of open records counsel. When aggregating the labor of multiple requestors, the records custodian must file a notice of aggregation of multiple requestors with the office of open records counsel, form attached hereto. 
(3)  Records with commercial value. Any request for a town public record that has commercial value, or for a record that does not exist in the form or format requested, will be referred to the town administrator or his designee for consideration. The town will charge a reasonable fee for the reproduction of any public record that has commercial value as allowed by state law and in accordance with T.C.A. § 10-7-506. 






(Code 2007, §§ 1-307, 1-307(attach.); Ord. No. 02-04, 3-2002; Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, 5-22-2008; Ord. No. 09-29, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Secs. 2-105-2-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TOWN ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-122. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created the office and official position of town attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 1-401; Code 2007, § 1-401) 
Sec. 2-123. - Qualifications and selection. 
    The town attorney shall be an adult, duly licensed by the supreme court of the state to practice law in the state, and shall be selected by a majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-402; Code 2007, § 1-402) 
Sec. 2-124. - Duties. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the town attorney to confer with the board of mayor and aldermen and to be responsive to its requests with respect to any and all matters of a legal nature affecting the town and, at the direction of the board, to take such legal action on behalf of the town as may from time to time be required and to further handle on his own initiative routine, recurring, day-to-day, legal matters falling within the purview of general authority previously delegated. 
(Code 1985, § 1-403; Code 2007, § 1-403) 
Sec. 2-125. - Tenure, expenses, and remuneration. 
    The town attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board of mayor and aldermen and shall have his expenses reimbursed, and the basis of his remuneration set, all as determined by the board. 
(Code 1985, § 1-404; Code 2007, § 1-404) 
Secs. 2-126-2-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - CODE OF ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Campaign finance, T.C.A. § 2-10-101 et seq.; conflicts of interest, T.C.A. §§ 6-54-107, 6-54-108, 12-4-101, 12-4-102; conflict of interests disclosure statements, T.C.A. § 8-50-501 et seq.; consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal official, T.C.A. §§ 2-10-122, 2-10-124; public official misconduct, T.C.A. § 39-16-41 et seq.; removal of public officials, T.C.A. § 8-47-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-149. - Applicability. 
    This article is the code of ethics for personnel of the municipality. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The terms "municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. 
(Code 2007, § 1-501; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-150. - Definitions of personal interest and employment interest. 
(a)  For purposes of sections 2-151 and 2-152, the term "personal interest" means: 
(1)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statutes on conflicts of interests; 
(2)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a matter to be regulated or supervised; or 
(3)  Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the official's or employee's spouse, parent, step-parent, grandparent, sibling, child, or step-child. 
(b)  The term "employment interest" includes a situation in which an official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be regulated or supervised. 
(c)  In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2007, § 1-502; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-151. - Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. 
    An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the measure. In addition, the official may recuse himself from voting on the measure. 
(Code 2007, § 1-503; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-152. - Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters. 
    An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. 
(Code 2007, § 1-504; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-153. - Acceptance of gratuities, etc. 
(a)  An official or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other than the municipality: 
(1)  For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the regular course of his duties; or 
(2)  That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of this section for officials or employees to accept gifts given as an expression of general thanks for the work of public service performed by the official or employee, which are reported to the town administrator in writing and which have a value, the amount of which would not reasonably influence the official or employee to act favorably toward the donor on official matters within the responsibility of the official or employee. For purposes of this section, the value of $35.00 at the time of enactment of this section, or as increased by three percent for each year thereafter, shall be defined as the amount which would not reasonably influence an official or employee. 
(c)  It shall not be a violation of this section for officials or employees to accept invitations to openings of new businesses or facilities, open-houses or similar events at which refreshments or meals are served to which many members of the local community are also invited, or complimentary passes to events hosted by not-for-profit organizations. 
(Code 2007, § 1-505; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-154. - Use of information. 
(a)  An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or disclose confidential information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to result in financial gain for himself. 
(Code 2007, § 1-506; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-155. - Use of municipal time, facilities. etc. 
(a)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to any private person or entity. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "private gain or advantage" shall not include: 
(1)  A benefit to a private person or entity that is authorized in writing by the town administrator or in official action by the town board of mayor and aldermen; or 
(2)  A mere incidental benefit to a private person or entity that flows secondarily to said person or entity as the indirect result of any action by any official or employee taken primarily and in the course of the performance of his authorized duties and responsibilities, and for the benefit of the municipality and the community at large. 
(Code 2007, § 1-507; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-156. - Use of position or authority. 
(a)  An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the municipality. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the municipality. 
(Code 2007, § 1-508; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-157. - Ethics complaints. 
(a)  The town attorney is designated as the ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the town attorney may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this article and other applicable law. 
(b)  Conducting investigations. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the town attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed official or employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may undertake an investigation on his own initiative when he acquires information indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations for action to end or seek retribution for any activity that, in the attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics. 
(2)  The town attorney may request the governing body to hire another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer when he has or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter. 
(3)  When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this article is lodged against a member of the municipality's governing body, the governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit, determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the governing body determines that a complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the town attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the governing body. 
(c)  The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics. 
(d)  When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation or a civil service policy, rule, or regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel or civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics. 
(Code 2007, § 1-509; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 2-158. - Violations. 
    An elected official or appointed member of a separate municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality who violates any provision of this article is subject to punishment as provided by the municipality's charter or other applicable law. An appointed official or an employee who violates any provision of this article is subject to disciplinary action. 
(Code 2007, § 1-510; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-8-2007) 
Secs. 2-159-2-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-185-2-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-02, § 1, adopted January 24, 2019, repealed §§ 2-207-2-213, which pertained to personnel committee and derived from Code 1985, §§ 1-801-1-807; Code 2007, § 4-301; Ord. No. 00-30, 6-2000; Code 2007, §§ 4-302-7; Ord. No. 09-15, § 1, 7-9-2009. 

Secs. 2-207-2-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-235. - Established; purposes. 
    There is hereby established a community health council to: 
(1)  Support and steer a health improvement process in the town, including the City of Knoxville and Knox County, with facilitation and support from the county health department. 
(2)  Assess and evaluate health, the perception of health, the performance of the local public health system, and future conditions relating to health in the town, the county, and the City of Knoxville. 
(3)  Establish strategic objectives for improving health in the town, the county, and the City of Knoxville. 
(4)  Promulgate goals and objectives for the local public health system in the town, the county, and the City of Knoxville in the form of an action plan every three years. 
(5)  Communicate assessment results and action plans to community partners, the public, and the organizations and agencies of the local public health system. 
(6)  Act as a forum for discussion and coordination of community-wide efforts to improve health outcomes and local public health system function in the town, the county, and the City of Knoxville. 
(7)  Act as an advisory body to elected and appointed officials in the town, the county, and the City of Knoxville in matters of health. 
(Code 2007, § 20-301; Ord. No. 12-18, § 1, 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 2-236. - Composition; terms of office; staff support. 
(a)  The total membership of the community health council shall not exceed 21 members, including six appointed and one permanent member as follows: one member appointed by the county mayor; one member appointed by the county commission; one member appointed by the city mayor; one member appointed by the city council; one member appointed by the town mayor; one member appointed by the town board of aldermen; and the director of the county health department or his designee. 
(b)  The members of the community health council shall serve staggered three-year terms. 
(c)  The community health council shall adopt bylaws reflecting an inclusive process for the selection and appointment of additional members to result in a diverse membership, and to provide detail concerning specific council structures, functions, and terms of office. 
(d)  Staff support for the community health council will be supplied through the county health department. 
(Code 2007, § 20-302; Ord. No. 12-18, § 1, 1-10-2013) 
Secs. 2-237-2-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Fiscal affairs, T.C.A. § 6-56-101 et seq.; depositories, T.C.A. § 6-4-402. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-266. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall terminate on June 30 of the next succeeding year. 
(Code 1985, § 6-101; Code 2007, § 5-101) 
Sec. 2-267. - Depository for town funds. 
(1)  TN Bank is hereby designated as a depository for town funds. 
(2)  The town recorder is hereby authorized to open said accounts at TN Bank. 
(Code 2007, § 5-102; Ord. No. 00-02, 1-2000; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 17-19 , § 1, 1-11-2018) 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, T.C.A. § 6-4-402. 
Secs. 2-268-2-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983, T.C.A. § 6-56-301 et seq. 

Sec. 2-298. - Purchasing agent. 
    The town administrator shall serve as the purchasing agent for the town. All supplies, materials, equipment and services of any nature whatsoever shall be acquired by the purchasing agent or his designee. In the absence of the town administrator, the associate town administrator shall serve as the purchasing agent for the town. 
(Code 2007, § 5-201; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 3-10-2011) 
Sec. 2-299. - Authorization of purchases. 
    Public advertisement and competitive bidding shall be required for the purchase of all goods and services exceeding an amount of $10,000.00 except for those purchases specifically exempted from advertisement and bidding by the Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983 (T.C.A. § 6-56-301 et seq.). All purchases shall be made in accordance with the Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983 (T.C.A. § 6-56-301 et seq.), this division and purchasing policies and procedures approved by the governing body. 
(Code 2007, § 5-202; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 3-10-2011) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating liquor and beer, T.C.A. title 57. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Sale or purchase to persons under age 21 years and certain other persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or for any agent or employee of any licensee, to sell, furnish or give away any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to applicable state law, or to a person visibly intoxicated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to applicable state law, to purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages as defined in this chapter; and it is further declared to be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to exhibit false or forged identification to a licensee or his agent for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages under this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 2-125; Code 2007, § 8-116; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-4-203, 57-3-406. 
Secs. 4-2-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - INTOXICATING LIQUOR[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating liquors, T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage or beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits and wine, and capable of being consumed by human beings, where the alcoholic content is greater than eight percent by weight. 
    Board means the board of mayor and aldermen of the town. 
    Liquor license means the license issued pursuant to T.C.A. title 57. 
    Retail sale or sale at retail means a sale to a customer or to any person for any purposes other than for resale. 
    Retailer means any person who sells at retail any alcoholic beverage for the sale of which a license is required by T.C.A. title 57, ch. 3 (T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq.) and T.C.A. title 57, ch. 4 (T.C.A. § 57-4-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 2-101; Code 2007, § 8-101; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(8-101), 2-9-2017) 
Sec. 4-22. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of the terms of this article may be punishable by a fine under the general penalty clause for this municipal code in addition to any other penalty herein provided and in addition to loss of license. Each separate occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2-133; Code 2007, § 8-117; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-23. - General regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all alcoholic beverages, but shall not apply to beer and other alcoholic beverages with an alcoholic content of eight percent by weight or less. 
(b)  The manufacture, sale, receipt, possession, storage, transportation, distribution, or in any other manner of dealing in alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the town shall be regulated in accordance with T.C.A. §§ 57-1-101 et seq., 57-2-101 et seq., 57-3-101 et seq., and 57-4-101 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 2-102; Code 2007, § 8-102; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(8-102), 2-9-2017) 
Sec. 4-24. - Inspection fee levied; collection; returns. 
(a)  For the purpose of providing a means of regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages within the town and to provide a means for enforcing the provisions of this article, there is hereby levied and imposed an inspection fee of five percent on all alcoholic beverages sold to retailers in this town. The fee shall be measured by the wholesale price of the alcoholic beverage sold by each wholesaler and shall be five percent of such wholesale price. The fee may be added by the wholesaler to invoices for alcoholic beverages sold to licensed retailers. The fees imposed under authority of this section shall be remitted by the wholesaler to the town recorder not later than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month. 
(b)  Collection of this inspection fee shall be made by the wholesaler or other source vending to the licensee at the time the sale is made to the licensee. However, nothing herein shall relieve the licensee of the obligation for the payment of the inspection fee, and it shall be the licensee's duty to see that the payment of the inspection fee is made to the town recorder. 
(Code 1985, § 2-124; Code 2007, § 8-115; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
State Law reference- Municipal inspection fees, T.C.A. § 57-3-501 et seq. 
Sec. 4-25. - Advertising restricted. 
(a)  Building-mounted sign. The holder of an off-premises consumption liquor license may install and maintain on his premises not more than one exterior wall sign which shall be mounted upon the front wall surface of the building, which sign shall otherwise comply with all requirements of other ordinances of the town as from time to time amended, and which sign shall not exceed the maximum size of 25 square feet. The lighting for such sign, whether external or internal to the sign, shall not be animated or pulsating. Further, no such licensee shall be permitted to erect or maintain or cause or allow to be erected or maintained any other type of advertising, electric or otherwise, on the exterior of his building, nor within any window thereof, or on any other premises located within the town. 
(b)  Ground-mounted sign. As regulated by chapter 109 of this Code. 
(Code 2007, § 8-112; Ord. No. 96-14, 6-1996; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-26. - Time of operation of retail liquor stores (Class I licenses). 
    No retail liquor store shall be open and no holder of an off-premises consumption license shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage on New Year's Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, or on any Sunday. On other days, no retail liquor stores shall be open and no such licensee shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. In the event of any emergency, retail liquor stores shall be closed upon order of the town administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 2-119; Code 2007, § 8-114; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Secs. 4-27-4-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-58. - Privilege license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to manufacture, sell, or barter, distribute, transport or in any manner deal in alcoholic beverages without having first obtained a license, where one is required, for such privilege from the state. 
(Code 1985, § 2-103; Code 2007, § 8-103; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-59. - Application, certificate of compliance required. 
(a)  Before any person or other legal entity (the applicant) shall receive a license for the establishment for an off-premises liquor store, the applicant shall make application for a certificate of compliance for a specific location and be granted such certificate for such specific location by the board as required by T.C.A. § 57-3-208. When the applicant which intends to obtain a liquor license is a legal entity owned, directly or indirectly, by a combination of persons and/or entities, the group of persons owning an interest, directly or indirectly, in the applicant is referred to herein as the "applicant group." The application for the certificate shall be in writing and shall be filed with the town recorder giving the following information: 
(1)  The name, date of birth and street address of each person to have an interest, direct or indirect, in the off-premises liquor store as an owner, partner, stockholder or otherwise. In the event that a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other legally recognized entity is an applicant or member of an applicant group, each person with an interest therein must be disclosed and must provide the information herein required by the town; 
(2)  The name of the off-premises liquor store proposed; 
(3)  The address of the off-premises liquor store proposed and its zoning designation; 
(4)  Number of years the applicant and persons in the applicant group is resident in the state; 
(5)  The name of the licensee and the address of other off-premises liquor stores in which an ownership interest is held by the applicant or any member of the applicant group, identifying the applicant or group member holding each interest; 
(6)  Occupation or business and name and location of such business, of the applicant and persons in the applicant group and length of time engaged in such occupation or business; 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant or any person in the applicant group has been convicted within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application of any violation of any state or federal law or of any violation of any municipal ordinance (with the exception of minor traffic violations such as speeding or traffic signal violations, but not excepting alcohol related violations), and, if so, provide the details of such violation (i.e., charging entity, citation to and copy of law convicted of violating, copy of charge, etc.); 
(8)  If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(9)  The name and address of the owner of the real property of the proposed location and the amount of rent to be paid, together with a letter from such owner affirming either that: 
a.  The parties have reached a written agreement on the terms of a lease and setting forth the amount of the rent provided for in the agreement; or 
b.  The parties have reached a written agreement on the terms of a sale of the premises to the applicant; 
(10)  The amount of money invested or to be invested, and the source of funds to be used, and, if borrowed, the name of the person from whom borrowed, the name of the bank with which the applicant does business, and the name of any person who is aiding the venture financially, either by a loan or guaranty; 
(11)  The name of any person who will have any interest, direct or indirect, in the business of the applicant or in the profits thereof, and the nature and character thereof, and whether the person holds a wholesale or retail liquor license; 
(12)  The identity of the applicant who will be in actual charge of the day-to-day operation of the business, and a certification that the individual has not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, and if the applicant is a corporation the identity of the officer or employee who will be in actual charge of the day-to-day operations of the business and that such officer or employee has not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(13)  A statement that the persons receiving the requested license to the best of their knowledge if awarded the certificate of compliance could comply with all the requirements for obtaining the required licenses under state law and the provisions of this article for the operation of off-premises liquor stores in the town; and 
(14)  The agreement of each applicant or each member of an applicant group, as appropriate, to comply with all applicable laws and ordinances and with the rules and regulations of the state alcoholic beverage commission and the town with reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the further agreement of each applicant or each member of an applicant group as to the validity and the reasonableness of these regulations, inspection fees, and taxes provided in this title with reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Further documentation. 
(1)  The application shall be accompanied by six copies of a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet giving the following information: 
a.  The shape, size and location of the lot which the off-premises liquor store is to be operated under the license; 
b.  The shape, size, height and location of all buildings whether they are to be erected, altered, moved or existing upon the lot; and 
c.  The off-street parking space and off-street loading and unloading space to be provided including the vehicular access to be provided from these areas to a public street. 
(2)  A written certification by the applicant that the premises of the proposed off-premises liquor store are in full and complete compliance with the distance requirements of section 4-63; and, that the applicant has taken steps to verify compliance with the distance requirements. To the extent that the applicant has documentation of such verification, or the process of verification, then the applicant shall submit such documentation with the application. 
(3)  In the case where the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the partnership agreement and an indication of who are general partners and who are limited partners, if any, and for each partner the profit sharing percentage in the partnership; 
(4)  In the case where the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the corporate charter or the operating agreement and a list of shareholders/members with their ownership percentage, a list of officers/managers and a list of names and addresses of directors. 
(c)  Signature. The application shall be signed and verified by each person to have any interest in the off-premises liquor store either as an owner, partner, stockholder or otherwise. 
(d)  Misrepresentation; concealment of fact; duty to amend. If any applicant, member of an applicant group, or licensee either intentionally or innocently misrepresents or conceals any material fact in any application form or as to any other information required to be disclosed by this article, such applicant, member of an applicant group or licensee shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article and his or her application may be disregarded or his license restricted or revoked as deemed appropriate by the board. In addition, if an application submitted does not contain the information required by the regulations of the town, it will not be deemed filed until all information has been submitted in writing. It shall be the duty of the applicant to determine and submit the information required. 
(e)  As of January 2007, two off-premises liquor stores have been permitted and established within the town. In issuing the required certificates of compliance for the licensing of additional off-premises liquor stores in the town permitted by this article, the board will consider all applications filed before a closing date to be fixed by it and select from such applications the persons deemed by it in its sole discretion to have qualifications required by law and the most suitable circumstances and location in consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town for the lawful operation of off-premises liquor stores without regard to the order of time in which the applications are filed. Such persons and only such persons so selected shall receive the additional certificates of compliance issued by the town. If, thereafter, with respect to any of the off-premises liquor stores allowed in the town: 
(1)  An additional license is, or becomes, available for any reason; or 
(2)  A licensee of an existing off-premises liquor store desires to transfer the retail liquor license for the existing location to a different location for reasons voluntary in nature, and that do not constitute a relocation emergency, as defined hereinafter; 
the board will consider all applications and select the applicant or applicant group deemed by it to have the qualifications required by law and the most suitable circumstances and location in consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the town and its citizens for the lawful operation of a liquor store after a closing date to be fixed by it upon public notice of the availability of such license. If an additional license is, or becomes, available as contemplated by subsection (e)(1) of this section, the town shall not fix a date for the receipt of applications with respect to the available license unless and until an interested party submits a written request asking that such date be so fixed. Such person and only such person so selected shall receive certificates of compliance issued by the town sufficient to allow the operation of the off-premises liquor store contemplated by the chosen application and at the specific location selected by the board. The applications shall be retained by the town until such time as all outlets for such certificates of compliance that have been issued by the town are open for business. At that time, all pending applications which did not result in the granting of certificates of compliance after consideration by the board will expire and be disposed of by the town. Applications can only be submitted to the town during the time frame the board has set forth for receipt of such applications. Applications in all matters submitted with or as a part of such applications become at the time they are submitted the sole and exclusive property of the town and constitute public records open to public inspection. 
(f)  In cases where an existing licensee requests to transfer a license to a new location because of a relocation emergency, the reopening of the process of requesting and considering other applications shall not occur. However, in such cases, the current licensee must apply for and be granted a certificate of compliance by the town and must obtain a license from the alcoholic beverage commission for the proposed new location. For purposes of this article, the term "relocation emergency" means an occurrence that befalls the holder of a license with respect to the physical premises where the store is operated that makes it necessary for the store to be moved to a different location, such as: 
(1)  Condemnation or eminent domain effecting a taking of the store location; 
(2)  Physical destruction of the premises not the fault of the licensee; or 
(3)  Similar involuntary occurrence that the board determines in its sole discretion constitutes a relocation emergency. 
(g)  In cases where an existing licensee seeks to pass the ownership of the assets of the off-premises liquor store to a third party for continued use at the location for which the licensee is licensed, and where the third party is either his heir or is a person or entity with whom the licensee has a binding, arms-length agreement for the sale of the assets used by the licensee in the operation of the off-premises liquor store, the reopening of the process of requesting and considering other applications shall not occur. However, in such cases the issuance of a certificate of compliance to the proposed licensee shall be subject to the applicant applying for and ultimately being granted a license from the alcoholic beverage commission. 
(h)  Licenses for an off-premises liquor store issued by the alcoholic beverage commission are good and valid for 12 months after issuance pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-212(a). However, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-213, a holder of a license must seek renewal of the license on an annual basis by proceeding in accordance with the statute. As part of the renewal process of the alcoholic beverage commission, a holder of a license must obtain from the town a certificate of compliance required by T.C.A. § 57-3-208 and this section, but only once every other year. 
(i)  The initial certificate of compliance issued by the town to an applicant shall expire 12 months after the date of the certification by the town unless the establishment has opened for business by the end of such 12-month period, or unless the applicant has made application to the board of mayor and aldermen and been granted, for good cause shown, an extension of the certificate. The intent of this provision is to ensure that those applicants who have been granted the limited number of locations for off-premises liquor stores permitted by the town to serve the public, actually establish those stores within a reasonable time. Upon the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the applicant shall have the duty to promptly and conspicuously post the proposed premises for the off-premises liquor store, and maintain such posting, with a clean, neat and legible sign, approximately 24 inches by 36 inches stating that the premises have been approved by the town for an off-premises liquor store and stating the name of, and contact information for, the applicant, said sign to be maintained by the applicant in a conspicuous place on the premises until either the opening for business of the store, or, if the store has not opened for business, until the expiration, revocation or termination of the certificate of compliance. 
(j)  As required by the rules of the alcoholic beverage commission (ABC rules, Tenn. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 0100-03-.09(5)), whenever any licensee of the off-premises liquor store discontinues business for any reason, said licensee shall notify the commission in writing and surrender the license. The licensee shall also notify the town administrator of such discontinuance. For purposes of this section as it relates to stores operating within the town, a licensee whose retail outlet has not been open for business for 20 consecutive business days shall be deemed to have "discontinued business." 
(k)  If, between the time of issuance of the initial certificate of compliance to a location by the town, and the application for a subsequent certificate of compliance for an existing, operating off-premises liquor store location (such as for a renewal, a transfer of assets permitted by subsection (g) of this section, or a relocation emergency permitted by subsection (f) of this section), the location has become noncompliant with the town's regulations governing location of off-premises liquor stores because a third party user of property establishes a property use (i.e., church, school, park, etc.) closer to the off-premises liquor store location than is allowed, then such noncompliant condition shall not be a reason for refusing to issue the certificate of compliance. 
(Code 1985, § 2-106; Code 2007, § 8-105; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999; Ord. No. 07-03, § 3, 5-10-2007) 
Sec. 4-60. - Liquor license for wine only restaurant sales. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages may be authorized and limited to wine only in certain restaurants as to which the alcoholic beverage commission of the state has issued a "wine only" license provided the holder of the license and the restaurant to which it is applicable are in compliance with all of the terms and conditions of said license and the laws, rules and regulations of the state otherwise applicable. The following conditions are also applicable to "wine only" licenses: 
(1)  A "wine only" license will allow a restaurant to sell wine by-the-drink. The restaurant may not sell or otherwise dispense any other alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The restaurant must otherwise qualify for a liquor by-the-drink license by proceeding through the same steps and procedures as are otherwise applicable to unrestricted liquor by-the-drink licenses, must have a minimum of 50 seats at tables, and the serving of meals must be the principal business conducted by the restaurant. 
(3)  An applicant for a "wine only" license must complete and submit the same application modified to reflect the desired "wine only" license as is required for an unrestricted liquor by-the-drink license application. 
(4)  The license fee for a "wine only" license is based upon the seating capacity of the restaurant. The license fee corresponds to one-fifth (20 percent) of the unrestricted liquor by-the-drink license fee which is also based upon seating capacity. 
(Code 1985, § 2-136; Code 2007, § 8-118; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-61. - Applicant to appear in person. 
    An applicant for a certificate for a license for the establishment of an off-premises consumption retail liquor outlet within the town shall appear in person before the board for such examination as may be desired by the board. The applicant shall furnish such relevant information as may be required. 
(Code 1985, § 2-107; Code 2007, § 8-106; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-62. - Persons ineligible for certificate. 
    A certificate shall not be issued to any person: 
(1)  Who, within ten years preceding the filing of the application, has been convicted of a felony. 
(2)  Who misrepresents a material fact or conceals a material fact required to be shown in the application for a certificate. 
(Code 1985, § 2-109; Code 2007, § 8-107; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-63. - Location and number of outlets. 
(a)  Pursuant to, and with the intent of complying with, authority granted by T.C.A. § 57-3-208, the town herein limits the total number of off-premises consumption retail liquor stores and licenses for locations within the town, and provides a general description of the type of location for such establishments. Off-premises consumption retail liquor stores (herein "off-premises liquor stores") may only be located without unduly impinging upon the overall health, safety and welfare of the town and its citizens. 
(b)  The number of off-premises liquor store licenses that may be issued for locations within the town shall not exceed the greater of the following: 
(1)  Five; or 
(2)  Five plus one for each 5,000 town residents that the total population in the town in any state or federally-sponsored census exceeds 20,000. 
(c)  All off-premises liquor stores must initially be located on property that is zoned a district within which such establishments are permitted uses; provided, however, that except for the two off-premises liquor stores in existence on January 31, 2007, no off-premises liquor stores shall initially be allowed on property where the nearest most portion of the building housing the establishment is: 
(1)  Within 340 feet of the nearest most portion of the premises, which premises are located within the boundaries of the town, housing any church, public or private educational institution that is open for the provision of general education to persons between any one or more of grades 1-12 and the instruction of which is recognized and accepted by the department of education of the state as meeting state educational requirements, mortuary, or the nearest point of the boundary of any town owned park; 
(2)  Within 340 feet of the nearest point of the boundary of a platted subdivision. For purposes of these regulations, the term "platted subdivision" is defined as a community zoned solely residential within the boundaries of the town having a recognized identity and containing five or more contiguous lots that have been platted to contain dwellings; and 
(3)  Within 1,500 feet from the nearest most portion of the premises of another off-premises liquor store that is also within the boundaries of the town, by measurement between the nearest most portion of premises housing the existing and proposed off-premises liquor store. 
(d)  For purposes of these regulations, the term "premises" means either the building housing the off-premises liquor store or other establishment or, if the store or establishment is located within a building with multiple tenants, then the area within the building to which the off-premises liquor store or other establishment is confined. 
(e)  If, pursuant to the provisions of state law, the state alcoholic beverage commission decrees that on-premises consumption licenses for the establishment of liquor by-the-drink retail sales outlets within the town shall be issued, then in such event, there shall be no limit upon the number of such licenses. However, no such license shall be issued permitting sales of liquor within 340 feet of any school or church measured from the nearest portion of the school or church building to the nearest portion of that portion of a building or structure actually occupied by the entity for which a permit is sought. 
(Code 1985, § 2-104; Code 2007, § 8-104; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999; Ord. No. 07-03, §§ 1, 2, 5-10-2007) 
Sec. 4-64. - Advertising requirements. 
    Before any certificate for an off-premises consumption license shall be granted for any premises within the corporate limits of the town, whether the application is for the transfer of an existing license to a new location or for the issuance of a new license, the applicant must place at least one advertisement, at his own expense, in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, no less than seven days prior to his application being acted upon originally by the board, the advertisement to contain essentially the same information as required for the posting of the premises as hereinafter set out in section 4-65. 
(Code 2007, § 8-108; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-65. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  All applicants for a certificate for off-premises consumption shall pay an investigation and processing filing fee of $300.00 to the town recorder. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application for a new license or for the transfer of an existing license to a new location, the town administrator shall: 
(1)  Promptly and conspicuously post the proposed premises with a clean, neat and legible sign, approximately 24 inches by 36 inches, stating the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the application, and the date that the application is to be originally considered by the board, said sign to be placed on the premises at least ten days prior to the date on which the application is to be originally acted upon by the board. 
(2)  Review all applications and transmit them to the board for its consideration at the earliest possible meeting following compliance of advertising and posting requirements, and also transmit the applicant's application for a certificate to the board for its consideration or reconsideration, advising the board for any imperfections or irregularities in any documents. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to alter, deface, remove or damage any sign placed on any premises under authority of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 2-111; Code 2007, § 8-109; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999; Ord. No. 07-03, § 4, 5-10-2007) 
Sec. 4-66. - Privilege tax payment; failure. 
(a)  The amount of the privilege tax set forth herein shall be for a consecutive period of 12 calendar months beginning with the date of issuance to the applicant of the applicable state liquor license. Such tax shall be payable yearly to the town recorder. 
(b)  Failure to pay to the town the required privilege tax as set forth herein on or before the expiration date of the license (12 calendar months from the date of original issuance or renewal) shall result in a monthly penalty of five percent of the fee due the town. The additional five percent monthly penalty is due as of the day of each month on and after the day that the fee first became delinquent. 
(Code 2007, § 8-110; Ord. No. 96-12, 5-1996; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
Sec. 4-67. - Privilege tax upon persons selling at retail alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  It is hereby declared the legislative intent that every person is exercising a taxable privilege who engages in the business of selling at retail in the town alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. For the exercise of such privilege, the following taxes are levied for town purposes to be paid annually, to wit: 
(1)  Private club: $300.00. 
(2)  Hotel and motel: $1,000.00. 
(3)  Restaurants, according to seating capacity, on licensed premises: 
a.  75-125 seats: $600.00. 
b.  126-175 seats: $750.00. 
c.  176-225 seats: $800.00. 
d.  226-275 seats: $900.00. 
e.  276 seats and over: $1,000.00. 
(b)  Privilege taxes are payable as provided in section 4-66. 
(Code 1985, § 2-116; Code 2007, § 8-111; Ord. No. 99-33, 7-1999) 
State Law reference- Privilege taxes, T.C.A. § 57-3-301. 
Secs. 4-68-4-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - BEER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Beer, T.C.A. § 57-5-101 et seq.; local regulation of beer, T.C.A. § 57-5-106. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-93. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adequate public notice means publication, where possible, of notice of a meeting or hearing scheduled by the beer board, either regular or special, in a newspaper of general circulation within the corporate limits of the town. 
    Adult entertainment means businesses which either directly or indirectly provide sex-related products and services. 
    Adult materials consists of any media material with explicit sexual content available to the public. 
    Applicant means the person on whose behalf an application for beer permit is filed. 
    Beer means beer, ale or other malt beverages, or any other beverages having an alcoholic content of not more than eight percent by weight, except wine as defined in T.C.A. § 57-3-101; provided, however, that no more than 49 percent of the overall alcoholic content of such beverage may be derived from the addition of flavors and other nonbeverage ingredients containing alcohol. 
    Beer board or board means that administrative body organized and empowered under the authority of T.C.A. § 57-5-106. 
    Certified clerk means a clerk who has successfully satisfied the training requirements contained in this part, or who has received certification from a responsible vendor training program. 
    Church means a building or property where a congregation regularly meets at least one day per week for religious worship. 
    Clerk means any person working in a capability to sell beer directly to consumers for off-premises consumption. 
    Commission means the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
    Permit means any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
    Permittee means any person to whom any permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
    Premises means the property owned, leased, or controlled by the permittee and so connected with the beer business in which the permittee is engaged as to form a component or integral part of it, including, but not limited to, the building and the parking areas surrounding it. The term "premises" includes all decks, patios and other well-defined outdoor serving and consuming areas that are contiguous to the exterior of the building in which the business is located and that are operated by the business identified in the permit. A permit shall be valid for all decks, patios and other well-defined outdoor serving areas that are contiguous to the exterior of the building in which the business is located, that are operated by the business and only for a business operating under the name identified in the permit. 
    Responsible vendor means a person, corporation or other entity that has been issued a permit to sell beer for off-premises consumption and has received certification by the state alcoholic beverage commission under the Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006 (T.C.A. § 57-5-601 et seq.). 
    Responsible vendor training program means a training program related to the responsible sale of beer for off-premises consumption which has met all the statutory and regulatory requirements set forth in the state alcoholic beverage commission under the Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006 (T.C.A. § 57-5-601 et seq.). 
    Restaurant means a business establishment whose primary business is the sale of prepared food to be consumed on the premise. 
    Storage means the storing or possessing of beer or other alcoholic beverages for the purpose of resale by the permit holder. 
    TABC means the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(Code 2007, § 8-206; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(8-206), 2-9-2017) 
Sec. 4-94. - Violations. 
    Any violation of this article shall constitute a civil offense and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision of this Code. Each day a violation shall be allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 8-224; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-95. - Public consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    None of the beverages regulated by this article shall be consumed upon any public street, public market not governed by an on-premises permit, alley, boulevard, bridge, nor upon the grounds of any cemetery or public school. 
(Code 2007, § 8-209; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-96. - Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders, employees and persons engaged in the sale of beer. 
    The following acts or conduct on licensed premises are deemed contrary to public policy, safety, health and morals and it shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder, employee or person engaged in the sale of beer to: 
(1)  Employ any person convicted of a crime related to the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(2)  Employ any minor under 18 years of age in the sale, storage, distribution or manufacture of beer. 
(3)  Make or allow the sale of beer between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, and between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on all other days of the week. 
(4)  Allow any loud, unusual, or obnoxious noises to emanate from the premises of the beer permit holder. 
(5)  Allow any person under 21 years of age to loiter in or about the place of business of the beer permit holder. 
(6)  Make or allow the sale of beer to a minor under 21 years of age. 
(7)  Operate or permit any employee or any other person to operate any gambling device or game of chance whatsoever. 
(8)  Bring, cause or allow to be brought onto the premises of any permittee any prohibited drugs under the provisions and within the meaning of the Tennessee Code Annotated. 
(9)  Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for men and women or fail to comply with any state, county or local health laws and regulations. 
(10)  Exhibit any motion pictures for which a fee for entrance to the theater is charged. 
(11)  Allow the sale of beer in any establishment where adult entertainment occurs or adult materials, novelty or other adult items are sold or stored. 
(12)  Employ, use or allow any person in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or malt beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(13)  Employ, use or allow the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (12) of this section. 
(14)  Encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(15)  Permit any employee or person to wear or use any device or covering, exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof. 
(16)  Allow any person on the licensed premises under the guise of entertainment to perform acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any other sexual acts prohibited by law; engage in the actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; engage in the actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva, genitals, or breasts below the top of the areola of any person; wear or use any device or covering exposed to public view which simulates the human breasts, genitals, anus, pubic hair, or any portion thereof. 
(Code 2007, § 8-219; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Secs. 4-97-4-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BEER BOARD 

Sec. 4-121. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a beer board to be composed of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 2007, § 8-201; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-122. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the beer board shall be open to the public. The beer board shall hold regular meetings upon the second and fourth Thursday of each month when there is business to come before the beer board. A special meeting may be called by the chairman, provided reasonable notice thereof is given to each member. The board may adjourn a meeting at any time to another time and place. 
(Code 2007, § 8-202; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-123. - Record of proceedings to be kept. 
    The recorder shall make a record of the proceedings of all meetings of the beer board. The record shall be a public record and shall contain at least the following: The date of each meeting; the names of the board members present and absent; the names of the members introducing and seconding motions and resolutions, etc., before the board; a copy of each such motion or resolution presented; the vote of each member thereon; and the provisions of each beer permit issued by the board. 
(Code 2007, § 8-203; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-124. - Requirements for quorum and action. 
    The attendance of at least a majority of the members of the beer board shall be required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Matters before the board shall be decided by a majority of the members present if a quorum is constituted. Any member present but not voting shall be deemed to have cast a "nay" vote. 
(Code 2007, § 8-204; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-125. - Powers and duties. 
    The beer board shall have the power and it is hereby directed to regulate the selling, storing for sale, distributing for sale, and manufacturing of beer within this municipality in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2007, § 8-205; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Secs. 4-126-4-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Permits, T.C.A. § 57-5-103 et seq. 

Sec. 4-149. - Permit for engaging in beer business. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer board. Each applicant must be a person of good moral character and must certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions of this division. Five types of permits may be issued by the beer board. 
a.  Class 1 on-premises permit shall be issued for the consumption of beer only on the premises of a restaurant. 
b.  Class 2 on-premises, other permit. Other establishments making application for a permit to sell beer for consumption on the premises, which do not qualify, or do not wish to apply for, a class 1 on-premises permit, but which otherwise meet all other regulations and restrictions in this division, shall apply for a class 2 on-premises permit. 
c.  Class 3 on-premises hotel/motel, permits for operation as a hotel or motel. 
d.  Class 4 on-premises tavern, where beer is sold for consumption at a tavern. Tavern shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is or is to be the sale of beer to be consumed on the premises. There shall not be more than a total of three taverns located within the corporate limits of the town. 
e.  Class 5 off-premises permit. 
f.  Class 6, special occasion beer permit. The special occasion beer permit request shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe and/or furnish and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $100.00. 
1.  The beer board is authorized to issue a special occasion beer permit to bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations for special events. 
2.  The special occasion beer permit shall not be issued for longer than one 48-hour period, unless otherwise specified by the beer board, subject to the limitations on the hours, imposed by law. 
3.  The application for the special occasion beer permit shall state whether the applicant is a charitable or nonprofit organization, include documents showing evidence of the type of organization, and state the location of the premises upon which alcoholic beverages shall be served and the purpose for the request of the license. 
4.  For purposes of this section, the term "bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization" means any corporation or other legal entity which has been recognized as exempt from federal taxes under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
5.  No charitable or nonprofit organization possessing a special occasion beer permit shall purchase, for sale or distribution, beer from any source other than a licensee as provided pursuant to state law. 
6.  Failure of the special occasion permittee to abide by the conditions of the permit and all laws of the state and the town will result in a denial of a special occasion beer permit for the sale of beer for a period of two years. 
(2)  Permits shall at all times be subject to all of the limitations and restrictions provided under this Code and the laws of the state. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued to the owner of the business, whether a person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association. 
(c)  The applicant or a representative must appear in person before the board and subject himself to examination upon any and all questions appertaining to his qualifications under this division and amendments thereto. If the applicant fails to appear before the board the permit request will be postponed until the next regularly scheduled beer board meeting. 
(Code 2007, § 8-207; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-150. - Classes of consumption permits. 
    Permits issued by the beer board shall consist of five classes: 
(1)  Class 1 on-premises permit. A class 1 on-premises permit shall be issued for the consumption of beer only on the premises. To qualify for a class 1 on-premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other regulations and restrictions in this division: 
a.  Be a restaurant or an eating place regulated, monitored and rated by the state; 
b.  Provide adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment on the premises; 
c.  The establishment for which a permit for on-premises consumption is sought must sell food prepared for on-premises consumption as a normal, regular and integral part of its everyday activities and such food is available for purchase during the same hours that beer is sold for on-premises consumption; 
d.  Be able to seat a minimum of 15 people, including children, in booths and at tables, in addition to any other seating it may have; 
e.  Have all required seating in the interior of the building under a permanent roof; and 
f.  To satisfy the requirement that it sell food for on-premises consumption as a normal, regular and integral part of its business, the on-premises permit holder must generate a minimum of 60 percent of the gross revenues of the establishment from food sales. Reporting procedures for establishments holding an on-premises permit are herewith established. Reporting forms shall be provided to establishments holding an on-premises permit and shall detail food sale and alcoholic beverage sale percentages on an annual basis and shall be due on or before June 30. The permit holder will submit copies of all sales tax returns and liquor by-the-drink returns, with appropriate documentation. These returns shall be subject to audit by the town. Reporting year shall be January 1 through December 31 of the previous year. The town recorder shall keep a record of such compliance and notify the beer board of an establishment which fails to meet the 60 percent ratio. 
(2)  Class 2 on-premises permit, other. Other establishments making application for a permit to sell beer for consumption on the premises, which do not qualify, or do not wish to apply for, a class 1 on-premises permit, but which otherwise meet all other regulations and restrictions in this division, shall apply for a class 2 on-premises permit. To qualify for a class 2 on-premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other regulations and restrictions in this division, generate a minimum of 95 percent of the gross revenues of the establishment from sales other than alcoholic beverages. Reporting procedures for establishments holding an on-premises permit are herewith established. Reporting forms shall be provided to establishments holding an on-premises permit and shall detail sales and alcoholic beverage sale percentages on an annual basis and shall be due on or before June 30. The permit holder will submit copies of all sales tax returns with appropriate documentation. These returns shall be subject to audit by the town. Reporting year shall be January 1 through December 31 of the previous year. The town recorder shall keep a record of such compliance and notify the beer board of an establishment which fails to meet the 95 percent ratio. 
(3)  Class 3 on-premises hotel/motel permits for operation as a hotel or motel. If a hotel or motel otherwise meets the requirements of this code and the laws of the state for either on-premises consumption permit or for an off-premises consumption permit, it is eligible to hold two separate permits. All on-premises consumption permits for hotels/motels are subject to the following additional conditions: 
a.  The hotel/motel that holds the permit must have 50 or more guest rooms; 
b.  The permit holder may only sell beer to guests of the hotel/motel, but only for consumption within the guest room assigned to the guest; 
c.  The permit holder may only sell beer at the front desk for the establishment, or through a retail convenience shop that is within the hotel/motel building and that is regularly maintained as such by the motel/motel; and 
d.  The total receipts of the hotel/motel resulting from the sale of beer and other alcoholic beverages may not exceed 40 percent of the total revenues received by the permit holder hotel/motel. 
(4)  Class 4 on-premises tavern where beer is sold for consumption at a tavern. The term "tavern" shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is or is to be the sale of beer to be consumed on the premises. There shall not be more than a total of three taverns located within the corporate limits of the town. To qualify for a class 4 on-premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other regulations and restrictions in this article: 
a.  Be housed in building space and/or tenant space that does not exceed 3,500 gross square feet. 
b.  Not make or allow the sale of beer between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon on Sundays, and between 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. on all other days of the week. 
c.  In no event will a permit be issued authorizing the manufacture or storage of beer, or the sale of beer within 340 feet of any school or church. The distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the building from which the beer will be manufactured, stored or sold to the nearest point on the building of the school or church. No permit shall be suspended, revoked or denied on the basis of proximity of the establishment to a school or church if a valid permit had been issued to any business on that same location, unless beer is not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location during any continuous six-month period. 
d.  Provide throughout with an approved, supervised automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
e.  New permits issued after February 16, 2017, are required to sell food, in addition to meeting the other regulations and restrictions in this chapter. 
(5)  Class 5 off-premises permit. A retailer's "off-premises permit" shall be issued to any person engaged in the sale of beer where the beer is not to be consumed by the purchaser or his guest upon or near the premises of the seller. 
(6)  Class 6 special occasion beer permit. The special occasion beer permit request shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe and/or furnish and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $100.00. 
a.  The beer board is authorized to issue a special occasion beer permit to bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations for special events. 
b.  The special occasion beer permit shall not be issued for longer than one 48-hour period, unless otherwise specified by the beer board, subject to the limitations on the hours, imposed by law. 
c.  The application for the special occasion beer permit shall state whether the applicant is a charitable or nonprofit organization, include documents showing evidence of the type of organization, and state the location of the premises upon which alcoholic beverages shall be served and the purpose for the request of the license. 
d.  For purposes of this section, the term "bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization" means any corporation or other legal entity which has been recognized as exempt from federal taxes under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
e.  No charitable or nonprofit organization possessing a special occasion beer permit shall purchase, for sale or distribution, beer from any source other than a licensee as provided pursuant to state law. 
f.  Failure of the special occasion permittee to abide by the conditions of the permit and all laws of the state and the town will result in a denial of a special occasion beer permit for the sale of beer for a period of two years. 
(Code 2007, § 8-218; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(8-218), 2-9-2017) 
Sec. 4-151. - Application fees and privilege tax. 
(a)  Application fee. The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe and/or furnish, and pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-104(a), shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $250.00, or such larger amount as may be authorized by the laws of the state. 
(b)  Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of selling, distributing, storing or manufacturing beer a privilege tax of $100.00, or such larger amount as may be authorized by the laws of the state. Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or manufacture of beer shall remit the tax each successive January 1 to the town. At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax payment date. 
(Code 2007, § 8-208; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Authorized fees and taxes, T.C.A. § 57-5-104. 
Sec. 4-152. - Application; requirements and conditions. 
    Each applicant for a beer permit shall be required to complete a formal, written application in a form approved by the beer board. Each applicant must explicitly and affirmatively state all of the following: 
(1)  The owner or owners of such premises. 
(2)  Name of applicant's business and whether the applicant is a person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or association. 
(3)  Location of premises of the business by street address and tax map and parcel. 
(4)  Telephone number at the location. 
(5)  If beer will be sold at two or more restaurants or other businesses, within the same building as provided by T.C.A. § 57-5-103(a)(4), a description of all such businesses. 
(6)  Any firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, partnership, limited liability company or association having at least a five percent ownership in the applicant must provide the names of all owners, stockholders, partners, and members, together with the addresses, telephone numbers, social security numbers and Federal Tax ID numbers of such individuals. If an owner, stockholder, partner or member of the applicant is also a legal entity other than a person. The same information for its owners is required. 
(7)  Identity and address, telephone number, and email address of a representative to receive annual tax notices and other communication from the town. 
(8)  Whether any person, firm, corporation, joint stock companies, syndicate or associations having at least a five-percent ownership interest in the applicant or any person employed in the distribution or sale of beer has been convicted of any violation of the laws against possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(9)  Whether the applicant is seeking a permit which would allow the sale of beer for on-premises consumption of beer or for off-premises consumption or both types of consumption. 
(10)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property where the applicant's business will be located and a copy of the lease governing the applicant's possession of the premises. 
(11)  The application shall authorize a police records check and shall waive any right the applicant may have to privacy concerning arrests reflecting on the moral character of the applicant. 
(12)  That the applicant will not engage in the sale of such beverages except at the place or places for which the beer board has issued a permit to such applicant. 
(13)  That no sales of such beverages will be made except in accordance with the permit granted. 
(14)  The application shall be submitted to the town recorder at least 15 days prior to the beer board meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(15)  Applications shall at all times be kept on file by the town recorder and shall be open to inspection of the general public within the limits of federal, state and local law, and any person, firm, corporation or association knowingly making any false statement in the application shall forfeit his permit or right to a permit and shall not be eligible to receive any permit for a period of one year thereafter. 
(16)  No applicant for a beer permit for on-premises consumption shall be issued a permit unless the town recorder has obtained approval of the premises from the building inspector and fire marshal, and a background report from the county sheriff's office recommending approval. 
(17)  Any other information as may be deemed material and requested by the beer board and/or town staff. 
(Code 2007, § 8-211; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-153. - Police record check. 
    The town recorder shall submit all applications to the county sheriff's office for a records check prior to time of the beer board meeting at which the application will be considered. 
(Code 2007, § 8-210; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-154. - Beer permits shall be restrictive. 
(a)  All beer permits shall be restrictive as to the type of beer business authorized under them. Separate permits shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing, and manufacturing. Beer permits for retail sale of beer may be further restricted so as to authorize sales only for either off-premises or on-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type or phase of the beer business not expressly authorized by his permit. It shall likewise be unlawful for holder of a permit not to comply with any and all express restrictions or conditions in the permit. 
(b)  Where an owner operates two or more restaurants or other businesses within the same building, the owner may, in the owner's discretion, operate some or all such businesses pursuant to the same permit. 
(Code 2007, § 8-213; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-155. - Interference with public health, safety, and morals prohibited. 
(a)  No permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when, as determined in the discretion of the board, such business would cause congestion of traffic or would interfere with schools, residences, churches, or other places of public gathering, or would otherwise interfere with the public health, safety, and morals. 
(b)  In no event will a permit be issued authorizing the manufacture or storage of beer, or the sale of beer within 340 feet of any school or church. The distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the building from which the beer will be manufactured, stored or sold to the nearest point on the building of the school or church. No permit shall be suspended, revoked or denied on the basis of proximity of the establishment to a school or church if a valid permit had been issued to any business on that same location, unless beer is not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location during any continuous six-month period. 
(c)  In no event will a permit of any type required by this article be issued for use in conjunction with an establishment in which there is permitted: 
(1)  Any female to appear or remain on the premises so costumed or dressed that one or both breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view. The term "wholly or substantially exposed to public view," as it pertains to such exposure means the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion of the breast below the top of the nipple. 
(2)  Any person to appear or remain upon the premises so costumed or dressed that the pubic hair, anus, or genitals are exposed to public view. 
(Code 2007, § 8-216; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-156. - Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes prohibited. 
    No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a crime related to the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor or illegal drugs, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(Code 2007, § 8-217; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-157. - Fire and building inspection. 
(a)  No beer permit of any type shall be issued unless and until the premises to which such permit is applicable have been inspected and have passed the minimum fire and building codes adopted by the town. 
(b)  The beer board shall have the power to revoke any beer permit issued under the provisions of this article when the premises are found to be in violation of the minimum fire and life safety codes and building codes. No beer permit shall be revoked until a public hearing is held by the beer board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the town administrator, or a member of the beer board. 
(Code 2007, § 8-222; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-158. - Issuance. 
    After all inspections have been made and the applicant for a beer permit has met all requirements of this article, after all necessary fees and charges have been paid by the applicant, and after the beer board has determined the applicant has complied with all other requirements contained in this article, the board shall approve the application. Within a reasonable time following final approval of the application, a beer permit shall be issued to the applicant. The permittee shall retain such beer permit for as long as he shall wish to do business at the premises for which it was issued; provided that such permit is not revoked or suspended by the board. 
(Code 2007, § 8-220; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-159. - Permits not transferable; permitted locations for consumption. 
(a)  The beer permit is only for the owner to whom the permit is issued and cannot be transferred to another owner. If the owner is a corporation, a change in ownership shall occur when control of at least 50 percent of the stock of the corporation is transferred to a new owner. 
(b)  The beer permit is only for a single location, except as provided in section 4-154, and cannot be transferred to another location. A permit shall be valid for all decks, patios and other outdoor serving areas that are contiguous to the exterior of the building in which the business is located and that are operated by the business. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision of this part to the contrary, when a permittee applies for a new permit based solely upon a change of the name under which the business operates with no change whatsoever in the ownership of the business or the location of its operation, upon completion of the appropriate application form and payment of any required fees, the town recorder shall be authorized to issue the new permit without further review by the beer board. 
(Code 2007, § 8-214; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-160. - Display of permit. 
    The permit required by this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Code 2007, § 8-215; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
Sec. 4-161. - Revocation or suspension of beer permits. 
    The beer board shall have the power to revoke or suspend any beer permit issued under the provisions of this article when the holder thereof is guilty of making a false statement or misrepresentation in his application for failing to take actions required by this article or of violating any of the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the provisions of section 4-158. However, no beer permit shall be revoked or suspended until a public hearing is held by the board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Revocation or suspension proceedings may be initiated by the town administrator or member of the beer board. No suspension of a beer permit shall be contrary to the provisions of T.C.A. title 57, ch. 5, pt. 6 (T.C.A. § 57-5-601 et seq.). 
Sec. 4-162. - Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Responsible vendor. The beer board shall not, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-608, revoke or suspend the permit of a responsible vendor for a clerk's illegal sale of beer to a minor, if the vendor and the clerk making the sale have complied with the requirements of T.C.A. § 57-5-606 as a responsible vendor under that part, but may impose upon the responsible vendor a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales to minors or for any violation of this article or state law. Permanent revocation of beer permits issued to responsible vendors may only be applied when a responsible vendor permittee commits at least two violations within a 12-month period and then only after the state alcoholic beverage commission revokes the permittee's status as a responsible vendor. 
(b)  Non-responsible vendor. The prohibition of subsection (a) of this section concerning the revocation or suspension of the vendor's permit shall not apply to any vendor who is not a responsible vendor under the Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006 (T.C.A. § 57-5-601 et seq.), or to a participating vendor, if the vendor or clerk making a sale to a minor fails to comply with the requirements of T.C.A. § 57-5-606. With respect to such permittee, the beer board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer the permittee the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for any other offense. 
(c)  Civil penalty as alternative. If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil penalty is not received within seven days, the revocation or suspension shall begin eight days after the beer board hearing. If the civil penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(d)  Payment of civil penalty admission of violation. Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension by a permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the town may impose. 
(Code 2007, § 8-223; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 5-22-2014) 

Chapter 5 - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[1]
modified

Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Editor's note Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, adopted May 28, 2020, amends the effective date of this Ordinance to September 1, 2020.


Sec. 5-101. - Short title.
modified
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Town of Farragut Hotel/Motel Tax Ordinance.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-102. - Definitions.
modified
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1)Consideration means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever; provided, however, nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that consideration is charged when the space provided to the person is complimentary from the operator and no consideration is charged to or received from any person.(2)Hotel means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist court, tourist cabin, motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration.(3)Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room, lodgings, or accommodations in any hotel.(4)Operator means the person operating the hotel whether as owner, lessee, or otherwise.(5)Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.(6)Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for a period of less than 30 continuous days.
(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-103. - Levy of tax authorized.
modified
As authorized by T.C.A. § 67-4-1401, et seq., the board of mayor and aldermen of the Town of Farragut does hereby levy upon the occupancy in any hotel of each transient a privilege tax of three (3.0) percent of the consideration charged by the operator. Such tax is a privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room and is to be collected as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-104. - Disposition of tax.
modified
The proceeds received by the Town of Farragut shall be used for tourism development.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-105. - Collection and refund.
modified
(1)Such tax shall be added by each and every operator to each invoice prepared by the operator for the occupancy of the hotel and given directly or transmitted to the transient. Such tax shall be collected by such operator from the transient and remitted to the town.(2)When a person has maintained occupancy for 30 continuous days, that person shall receive from the operator a refund or credit for the tax previously collected from or charged to him, and the operator shall receive credit for the amount of such tax if previously paid or reported to the Town of Farragut.
(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-106. - Remittance of tax.
modified
(1)Except as provided in subsection (2) hereof, the tax hereby levied shall be remitted by all operators who lease, rent or charge for any rooms, lodgings, spaces or accommodations in hotels within the town to the town recorder, such tax to be remitted to such officer not later than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month. The operator is hereby required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the presentation of the invoice for such occupancy whether prior to occupancy or after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator, and if credit is granted by the operator to the transient, then the obligation to the town entitled to such tax shall be that of the operator.(2)Rent and charges for rooms, lodgings, spaces or accommodations in hotels within the town collected in calendar year 2020, are exempt from such tax if the amount collected is a fixed rate that is committed to by the operator and is collected pursuant to written agreements signed and entered into by the operator before March 1, 2020, which agreements commit the operator to charge a specified rate for occupancy and committing (i) to a group sponsor for a block of five rooms or more or (ii) to a business entity a negotiated rate for occupancy, during 2020 (herein "group or corporate rate"), provided that: (i) copies of such written agreements are delivered by the operator to the town recorder on or before April 1, 2020, and (ii) the operator's monthly tax return for the month the group or corporate rate is actually collected, includes a listing of the total of the group or corporate rate nights collected and a cross-reference to the written agreement, by date and group or corporate sponsor, pursuant to which the group or corporate rate was charged.
(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-107. - Monthly tax returnAnnual audit.
modified
The town recorder shall be responsible for the collection of such tax. A monthly tax return under oath shall be filed with the town recorder by the operator with such number of copies thereof as the town recorder may reasonably require for the collection of such tax. The report of the operator shall include such facts and information as may be deemed reasonable for the verification of the tax due. The form of such report shall be developed by the town recorder and approved by the board of mayor and aldermen prior to use. the town recorder may audit each operator in the town at least once per year and report on the audits made to the board of mayor and aldermen. The board of mayor and aldermen is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances to provide reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-108. - No advertising of rebates.
modified
No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner whether directly or indirectly that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent, or that if added, any part will be refunded.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-109. - Delinquent taxesInterest and penalty.
modified
Taxes collected by an operator which are not remitted to the town recorder on or before the due dates are delinquent. An operator shall be liable for interest on such delinquent taxes from the due date at the rate of 12 percent per annum, and in addition, for a penalty of one percent for each month or fraction thereof such taxes are delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax herein required to be remitted. Each occurrence of willful or knowing refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax, or willful or knowing refusal of a transient to pay the tax imposed is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $50.00 per day per offense. The penalty is to be imposed separately for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. Each occurrence means each day for which there is a failure to collect or remit in the case of an operator, or a failure to pay in the case of a transient.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-110. - RecordsInspection.
modified
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the town of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve for a period of three years all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of the payment to the town, which records the town recorder shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-111. - Administration and enforcement.
modified
The town recorder in administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall have as additional powers, those powers and duties with respect to collecting taxes as provided in T.C.A., tit. 67, or otherwise provided by law for the county clerks.

(1)Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the taxpayer has the remedies provided in T.C.A., tit. 67, ch. 1, pt. 9, it being the intent of this chapter that the provision of law which apply to the recovery of state taxes illegally assessed and collected shall also apply to the tax levied under the authority of this chapter. The town recorder shall also possess those powers and duties as provided in T.C.A., § 67-1-707, for the county clerks with respect to the adjustment and refunds of such tax.(2)With respect to the adjustment and settlement with taxpayers all errors of taxes collected by him under authority of this chapter shall be refunded by the town. The town recorder shall have the authority to direct the refunding of same. Notice of any tax paid under protest shall be given to the town recorder and any suit brought for recovery of tax paid under protest shall name the town recorder.
(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-112. - Deposit of funds.
modified
The town recorder is hereby charged with the duty of collection of the tax herein authorized and shall place the proceeds of such tax in an account to be used for the purposes as designated by section 5-104 of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)

Sec. 5-113. - Severability clause.
modified
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any of its sections, provisions, exceptions, or parts be held unconstitutional or void, the remainder of the chapter shall continue to be in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent now hereby declared, that this chapter would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional or void matter had not been included herein.

(Ord. No. 20-01 , §; 1, 1-23-2020; Ord. No. 20-05 , § 1, 5-28-2020)
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals, T.C.A. title 44. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means a dog or canine creature. 
    Animal control officer means a person designated by the town administrator to carry out the provisions of this chapter including the impoundment of animals. 
    Animal shelter means an agency, organization, or premises designated by the town for the purpose of impounding and caring for any dog impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    At large means any dog when it is off the property of its owner and not under control of a competent person. 
    Direct control means immediate and continuous physical control of an animal (excluding herding dogs, dogs in the process of hunting, police dogs and dogs participating in organized field competition) at all times such as by means of a fence, leash, cord or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal. 
    Exposed to rabies means a dog has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this chapter if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
    Kennel means an establishment for the breeding, buying, selling, or boarding of dogs or cats. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons, or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring dogs. 
    Spayed female means any bitch which has been operated upon to prevent conception. 
    Vicious dog means any dog that attacks a person by biting or in any manner causing injury or the reasonable likelihood of injury; or, one who repeatedly attacks livestock or other domestic animals. However, the term "vicious dog" does not apply to any dog that bites, attacks, or attempts to attack any person or animal unlawfully upon the dog owner's premises or which is provoked to attack. 
(Code 1985, § 3-201; Code 2007, § 10-101; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-2. - Violations, civil infractions; civil penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter is a civil infraction. 
(b)  Any person who has committed an act in violation of this chapter may receive a citation from the town: 
(1)  By an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who, based on personal observation, has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction; or 
(2)  By an animal control officer, law enforcement officer or the town administrator, or his designee, who by direct complaint by a citizen who has personally observed the civil infraction in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The town municipal court shall have jurisdiction over all violations of this chapter occurring within the town. 
(d)  Any violation of this chapter may be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day that any section of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate punishable offense. 
(e)  Any person issued an animal control ordinance citation may be deemed to be charged with a civil violation and shall comply with the directives on the citation. 
(f)  If a person fails to appear in court to defend or prosecute the citation, such person shall be deemed to have waived their right to contest or prosecute the citation and in such a case a default judgment may be entered and the judge shall dismiss the citation or impose a civil penalty at that time, as the case may be. An order to show cause may be issued. If the civil penalty is paid, the case shall be dismissed. If the civil penalty is not paid, judgment may be entered upon to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Code 1985, § 3-207; Code 2007, § 10-107; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-3. - Exemptions. 
    Hospitals, clinics, and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians, for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except where expressly stated. 
(Code 1985, § 3-213; Code 2007, § 10-113; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-4. - Interference. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer or town administrator in the performance of any duty imposed by this chapter or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control officer except as herein provided. 
(Code 1985, § 3-211; Code 2007, § 10-111; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-5. - Complaints of violations. 
    Any violations of the provisions of this chapter may be reported to the town office by any person observing the violation. For alleged violations under section 6-37(5), (6) and (7), the person making the complaint shall identify themselves to the town administrator or his designee prior to any action being taken by the town administrator or his designee. A record of complaints shall be maintained on file in the town office. 
(Code 1985, § 3-210; Code 2007, § 10-110; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-6. - Animal shelter. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the town administrator or his designee is authorized to use any appropriate facility within or outside the town upon such basis as may be approved in advance by the board of mayor and aldermen. All fees collected for boarding or keeping of animals provided under this chapter shall be paid to the recorder and used for the expenses of such shelter. 
(Code 1985, § 3-208; Code 2007, § 10-108; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-7. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be transported to the animal shelter, or if the animal is in immediate danger, to a veterinary facility. The animal shall be held at the animal shelter for a waiting period of not less than three days, including the day the animal is received, but exclusive of legal holidays, unless the animal is wearing identification, rabies or license tags, in which event the waiting period shall not be less than five days, including the day the animal is received, but exclusive of legal holidays. During the prescribed waiting period, the owner of the animal, if known, shall be notified and allowed to redeem the animal upon payment of any applicable fees. No animal shall be destroyed until the expiration of the prescribed waiting period except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If, in the attempt to seize an animal, it becomes impossible to do so safely by proper handling procedures, the animal control officer after being convinced that seizure of the animal is necessary to public welfare by reason of its viciousness or infection with rabies may tranquilize the animal or dispose of the animal by shooting it. 
(c)  If any animal so impounded is found to be sick, injured or of a vicious nature, the animal may be immediately destroyed in a humane manner; provided, however, that if the owner is known, he shall be notified, and shall have the right to obtain the advice and services of a veterinarian, and in all such cases where the owner of the animal is known, the animal shall not be destroyed without the consent of the owner. Where there has been a reasonable attempt to contact the owner and the owner has not promptly responded, then the animal may be humanely destroyed. 
(d)  As soon as possible after any animal is impounded, a permanent record shall be made which includes a description of the animal and the date, time and place that the animal was picked up. If such animal is not redeemed, the date and time of adoption or euthanasia shall also be included as part of the permanent record. 
(e)  Whenever the animal control officer finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other involuntary absence of the person responsible for the care of such animal, the animal control officer may impound such animal until reclaimed by its owner. Any animal which has been impounded and not reclaimed for ten days after the circumstances causing the impoundment have ceased to exist may be disposed of pursuant to animal shelter policy. This section does not replace the criminal offense part of T.C.A. § 39-14-202, pertaining to cruelty to animals. 
(Code 1985, § 3-206; Code 2007, § 10-106; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Sec. 6-8. - Disposing of dead dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or place the carcass of any dog which he owns upon any street, alley or lot or to allow the dog to remain on his property. Within 24 hours after he has learned of its death, the owner shall have it buried in a pet cemetery, bury it at least three feet beneath the surface of the ground and not closer than 300 feet to any flowing stream or public body of water, or otherwise have it removed from his property and legally disposed of. 
(Code 1985, § 3-205; Code 2007, § 10-105; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Secs. 6-9-6-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats, T.C.A. § 44-17-101 et seq. 

Sec. 6-35. - Restraint of dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any dog owned by him or under his control to run at large in any street, alley, park, or off the property of the owner. Any person owning or having possession of any dog shall keep such dog upon his own premises unless such dog is under direct control. 
(Code 1985, § 3-202; Code 2007, § 10-102; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
State Law reference- Dogs at large, T.C.A. § 44-8-408. 
Sec. 6-36. - Confinement of certain dogs. 
(a)  The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog, and shall not take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled. 
(b)  Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with another dog except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 3-203; Code 2007, § 10-103; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
State Law reference- Confinement of female dogs while proud, T.C.A. § 44-8-410. 
Sec. 6-37. - Dogs becoming nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain any dog in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance as provided in this article. The following acts or actions by an owner or possessor of any dog are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are, therefore, unlawful: 
(1)  Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control any dog as required by section 6-35. 
(2)  Maintaining a vicious dog other than in a manner as described in section 6-36(a). 
(3)  Maintaining any dog that is diseased and/or dangerous to the public health. 
(4)  Failure to confine a female dog while in heat in such a manner as described in section 6-36(b). 
(5)  Allowing or permitting any dog to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers, or vegetables. 
(6)  Maintaining his property in a manner that is offensive, annoying, or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare of the community because of the number, type, variety, density, location, or condition of the dogs on the property. 
(7)  Allowing any dog to habitually bark, whine, or howl in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises. For the purposes of this section, the term "habitually" shall mean continuously for a period of ten minutes, or intermittently for one-half hour or more. 
(Code 1985, § 3-204; Code 2007, § 10-104; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
Secs. 6-38-6-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies, T.C.A. § 68-8-101 et seq. 

Sec. 6-63. - Vaccination, rabies tags. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any animal which has not been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with T.C.A. §§ 68-8-104, 68-8-107, and 68-8-108. Every animal owner shall attach a metal tag or other evidence of vaccination to a collar which shall be worn at all times by the dog vaccinated; provided that the collar may be removed in the case of hunting dogs while in chase or returning from the chase. Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting the use of an unvaccinated dog in either the hunt or chase. 
(Code 1985, § 3-212; Code 2007, § 10-112; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 68-6-106. 
Sec. 6-64. - Animal bites. 
(a)  Every incident in which an animal or rodent bites a person shall be promptly reported to the town administrator and such animal or rodent shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the town administrator for a period of ten days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the town administrator. At the discretion of the town administrator or his designee, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the town animal shelter, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the town animal shelter. 
(b)  The owner upon demand by the animal control officer and town administrator shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Said animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the required fees. 
(c)  When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer of the county of the diagnosis. 
(d)  Quarantine. 
(1)  When one or both reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer shall recommend an area wide quarantine for a period of 60 days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine by a proper public health officer of the county, no pet animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the town without written permission of the animal control officer. 
(2)  During this quarantine period and as long afterward as he decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the town administrator shall require that all dogs or cats, three months of age and older, shall be vaccinated against rabies with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the biologics control section of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The types of approved canine antirabies vaccine to be used and the recognized duration of immunity for each shall be established by the town administrator. All vaccinated dogs or cats shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for 30 days after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the town administrator shall be empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the area of the health jurisdiction. 
(3)  No dog which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the town administrator and the animal control officer. 
(e)  Dogs or cats bitten by a known rabid animal shall be destroyed immediately or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed dog or cat, strict isolation of the animal shall be enforced. If the dog or cat has been previously vaccinated, within time limits established by the town administrator based on the kind of vaccine used, then revaccination and strict isolation for a minimum of 30 days shall be carried out. For all other dogs or cats, a strict isolation shall be enforced in a kennel for six months. 
(f)  In the event there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of the quarantine may be extended for an additional six months. 
(g)  No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, or remove from the town limits, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein provided, without written permission from the town administrator. 
(h)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
(i)  The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(j)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine as required herein when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer and/or town administrator. 
(k)  Each and every provision of this chapter relative to rabies control shall be applicable to all animals and rodents and the owners thereof in the town. 
(Code 1985, § 3-209; Code 2007, § 10-109; Ord. No. 03-04, 3-2003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 68-8-109. 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Professions, businesses and trades, T.C.A. title 63; general power relative to businesses, T.C.A. § 6-2-201(20). 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Business Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-4-701 et seq.; municipal business tax, T.C.A. § 67-4-705. 

Sec. 8-19. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to identify, aid and support businesses who are engaged in any business by obtaining reliable information as to who is conducting or planning to conduct business and the nature of the business, within the town. 
(Code 2007, § 5-301; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-20. - Application of article. 
(a)  Each person who conducts a business, as that term is defined by T.C.A. § 67-4-702(a)(2), which operates from a physical site or place of business situated within the corporate limits of the town is subject to this article. Any person operating a business which does not do so from a physical location or site within the corporate limits of the town, need not obtain a privilege license, even though it conducts business with customers in the town. For purposes of this article, the term "person" shall include either individuals, corporations, partnerships, or any other legal entity involving a business relationship. 
(b)  The privilege licenses shall apply to all vocations, occupations, and businesses, within the town as declared by the general laws of the state. The privilege license applies to all commercial, office and home based businesses. 
(Code 2007, § 5-302; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-21. - Separate businesses. 
    Each person or entity doing business in more than one factory, mill, warehouse, store, stall or stand, or other place of business, shall secure a separate license for each such place of business, unless such places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open into each other, and are operated as a unit, and shall pay the prescribed license fee for each such place of business. 
(Code 2007, § 5-305; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-22. - Multi-vendor sales locations. 
(a)  In the case of antique malls, flea markets, craft shows, antique shows, gun shows, farmers markets, auto shows, or similar activities as determined by the town administrator, operated as public facilities for such particular purpose (referred to herein "public markets") from which business is carried on by two or more retailers of tangible personal property (individually referred to as "exhibitors"), the owner, manager, operator or promoter of the facility shall be required to obtain a collective license for all nonlicensed exhibitors, and shall collect and submit to the town recorder a fee as allowed by state law, currently provided for in T.C.A. § 67-4-710, from each such exhibitor who does not possess a current business license issued by the town. 
(b)  Exhibitors at a public market may elect to either obtain a business license as provided herein, or not obtain a license and pay the fee per booth per day to the public market operators who shall in turn remit it to the town. Those exhibitors electing to obtain a business license must present evidence of a current, valid license to the operator before conducting business, and will not be required to pay the daily fee. The operator of a public market shall at all times maintain copies of the current business licenses of current exhibitors from whom the daily fee is not being collected. These records shall be open for inspection and copying by the town administrator or his designee. 
(c)  In the case of a public market in which the location is not a continuing business, the fees collected by the owner, manager, operator, or promoter shall be submitted to the town recorder within 72 hours after the closing of the event. 
(d)  In the case of a public market in which the location is a continuing business, the fees collected by the owner, manager, operator, or promoter shall be due and payable monthly, on the first day of each month. 
(e)  This provision will not apply to any business that is primarily engaged in selling antiques at least five days each week in a permanent location which has a common cash register for all sales. For antique malls selling antiques at least five days a week with a common cash register for all sales, only the mall operator will be required to obtain a business license. Individual booths rented at such malls will not be deemed to be separate places, locations, or outlets in the state from which business is conducted. 
(Code 2007, § 5-306; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-23. - Applications. 
    Every application for a license under this article shall be submitted through the town's website or in writing to the town recorder's office upon a form to be provided by the town. Such application shall be signed either by the applicant or by his agent, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Complete and exact name under which the business is proposed to be operated. 
(2)  If the business is proposed to be operated by an individual under any assumed name, the name of such individual and his address. 
(3)  If the business is a partnership, the name and address of the active managing partner of said business. 
(4)  If the business is a corporation, the name and address of the president and of the secretary of the corporation, and the location of the principal office. 
(5)  Nature of the business for which license is desired. 
(6)  Proposed or existing location. 
(Code 2007, § 5-307; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-24. - License issuance and renewals. 
(a)  New license. Upon receipt of the application and payment of $15.00, the town recorder shall issue the business privilege license. The license shall be issued at the time of registration. In the event the application and payment are submitted online the license will be mailed to the business address. 
(b)  Term of license. A business privilege license issued to a new business shall be effective on the day it begins operating and shall expire on June 30 of the town's fiscal year. A license issued for each subsequent fiscal year shall be effective July 1 and shall expire on June 30 of the town's fiscal year. 
(c)  Business license renewal. The business shall renew the license upon the notification from the town. There shall be no charge for the renewal of an existing license. In the event a business fails to submit its request for renewal of its existing license on or before August 31, its license shall lapse and a new license must be applied for and the proper fee paid as with any new license. 
(d)  Fee waived. The license fee of $15.00 shall be waived for all businesses voluntarily submitting applications for a business privilege license within 90 calendar days of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived on second reading. All businesses, as defined in this chapter, that fail to submit an application during this initial grace period will be subject to the license fee as outlined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2007, § 5-308; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-25. - Procedure if other approval or permit required. 
    In any case where other municipal, county or state approvals, permits or licenses are required of any licensee, the town recorder shall not issue a business privilege license until such approval or permits have been acquired. In addition to being cited and fined for violation of these regulations, in a case where other municipal approvals, permits or licenses are required of the licensee, such other approvals, permits or licenses may be revoked by the town if the licensee does not obtain a business privilege license as required by this article. 
(Code 2007, § 5-309; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-26. - Contents of license; official copies of same. 
    Every license shall show the name of the business, the nature of the business, the location thereof. The town recorder shall keep a copy of every license issued. 
(Code 2007, § 5-310; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-27. - Display of license. 
    Every license shall be kept in plain sight for the public to view at the place of business named on the license. 
(Code 2007, § 5-311; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-28. - Assignments and transfers. 
    Every license issued under the provisions shall only be assignable when that business carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person and the purchaser thereof is to carry on the same business and business name at the same place, the license may be assigned to the purchaser. Upon delivery of the license, properly assigned, to the town recorder, together with a written statement that the business has been sold as a unit and that the purchaser is to carry on the same at the same place of business the assignee shall be entitled to have a new license issued to him. The town recorder shall cancel the assigned license upon issuance of a revised license. 
(Code 2007, § 5-312; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-29. - Exemptions. 
    The following businesses are exempt from the requirements of this article as indicated below: 
(1)  Any not-for-profit business operated for a religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose, if the entire gross income of the business is used for said purpose. 
(2)  Any not-for-profit business that operates group homes, day cares or other types of care facilities for a nonprofit religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose is exempt from payment of a privilege license fee, if the entire gross income of the business is used exclusively for nonprofit purposes. 
(Code 2007, § 5-313; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 8-30. - Delinquent license fee and penalty. 
    Upon discovering any business which has been operating within the town without a business license as required by this article, the town recorder is hereby authorized to assess and collect the delinquent privilege license fee plus a penalty as specified by T.C.A. § 67-1-804 of one percent of the total license fees due and unpaid for each 30 days or fraction thereof that the fee remains unpaid subsequent to the assessment date, up to a maximum of 25 percent of the total unpaid amount. Where an application or renewal is delinquent the minimum penalty shall be as provided in T.C.A. § 67-1-804 regardless of the amount of the fees due. 
(Code 2007, § 5-314; Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire safety, T.C.A. § 68-1-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 10-19. - Fire code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. § 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of establishing the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion, or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures and premises, and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations, the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, including appendix B, appendix C, appendix D, appendix E, appendix F, appendix G, appendix H, and appendix I, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2012 edition, including annex A, annex B, and annex C, as prepared and adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this Code and is hereinafter referred to as the fire code. 
(Code 2007, § 7-101; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 10-20. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Fire Code and NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section [A] 101.1, Title, of the International Fire Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  Section 105, Permits, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following: 
    105.2.1.1 Permit denial. No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any other shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, if the matter for which application has been filed, if completed, would be in violation of any ordinance of the town. No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, who, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the town nor shall any permit be issued for a premise that, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the town. 
(d)  Section 108, Board of appeals, of the International Fire Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    108.4 Membership. The town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    108.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    108.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    108.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    108.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    108.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    108.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    108.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(e)  Section 109, Violations, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following: 
    109.1.1 Revocation. The fire official may also revoke a permit or approval if a permit holder shall, subsequent to the issuance of such permit or approval, violate the terms of the International Fire Code or the provisions of any other pertinent sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinances of the town. 
(f)  Section 401.3.1, Fire events, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    401.3.1 Fire events. In the event an unwanted fire or other emergency occurs on a property, the owner or occupant shall immediately report such condition to the fire department. 
(g)  Section 901.6, Inspection, testing and maintenance, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following phrase to the last sentence: 
    "..., only with approval of the fire official." 
(h)  Section 901.7, Systems out of service, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting the first sentence in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    901.7 Systems out of service. Where any fire protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. 
(i)  Section 903.2.3, Group E, 1, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
1.  Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than 5,000 square feet in area. 
(j)  Section 903.4.2, Alarms, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following sentence: 
    "Alarms shall comply with Section 907.5, Occupant Notification Systems." 
(k)  Section 903.4.3, Floor control valves, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor. 
(l)  Section 907.1.2, Fire alarm shop drawings, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following: 
14.  A point-to-point wiring diagram for all devices. 
15.  A riser diagram showing the zones for all devices connected to the control panel. 
(m)  Section 907.1.3, Equipment, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following sentence at the end of the paragraph: 
    "All systems installed within a building shall be interconnected and compatible in accordance with their listings." 
(n)  Section 907.2.1.1, System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting the first sentence in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with NFPA 72. 
(o)  Section 907.2.11.1, Group R-1, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by adding the following: 
4.  In each garage or storage area with a four-foot or wider door to the outside. 
(p)  Section [B]1008.1.9.3, Locks and latches, 2, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety. 
(q)  Section 1029.2, Minimum size, of the International Fire Code, shall be amended by deleting the exception. 
(r)  Section D107, One- or two-family residential developments, of Appendix D of the International Fire Code, shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(s)  Section 7.2.1.5.5, Key-operated locks, of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety. 
(t)  Section 6.1.14.4, Separated occupancies, of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, shall be amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the International Building Code, 2012 Edition separations. 
(u)  Section 16.3.2.5, of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, shall be deleted in its entirety and substitute in lieu thereof the following: 
    16.3.2.5 Domestic cooking equipment capable of producing grease laden vapors shall be protected as required by NFPA 96. 
(v)  The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, shall be amended by deleting Chapter 24, One- and Two-Family Dwellings, in its entirety. 
(Code 2007, § 7-102; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 10-21. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. § 6-54-501 to 6-54-504, one copy of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, and one copy of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 7-103; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 10-22. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Fire Code or the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 7-104; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 10-23. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Fire Code or the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Fire Code and the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Fire Code and the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 7-105; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 10-24. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the fire official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the fire official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the fire official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 7-106; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 10-25-10-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, T.C.A. § 68-104-101 et seq. 

Sec. 10-52. - Fireworks defined. 
    The term "fireworks" means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers, or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or device containing an explosive substance. The term "fireworks" shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Code 1985, § 7-101; Code 2007, § 7-201) 
Sec. 10-53. - General manufacture, storage, and sale prohibited. 
    The manufacture of fireworks within the corporate limits is prohibited. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at wholesale and/or at retail any fireworks. 
(Code 1985, § 7-102; Code 2007, § 7-202) 
Sec. 10-54. - Seizure of fireworks. 
    The town administrator or his designee shall be authorized to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7-103; Code 2007, § 7-203) 
Sec. 10-55. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics and sports or for use by military organizations. 
(Code 1985, § 7-104; Code 2007, § 7-204) 
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, T.C.A. § 16-18-101 et seq.; town judge and town court, T.C.A. § 6-4-301 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Created; where and when to be held. 
    There is hereby created a municipal court for the town. Said court shall be held at the town hall or at such other place within the town as the municipal judge may from time to time designate. Said court shall be in session not less often than one day per month at such hours as may be determined by the municipal judge and may be in session more frequently at such hours and at such places within the town as may be determined by the municipal judge. The initial determination of the time and date of convening of court shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least 15 days prior to the initial convening session of said court and thereafter any change in the schedule of hours, date, or place of session shall be likewise published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least 15 days prior to such change in the dates, hours, or place becoming effective. 
(Code 1985, § 1-501; Code 2007, § 3-101) 
Sec. 12-2. - Office of municipal judge established; tenure; removal. 
    There is hereby established the office of municipal judge which office shall be filled by a resolution of appointment by the board of mayor and aldermen. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, such officer shall always serve at the pleasure of the board of mayor and aldermen and may be removed from office for any reason at any time by resolution of said board. 
(Code 1985, § 1-502; Code 2007, § 3-102) 
State Law reference- Creation of office of municipal judge, T.C.A. §§ 16-18-101, 16-18-102; municipal court judges, T.C.A. § 16-18-308 et seq. 
Sec. 12-3. - Powers of judge. 
    The powers of the judge are provided for in T.C.A. § 16-18-302 and as otherwise may be provided by state law. 
(Code 1985, § 1-503(modified); Code 2007, § 3-103) 
Sec. 12-4. - Qualifications of judge. 
    Any person appointed to the office of municipal judge shall hold a baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university, shall be at least 30 years of age, and have been a resident of the town for a period of one year preceding election to office. The continuing education requirements of the judge are governed by T.C.A. § 16-18-309. If the judge is a licensed attorney at time of selection, suspension or revocation of such person's license to practice law shall constitute an automatic termination of that person's appointment to office pursuant to this chapter and a vacancy in such office shall forthwith exist to be filled by appropriate appointment by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-504; Code 2007, § 3-104; Ord. No. 09-25, § 1, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 12-5. - Normal term of office for judge. 
    The normal term of office for any officer appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year and such officer shall continue to serve thereafter until such officer's successor has been appointed and is sworn in unless otherwise provided herein. Vacancies in any office created hereby shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 1-505; Code 2007, § 3-105) 
Sec. 12-6. - Oath of office for judge. 
    Any person appointed to the office of municipal judge shall, prior to entering upon the duties of such office, take the following oath to be administered by the mayor: 
    "I, ___________, do solemnly swear to perform and discharge the duties and obligations of Municipal Judge of the Town of Farragut, and to enforce the ordinances of the town and the laws of the state without fear or favor, so help me God." 
(Code 1985, § 1-506; Code 2007, § 3-106) 
Sec. 12-7. - Compensation of judge. 
    In passing any resolution appointing any person to office pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such resolution by the board of mayor and aldermen shall prescribe the compensation, if any, to be paid to such person which level of compensation may not be changed or altered during such person's term of service. 
(Code 1985, § 1-507; Code 2007, § 3-107) 
Sec. 12-8. - Office of municipal court clerk. 
    There is hereby established the office of municipal court clerk which office shall be filled by a resolution of appointment by the board of mayor and aldermen. The continuing education requirements of the municipal court clerk are governed by T.C.A. § 16-18-309. 
(Code 1985, § 1-508; Code 2007, § 3-108; Ord. No. 09-25, § 2, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 12-9. - Service of court process. 
    The town administrator, code enforcement officer, and court officer are each hereby appointed and designated as officers of the municipal court for the purpose of serving any process, documents, notices, warrant, writs, citations, and other official instruments of and from the municipal court. 
(Code 1985, § 1-509; Code 2007, § 3-109) 
Sec. 12-10. - Appeals from municipal court. 
    Appeals from municipal court are governed by T.C.A. § 16-18-307. 
(Code 1985, § 1-510; Code 2007, § 3-110; Ord. No. 09-25, § 3, 1-14-2010) 
Sec. 12-11. - Court costs. 
(a)  In addition to any fine assessed by the municipal judge, the costs to be collected by the municipal court clerk are established as follows: 
(1)  Municipal court costs for the town are $100.00 per citation, which shall include all taxes, fees or costs that are to be transmitted by the municipal court clerk to the state department of revenue as required by the Tennessee Municipal Court Reform Act of 2004 (T.C.A. § 16-18-301 et seq.). 
(2)  The defendant may post a cash bond in the amount of $100.00 prior to the citation being heard in court with an approved inspection by town staff, verifying compliance of the violation. 
(3)  In the case of parking violations and automated red light enforcement violations, instructions on the citation shall be followed, as well as conforming to any and all applicable regulations under chapter 24. Court costs shall not be assessed unless contested in court and a guilty judgment rendered. 
(b)  Court costs shall be imposed in all cases commenced and found guilty in the municipal court. However, such costs shall not be imposed in the following cases: 
(1)  Parking violations, or any other violation where court costs are prohibited by state law; 
(2)  Any adjudication of the matter resulting in a judgment of not guilty; or 
(3)  Any voluntary dismissal of the case by the town administrator or his designee when the town administrator or his designee agrees to the suspension of costs. 
(Code 1985, § 1-511; Code 2007, § 3-111; Ord. No. 09-25, § 4, 1-14-2010) 
State Law reference- Municipal court costs, T.C.A. § 16-18-304. 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to nuisances, T.C.A. § 6-2-201(23). 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BLIGHTED OR DETERIORATED PROPERTIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Blight removal, T.C.A. § 13-21-201 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Authority. 
    This article shall be known as the "Blighted or Deteriorated Property Ordinance of the Town of Farragut." This article is adopted pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. title 13, ch. 21, pt. 2 (T.C.A. § 13-21-201 et seq.). 
(Code 2007, § 13-201; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Sec. 14-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the inhabitants of the town by creating the means to rid neighborhoods of blighted or deteriorated properties. The provisions of T.C.A. § 13-21-201 are hereby adopted. 
(Code 2007, § 13-202; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Sec. 14-21. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all blighted or deteriorated properties, both residential and commercial. 
(Code 2007, § 13-203; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Sec. 14-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blighted or deteriorated property means any vacant structure or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel, whether residential or commercial, but not including property used for agricultural purposes, in a predominantly built-up neighborhood: 
(1)  Which, because of physical condition or use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public nuisance in accordance with local housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes; 
(2)  Which, because of physical condition, use or occupancy, is considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; 
(3)  Which, because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by the housing code, has been designated by the town administrator as unfit for human habitation; 
(4)  Which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety of persons or property; 
(5)  From which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use; 
(6)  Which, by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance, has become a place for accumulation of trash and debris, or a haven for rodents or other vermin; or 
(7)  Which has not been rehabilitated within the time constraints placed upon the owner by the town administrator. 
    Qualified bidder means one who appears at an auction pursuant to section 14-27 and prior to being permitted to bid establishes to the satisfaction of the town administrator that he has the financial wherewithal to complete the required rehabilitation of the property, and after he is the successful bidder establishes to the satisfaction of the town administrator that he also has the financial wherewithal to pay the purchase price. 
    Redevelopment means the planning or replanning, design or redesign, acquisition, clearance, development and disposal, or any combination of these, of a property in the preparation of such property for residential, commercial, and related uses, as may be appropriate or necessary. 
    Residential, commercial, and related use means residential or commercial property for sale, lease or rental and related uses; such related uses include, but are not limited to, park and recreation areas, neighborhood community service, parking lots or structures, and any use which is consistent with and/or complementary to the existing properties in the area. 
    Vacant property review commission means a commission established to review vacant properties to make a written determination of blight and deterioration. 
(Code 2007, § 13-204; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-21-202. 
Sec. 14-23. - Administration. 
    The town administrator or his designee shall enforce the provisions of this article, and such persons, consistent with any constitutional limitations, may enter any building, structure, or premises in the town to perform any duty imposed by this article. 
(Code 2007, § 13-205; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Sec. 14-24. - Vacant property review commission. 
(a)  Commission membership. The board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall also serve as the vacant property review commission. 
(b)  General powers and duties. The commission shall review properties alleged to be blighted or deteriorated in order to determine whether they should be certified as blighted or deteriorated to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 2007, § 13-206; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
State Law reference- Vacant property review commission, T.C.A. § 13-21-203. 
Sec. 14-25. - Certification of property as blighted or deteriorated. 
(a)  Commission review. A property which has been referred to the commission by the town administrator as blighted or deteriorated may only be certified to the board of mayor and aldermen as blighted or deteriorated after the commission has determined that: 
(1)  The owner of the property or designated agent has been sent an order by the town administrator to eliminate the conditions which are in violation of local codes or law; 
(2)  The property is vacant; 
(3)  The property is blighted and deteriorated; 
(4)  The commission has notified the property owner or designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with the notice; and 
(5)  The planning commission has determined that the reuse of the property for residential, commercial and related use is in keeping with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Referral to board of mayor and aldermen. The findings required in subsection (a) of this section shall be in writing and included in the report to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  Commission notification. The commission shall notify the owner of the property or a designated agent that a determination of blight or deterioration has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions causing the blight shall render the property subject to condemnation by the town. Notice shall be mailed to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested. However, if the address of the owner or designated agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the commission in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected. The written notice sent to the owner or owner's agent shall describe the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated, and shall demand abatement of the conditions within 90 days of the receipt of such notice. 
(d)  Deadline extension. An extension of the 90-day time period may be granted by the commission if the owner or designated agent demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited in the notice. 
(Code 2007, § 13-207; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-21-205. 
Sec. 14-26. - Eminent domain. 
(a)  Acquisition. The town may acquire by eminent domain pursuant to T.C.A. title 29, ch. 16 (T.C.A. § 29-16-101 et seq.) and 17 (T.C.A. § 29-17-101 et seq.), which chapters are hereby incorporated by reference, any property determined to be blighted or deteriorated pursuant to this part, and shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of property so acquired for residential, commercial and related use, pursuant to the provision of this part. 
(b)  Proceedings. The board of mayor and aldermen may institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to T.C.A. title 29, ch. 16 (T.C.A. § 29-16-101 et seq.) and 17 (T.C.A. § 29-17-101 et seq.), which chapters are hereby incorporated by reference, against any property which has been certified as blighted or deteriorated by the commission if the board of mayor and alderman finds that: 
(1)  Such property has deteriorated to such an extent as to constitute a serious and growing menace to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Such property is likely to continue to deteriorate unless corrected; 
(3)  The continued deterioration of such property may contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the area immediately surrounding the property; and 
(4)  The owner of such property has failed to correct the deterioration of the property. 
(Code 2007, § 13-208; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 13-21-204-13-21-206. 
Sec. 14-27. - Disposition of acquired property. 
    Upon acquisition of properties pursuant to this article, the town shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of the property so acquired. Once acquired, the town administrator shall determine whether the rehabilitation of the acquired property is feasible. If in the determination of the town administrator the property may reasonably be rehabilitated, he may cause the rehabilitation to be done or he may cause the property to be sold at auction subject to the qualified bidder making the highest bid agreeing to rehabilitate the property within 90 days of the consummation of the auction sale. If the town administrator determines that rehabilitation of the property is not feasible or practical, he shall cause the property to be demolished and the lot cleared. In either event, upon completion of the rehabilitation or clearing of the property so acquired, the town administrator may cause the property to be sold at auction or held for public purposes. 
(Code 2007, § 13-209; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Sec. 14-28. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the town, or the vacant property review commission, who in the course of such officer's or employee's duties is required to participate in the determination of property blight or deterioration or the issuance of notices on code violations which may lead to a determination of blight or deterioration, shall acquire any interest in any property declared to be blighted or deteriorated. 
(b)  If any such officer or employee owns or has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property certified to be blighted or deteriorated, the officer or employee shall immediately disclose, in writing, such interest to the commission and to the board of mayor and aldermen, and such disclosure shall be entered in the minutes of the commission and of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  Failure to disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 
(d)  No payment shall be made to any officer or employee for any property or interest therein acquired by the town from such officer or employee unless the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 2007, § 13-210; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-2005) 
Secs. 14-29-14-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - WEEDS AND LITTERING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-60. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter means "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste materials which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Nuisance means the existence within the corporate limits of the town of lots and parcels of land overgrown with vines, weeds, and other underbrush within 100 feet of an occupied building which building is located within a residential subdivision in the town, or burdened with accumulations of debris, trash, litter, garbage, or refuse or any combination of such elements, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Weeds means any plant or plant residue not cultivated for agricultural purposes or human consumption. 
(Code 1985, § 8-201; Code 2007, § 13-101; Ord. No. 96-26, 10-1996) 
Sec. 14-61. - Weeds. 
    No owner, or agent of such owner of any lot, place or area within 100 feet of an occupied building which building is located within a residential subdivision in the town, shall permit on such lot, place or area, or upon any sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or noxious matter, that may be growing, lying, or located thereon to exceed a height of 12 inches. This section does not apply to the owner or operator of an operating farm. 
(1)  Complaint. A complaint on any violation of the provisions of this section may be reported to the town office by any person observing the violation. The person shall identify him to the town office prior to any action being taken by the town administrator. A record of complaints shall be maintained on file in the town office. 
(2)  Notice to destroy. Once a complaint is received, the town administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to investigate the complaint and, if justified, to notify, in writing, the owner or agent of such owner of any such lot, place, or area within the town to cut, destroy, and/or remove any such weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, found growing, lying or located on such owner's property, or upon the sidewalk abutting same. Such notice shall be mailed and delivered by the United States Postal Service, addressed to said owner, or agent of said owner, at his last known address. 
(3)  Action upon noncompliance. 
a.  Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent to cut, destroy and/or remove weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths, or other noxious matter, growing, lying, or located upon such owner's property, or upon the sidewalk or street abutting same, within 13 days of the date of the written notice provided for in subsection (2) of this section, or in the event the same is returned in the mail to the town because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, a town warrant may be issued to the owner or agent so notified for violation of this article. 
b.  If the owner or agent convicted of violating this article shall fail to remedy such conditions within ten days of the date of the conviction, unless an appeal is made, the town administrator is authorized to take such action as is necessary to remedy the conditions and abate the nuisance. Upon completion of such work the reasonable cost thereof, plus a fee of 25 percent of the reasonable cost for inspections, notifications and other incidental costs in connection therewith, shall be paid by the owner or agent of said property and said costs shall be billed to the owner or agent of said property. If the bill is not fully paid within 60 days after the mailing of said bill, a ten percent penalty shall be added and the total amount of the bill and the penalty shall be certified by the town recorder and collected in the manner provided by law. 
(4)  Minimum penalty for multiple convictions. In the event within any consecutive 36-month period, a person or entity shall be convicted on more than one occasion for the violation of this section or if within any consecutive 60-month period any person or entity shall be convicted of more than two violations of this section then in such event the minimum fine for the second conviction shall be $250.00 and the minimum fine for the third and subsequent violations occurring within said applicable time period shall be $500.00. 
(Code 1985, § 8-202; Code 2007, § 13-102; Ord. No. 96-24, 6-1996; Ord. No. 96-26, 10-1996) 
Secs. 14-62-14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTERING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Littering, T.C.A. § 39-14-501 et seq. 

Sec. 14-81. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles, in private receptacles for collection, or in official dumps. 
(Code 1985, § 8-203; Code 2007, § 13-103) 
Sec. 14-82. - Obstruction of drainage ditches, swales, etc. 
    It shall be a violation of this division for any person to place yard clippings, leaves, wood or rubbish in any drainage ditch, swale, culvert or other storm water drainage way. 
(Code 1985, § 8-204; Code 2007, § 13-104) 
Sec. 14-83. - Depositing litter or leaves and grass clippings into gutters or on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the accumulation of litter, yard clippings, leaves, wood, mulch or rubbish from any building, lot, or public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter and yard clippings. 
(Code 2007, § 13-105; Ord. No. 96-24, 6-1996) 
Sec. 14-84. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town, or upon private property. 
(Code 1985, § 8-206; Code 2007, § 13-106) 
Sec. 14-85. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1985, § 8-207; Code 2007, § 13-107) 
Sec. 14-86. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except in public receptacles. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Code 1985, § 8-208; Code 2007, § 13-108) 
Sec. 14-87. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town. 
(Code 1985, § 8-209; Code 2007, § 13-109) 
Sec. 14-88. - Litter on private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or open or vacant private property of another within the town and no person shall throw or deposit ashes, yard clippings, leaves and/or wood on any occupied or open or vacant private property of another within the town without permission of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1985, § 8-210; Code 2007, § 13-110) 
Sec. 14-89. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection nor the depositing of yard clippings, leaves, wood or wood ashes upon his own property. 
(Code 1985, § 8-211; Code 2007, § 13-111) 
Sec. 14-90. - Clearing of litter from public or private property. 
(a)  Complaint. A complaint on any violation of the provisions of this division, other than of section 14-61, may be reported to the town office by any persons observing the violation. The person shall identify himself to the town office prior to any action being taken by the town administrator. A record of complaints shall be maintained on file in the town office. 
(b)  Notice to remove. Once a complaint is received, the town administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to investigate the complaint and, if justified, to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the town or the agent of such owner and/or any person who placed litter upon public or private property to properly dispose of litter located on such public or private property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or person at his last known address. 
(c)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person, owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (b) of this section, or within 15 days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned in the mail to the town because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, a town warrant may be issued to the person, owner or agent so notified for violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 8-212; Code 2007, § 13-112) 
Secs. 14-91-14-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - LOT CLEARING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Removal of unhealthful or unsanitary conditions from lots, T.C.A. § 6-54-113. 

Sec. 14-109. - Prohibition. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities under T.C.A. § 6-54-113, it is unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create, maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, or garbage or any combination of the preceding elements so as to endanger the health, safety, or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the infestation of rats and other harmful animals. It is the intent of this title to be permissive, and not mandatory, and to serve as a means of last resort for the town to assist residential communities and/or owners of neighboring property when restrictions and/or covenants applicable to the offending property provide no private remedial powers to correct the offensive characteristics of the property that endanger the health, safety and welfare of other citizens. In accordance with this intent, the town administrator or his designee may or may not take steps under this title. He must be satisfied, in his sole discretion, that there are no covenants or restrictions that are applicable to the property that could be enforced to correct its offensive characteristics, and that all reasonable private actions aimed at eliminating the offensive characteristics of the property have been exhausted. 
(Code 2007, § 13-301; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-110. - Designation of public officer or department. 
    The town administrator or his designee is designated pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-54-113 to enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the town. 
(Code 2007, § 13-302; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-111. - Notice to property owner. 
    It is the duty of the town administrator or his designee to serve notice upon the owner of record in violation of section 14-109, a notice in plain language to remedy the condition within ten days (or 20 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, if the owner of record is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials). The notice shall be sent by registered or certified United States mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the owner of the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the following additional information: 
(1)  A brief statement that the owner is in violation of section 14-109, which has been enacted under the authority of T.C.A. § 6-54-113, and that the property of such owner may be cleaned up at the expense of the owner and a lien placed against the property to secure the cost of the cleanup; 
(2)  The person, office, address, and telephone number of the department or person giving the notice; 
(3)  A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which shall be in conformity with the standards of cost in the town; and 
(4)  A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the notice, indicating the desire for a hearing. Failure to request a hearing within the notice period described above shall without exception constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(Code 2007, § 13-303; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-112. - Cleanup at property owner's expense. 
    If the property owner of record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within the notice period set forth in section 14-111, the town administrator or his designee may cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable standards, and the costs thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the property. The town may collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent jurisdiction. The town may bring one action for debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom such costs have been assessed, and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. Upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds in the county, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state and county for taxes, any lien of the town for special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be referred to the county trustee for collection at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. 
(Code 2007, § 13-304; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-113. - Owner-occupied property. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 14-112, when the property is owner-occupied residential property, the town must wait until cumulative charges for remediation equal or exceed $500.00 before filing the notice with the register of deeds and the charges becoming a lien on the property. After this threshold has been met and the lien attaches, charges for costs for which the lien attached are collectible as provided in section 14-112 for these charges. 
(Code 2007, § 13-305; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Sec. 14-114. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the town administrator or his designee under section 14-112 may seek judicial review of the order or act in a court of record in the county. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the time period established in section 14-111 shall be stayed during the pendency of judicial review. 
(Code 2007, § 13-306; Ord. No. 09-23, § 1, 9-24-2009) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes, T.C.A. title 16. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the municipality to discharge any firearm within 600 feet of any home, building or other structure designed for regular, temporary or intermittent occupancy or presence therein by human beings other than such structure owned or leased by the person discharging such a firearm or to discharge such firearm within 600 feet of any street, school yard, or playground within the town. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any persons acting in self-defense, or while executing laws of the state, county and/or municipality or who are within a legally established gun range or shooting gallery. 
(Code 1985, § 10-201; Code 2007, § 11-101) 
Sec. 16-2. - Lewd and indecent conduct prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in a public place or in a place available to the public, or for any person who owns or operates premises constituting a public place or place available to the public to knowingly permit or allow to be performed therein, any of the following acts or conduct: 
(1)  The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals in public. 
(3)  The actual or simulated public display of pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(4)  The display by any means for viewing by persons upon the premises of visual images or objects depicting any of the acts or matters set forth in subsections (a)(1), (2) and/or (3) of this section. 
(5)  Lewd, lascivious or immoral conduct. 
(6)  The indecent or lascivious exposure or use of the human body or any part thereof. 
(7)  Committing or offering or agreeing to commit an act of prostitution. For purposes of this section, the term "prostitution" shall include: 
a.  The crass exploitation of nudity. 
b.  Sexual intercourse for money or other property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female to appear in a public place or place available to the public so costumed or dressed that one or both breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view, and it shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of premises constituting a public place or place available to the public to knowingly permit or allow any such person to appear on the premises owned or operated by him. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "wholly or substantially exposed to public view," as it pertains to the female breast shall mean an exposure with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion of the breast below the top of the nipple. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "public place" shall include: streets, sidewalks or highways; transportation facilities; schools; places of amusement; parks; playgrounds; restaurants; nightclubs; cocktail lounges; burlesque houses; bars; cabarets; taverns; taprooms; private fraternal, social, golf or country clubs; or any place that allows the consumption of intoxicating beverages on the premises. A "place available to the public" is premises to which admittance may be obtained by adult persons generally without admission fee or upon payment of a subscription fee, membership fee, admission fee, donation, or separate fee for each item purchased or each performance attended. 
(Code 1985, § 10-202; Code 2007, § 11-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 39-13-517, 39-13-513. 
Secs. 16-3-16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PARKS, BLOCK PARTIES, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  Any word or term not defined within this Code or in chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be construed to be used in this article as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block party means a geographically defined outdoor gathering on a public street or portion of a public street which involves the closure or partial closure of a street. 
    Celebratory gathering means a gathering open to the public for the purpose of celebrating a person, place, holiday, event, and/or entity. 
    Community event means a town-sponsored or co-sponsored event that benefits and/or promotes the community. 
    Concert means an outdoor event centered around amplified music or speech. 
    Parade means any march, procession, race, or motorcade consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets within the town that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets. 
    Permit means permission to operate an event under this article which is issued by the town as required by this article. 
    Picketing and pickets mean the carrying or displaying of picket signs by one or more persons for the purpose of demonstrating. 
    Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of more than 20 persons for a common purpose, that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
    Race means any organized event where participants are physically competing. 
    Sidewalk means any public area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic. 
    Street means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof, set aside for parking or for purposes of vehicular traffic. For purposes of this article, the term "street" includes sidewalks. 
(Code 2007, § 20-204; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-24. - Authority. 
    This article shall be known as the "Celebratory Gatherings Ordinance of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee." This article is adopted under the authority granted to the town through its Charter of incorporation, the Mayor-Aldermanic Charter, section 6-2-201. 
(Code 2007, § 20-201; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-25. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive framework for permitting private use of public properties which will promote and carry out the goals and objectives of the town. These regulations are intended to assist in the economic development of the town, but without lessening a quality of life which the citizens of the town strive to maintain and improve to the greatest extent possible. 
(Code 2007, § 20-202; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-26. - Scope. 
    This article shall regulate community events and the private use of public properties. Nothing contained in this article shall relieve a business or organization from the requirements of obtaining a permit for activities covered under chapter 4, section XXIV, of the zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(Code 2007, § 20-203; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-27. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  A governmental agency acting within the scope and authority of its functions; and 
(3)  Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such event, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the town administrator's office at least 24 hours prior to such event. 
(Code 2007, § 20-206; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-28. - Enforcement of other laws. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted under this article if the conduct of such person violates the laws of the state, provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the town, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the town, or if such person engages in acts that cause or would tend to cause a breach of the peace as determined by the town and/or law enforcement agency of jurisdiction. 
(Code 2007, § 20-212; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-29. - Sign requirements. 
(a)  Compliance with MUTCD. All traffic control signs shall comply with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(b)  Other signs not specifically permitted. All other signs shall comply with the following regulations. Any sign that is not specifically permitted shall be prohibited. 
(1)  Community events. 
a.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per community event not to exceed 40 square feet. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
b.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
c.  All signs shall be a minimum ten-millimeter corrugated plastic. Ground-mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts. All signs shall be affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
d.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the community event. 
(2)  All other events. 
a.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per event not to exceed 20 square feet. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
b.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
c.  All signs shall be a minimum ten-millimeter corrugated plastic. Ground-mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts. All signs shall be affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
d.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the event. 
(Code 2007, § 20-208; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Secs. 16-30-16-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 16-47. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in or conduct a community event unless a permit is issued by the town administrator. No person shall engage in or conduct any block party, celebratory gathering, concert, demonstration, parade, picketing, public assembly, race, or any other similar event as determined by the town administrator involving the use or disruption of the public right-of-way or other public property within the corporate boundary of the town, unless a permit is issued by the town administrator. 
(Code 2007, § 20-205; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-48. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking a permit for an event as defined under this article shall complete, sign, and file an application with the town administrator or hi designee, using the application form provided by the town administrator's office. 
(b)  An application for a permit shall be filed with the town administrator at least 30 calendar days and not more than 365 days before the event is proposed to commence. The town administrator may waive the 30-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the event the anticipated number of participants, and the town services required in connection with the event, the town administrator determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety. 
(c)  The application for a permit under this article shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  General narrative describing and outlining the event; 
(2)  A sketch plan indicating all major elements of the event, including: 
a.  Area designated for the event; 
b.  All streets and sidewalks within 500 feet of the event; 
c.  Assembly area for emergency and/or security personnel; 
d.  Parking areas; 
e.  All event signage; 
f.  Portable bathroom facilities including location, number, gender designation, and accessibility; 
g.  Power distribution location and method (generators, extension cords); 
h.  Tent locations (separate permit required by the fire marshal); 
i.  Barricade locations; 
j.  Beer distribution area (separate permit required by the beer board); 
k.  Wine and/or liquor distribution area (check Tennessee Code Annotated: separate permit required); 
l.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation; 
m.  The name, address, telephone number, emergency contact number, and e-mail of the person seeking to conduct such an event; who shall be deemed to be in charge of the event and responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article; 
n.  The names, addresses telephone number, and email address/website of the headquarters of the organization for which the event is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization; 
o.  The requested date of the event; 
p.  For parades and races, a map separate from the sketch plan, illustrating the route to be traveled, names of affected streets and cross streets, including the starting point and the termination point; 
q.  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles, the type of animals, and a description of the vehicles that will constitute the respective event; 
r.  The hours when the event will start and terminate to include setup and takedown; 
s.  The time at which units of the event will begin to assemble at any such area; 
t.  Statement indicating the method of ensuring the event's safety and security; 
u.  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, and the maximum decibel level of any such sound amplification equipment; 
v.  The approximate number of participants (spectators are by definition not participants); and 
w.  Any other information deemed necessary by the town administrator or his designee and/or public safety personnel. 
(d)  At the time of application for permit, the applicant shall provide a certificate of liability insurance indicating the event as insured and naming "the Town of Farragut including its employees and agents" as additionally named insured. The town shall be the certificate holder. The certificate of liability insurance coverage shall be not less than $1,000,000.00 coverage per event per occurrence. The town administrator or his designee may decrease the amount of coverage or waive this requirement at his discretion. 
(e)  Prior to the event, the applicant shall obtain and provide to the town an irrevocable letter of credit (LOC) from a state financial institution naming the "Town of Farragut, TN" as the LOC holder. The amount of the LOC will be determined by the town administrator or his designee, at the time of approval of the event permit, and shall be used to cover any town-related costs resulting from the event. The town administrator or his designee, shall conduct a post event inspection of the area with the applicant present. Within a time frame determined by the town administrator or his designee the applicant will be required to address any issues resulting from the event to the satisfaction of the town. If the applicant fails to address the items listed upon inspection within the allotted time frame, the LOC may be drawn upon to remedy any issues related to the event. Upon approval of the inspection by the town, the LOC will be released. The town administrator or his designee may decrease the amount of coverage or waive this requirement at his discretion. 
(Code 2007, § 20-207; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-49. - Standards for issuance. 
    The town administrator or his designee may issue a permit when, from consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of town employees or public safety personnel to properly police the line of movement, and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection of the town; 
(2)  The event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(3)  There are sufficient parking places near the beginning/ending of the event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected; 
(4)  No parade, public assembly, or block party permit application for the same time and location has already been granted or has been received and will be granted; 
(5)  No event permit application for the same time but different location has already been granted, or has been received and will be granted that, by combination thereof, will disrupt town services or unreasonably inhibit traffic circulation. In any case, the police resources required for that event would be so great that, in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of police services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; and 
(6)  The reasonable enjoyment of surrounding properties, businesses, and residences will not be disturbed in such a way as to cause an undue, constant nuisance as determined by the town administrator and/or public safety personnel. 
(Code 2007, § 20-209; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-50. - Nondiscrimination. 
    The town administrator shall uniformly consider each application based upon its merits, and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this article based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender-related factors. 
(Code 2007, § 20-210; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-51. - Notice of approval/denial of application. 
    The town administrator or his designee shall approve or deny the application within 15 working days of submittal. If the town administrator disapproves the application, he shall notify the applicant of the denial and shall state the reasons for that denial. 
(Code 2007, § 20-211; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 16-52. - Revocation of permit. 
    The town administrator and/or public safety personnel may revoke the permit and terminate all activities related to the event in the interest of public health and safety, or if an extreme public nuisance is generated by the event as determined by the town administrator and/or public safety personnel. 
(Code 2007, § 20-213; Ord. No. 12-04, § 1, 2-23-2012) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 18-1. - Enforcement. 
    If any individual or group of individuals fails to follow any park regulation or any town policy related to use of town parks, said individual or group may be requested to cease use and to leave park property. When such violations are discovered, the town administrator or designees are authorized to instruct said individual or group to cease any violation and to vacate park property when deemed necessary. If an individual or group fails to respond to said instructions, then authorized officers may be called upon to remove said individual or group. 
(Code 1985, § 12-604; Code 2007, § 20-104) 
Sec. 18-2. - Regulations for use. 
    The following rules and regulations are established for all town parks and recreational facilities. It shall be unlawful for anyone to violate said rules and regulations. 
(1)  No unauthorized person shall injure or damage the grounds or any structure, rock, tree, shrub, flower, waterway, trail, bird, or animal within any park nor shall any person gather limbs, brush, or trees therein for firewood. 
(2)  Firearms and fireworks shall be prohibited at all times except by authorized personnel. 
(3)  Bows, slingshots, and other missile or projectile throwing devices are prohibited. 
(4)  Dogs and other pets must be kept on a leash while in any park or recreational area and shall not be allowed in any building other than animals assisting the disabled. Any person having the custody or control of any dog or other animal shall have the responsibility for cleaning up any solid waste of the animal and to dispose of such waste in a sanitary manner. 
(5)  No vending or advertising of merchandise shall be permitted without permission of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(6)  Motorists shall observe speed limits and other traffic regulations as posted and park only in designated areas. 
(7)  All vehicles, including motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles, must remain on paved or gravel roadway inside the parking area. 
(8)  No alcoholic beverages of any kind or other illegal substances shall be permitted in any park area or recreational facility. 
(9)  Any organization, group, civic club, individual, firm, or corporation using a park or recreational facility for any purpose, or sponsoring or promoting any activities therein, must repair any damage done to fields, fences, light poles, structures, landscaping, or any facility by said organization, group, civic club, individual, firm, or corporation. Violation of this section shall result in forfeiture of the right to further use of the park and related facilities. 
(10)  Any organization, group, civic club, individual, firm, or corporation using a park or recreational facility for any purpose, or sponsoring or promoting any activities therein, shall clear the park of all rubbish, trash, or other debris immediately after said use. Violation of this section shall result in forfeiture of the right to further use of the park and related facilities. 
(11)  Overnight camping is prohibited in town parks except with prior permission by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(12)  Fires are prohibited in town parks except as specifically authorized. 
(13)  No person shall use any park within the town except for recreation purposes or use to which such property is customarily devoted. 
(14)  No unauthorized vehicle shall be parked at a town park outside of the authorized hours of operations. Any unauthorized vehicles which are found on park property after operational hours shall be towed away at owner's expense. 
(15)  Fishing shall be permitted on the pond at Anchor Park, but swimming and the related activities are prohibited. 
(16)  The emission of excessive noise from mechanical or electrical devices without express advance written permission from the town is prohibited. 
(17)  The board of mayor and aldermen may from time to time establish other regulations or restrictions as policy to govern use of town parks and recreational facilities. Such policies shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 12-601; Code 2007, § 20-101; Ord. No. 02-03, 2-2002) 
Sec. 18-3. - Fees. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may from time to time establish, at its discretion, a fee schedule for use of certain parks and specific recreational facilities. Said fees shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 12-602; Code 2007, § 20-102) 
Sec. 18-4. - Hours of operation. 
    To protect the residential areas of the town from undue disturbance and to also preserve the safety of users of town parks, the town administrator may establish hours of operation of town parks. Due to differing locations and types of use, hours of operation may vary from park to park. Certain facilities within the parks may be designated for different hours of operation than the park as a whole. No person or group shall use any park or its facilities outside hours established for their use. Any person or group found in violation of the established hours shall be instructed to leave. If a person or group fails to follow the established hours, it shall be considered trespassing and authorized personnel may have violators legally removed. 
(Code 1985, § 12-603; Code 2007, § 20-103) 
Chapter 20 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Transient Vendors, T.C.A. § 62-30-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    News agent refers to any agent or employee of any newspaper distributed in the town who is engaged in the delivery of newspapers or the solicitation of subscriptions thereof. 
    Peddler means any person, firm or corporation, either a resident or a nonresident of the town, who has no permanent regular place of business and who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale. 
    Permanent place of business means a physical location, open to the public at regular business hours for the purpose of conducting trade. 
    Solicitor means any person, firm or corporation who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery, except that the term shall not include solicitors for charitable and religious purposes and solicitors for subscriptions as those terms are defined in this section. Town businesses that have an established, physical location in the town are exempt from the permit fees required by this chapter. 
    Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes means any person, firm, corporation or organization who or which solicits contributions from the public from door to door, business to business or place to place, for any charitable or religious organization, and who does not sell or offer to sell any single item at a cost to the purchaser in excess of $10.00. No organization shall qualify as a "charitable" or "religious" organization unless the organization meets one of the following conditions: 
(1)  Has a current exemption certificate from the Internal Revenue Service issued under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Service Code of 1954, as amended; 
(2)  Is a member of United Way, or similar "umbrella" organization for charitable or religious organizations. 
    Solicitor for subscriptions means any person who solicits subscriptions from the public, either from door to door, business to business or place to place and who offers for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by provisions of the Constitution of the United States. 
    Transient vendor means any person who brings into temporary premises and exhibits stocks of merchandise to the public for the purpose of selling or offering to sell the merchandise to the public. Transient vendor does not include any person selling goods by sample, brochure, or sales catalog for future delivery; or to sales resulting from the prior invitation to the seller by the owner or occupant of a residence. For purposes of this definition, the term "merchandise" means any consumer item that is or is represented to be new or not previously owned by a consumer, and the term "temporary premises" means any public or quasi-public place including a hotel, rooming house, storeroom, building or part of a building, which is temporarily occupied for the purpose of exhibiting stocks of merchandise to the public. Premises are not temporary if the same person has conducted business at those premises for more than six consecutive months or has occupied the premises as his permanent residence for more than six consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-101), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-2. - Violation and penalty. 
    In addition to any other action the town may take against a permit holder in violation of this chapter, such violation shall be punishable by a penalty of up to $500.00 for each offense. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-111), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-3. - Exemptions. 
    The terms of this chapter shall neither apply to persons selling at wholesale to dealers, nor to news agents, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-102), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-4. - Restrictions on peddlers and solicitors. 
    No peddler, solicitor, solicitor for charitable purposes, or solicitor for subscriptions shall: 
(1)  Be permitted to set up and operate a booth or stand on any street or sidewalk, or in any other property or public area within the town. 
(2)  Stand or sit in or near the entrance to any dwelling or place of business, or in any other place which may disrupt or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Offer to sell goods or services or solicit in vehicular traffic lanes, or operate a "road block" of any kind. 
(4)  Call attention to his business or merchandise or to his solicitation efforts by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or creating other noise. 
(5)  Enter, or attempt to enter, into or upon any premises wherein a sign or placard bearing the notice "Peddlers or Solicitors Prohibited," or similar language carrying the same meaning, is located. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-105), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-5. - Restrictions on transient vendors. 
    A transient vendor shall not advertise, represent, or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as a sale by an insurance company, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver manufacturer at wholesale, or as the result of a canceled order, or at sale, or closing-out sale, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or otherwise, unless such advertisement, representation or holding forth is actually of the character it is advertised, represented or held forth. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-106), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-6. - Permittee must leave on request. 
    Any peddler, solicitor, solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or solicitor for subscriptions, while engaged in any sale or solicitation for sales upon the property of any private residence must, upon request of the owner or leaseholder of the property, vacate the property immediately. Failure to immediately vacate the property upon the request of the owner or leaseholder shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-110), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-7. - Hours of solicitation. 
    No permittee shall conduct any solicitations or sales except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (8:00 p.m. during daylight savings time) on Monday through Saturday, it being the intent that door-to-door sales occur during daylight hours and at times when citizens feel secure in their homes to receive unexpected visitors. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-112), 4-28-2016) 
Secs. 20-8-20-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 20-33. - Required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall operate a business as a peddler, transient vendor, or solicitor and no solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or solicitor for subscriptions shall solicit within the town except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-103), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-34. - Procedure. 
(a)  Required. Obtain a solicitation permit from the county prior to applying with the town. 
(b)  Application form. A sworn application containing the following information shall be completed and filed with the town recorder by each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient vendor, solicitor, or street barker and by each applicant for a permit as a solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or as a solicitor for subscriptions: 
(1)  The complete name and permanent address of the business or organization the applicant represents. 
(2)  A brief description of the type of business and the goods to be sold. 
(3)  The dates for which the applicant intends to do business or make solicitations. 
(4)  The name, permanent address and date of birth of the person who will make sales or solicitations within the town. 
(5)  The names of at least two reputable local property owners who will certify as to the applicant's good moral reputation and business responsibility or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate the applicant's moral reputation and business responsibility. This shall not apply, however, to nonprofit organizations. 
(6)  The last three cities or towns, if that many, where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and, in the case of transient merchants, the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities. This shall not apply, however, to nonprofit organizations. 
(7)  The make, model, complete description, and license tag number and state of issue, of each vehicle to be used to make sales or solicitations, whether or not such vehicle is owned individually by the person making sales or solicitations, by the business or organization itself, or rented or borrowed from another business or person. 
(8)  A recent clear photograph approximately two inches square showing the head and shoulders of the applicant. This shall not apply, however, to nonprofit organizations. 
(9)  State sales tax number, if applicable. 
(c)  Permit fee. Each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient vendor or solicitor shall submit with the application a nonrefundable fee as stated in the town fee schedule. There shall be no fee for an application for a permit as a solicitor for charitable purposes. 
(d)  Permit issued. Upon the completion of the application form and the payment of the permit fee, where required, the town recorder shall review, deny or issue a permit and, provide to the applicant the reason for denial, or a copy of the permit, as the case may be, within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-104), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-35. - Display of permit. 
    Each peddler, solicitor, solicitor for charitable purposes or solicitor for subscriptions is required to have in his possession a valid permit while making sales or solicitations, and shall be required to display the same to any county sheriff's officer upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-107), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-36. - Expiration and renewal of permit. 
    The permit of peddlers, solicitors and transient vendors shall expire 30 days from the date of issuance. The permit of solicitors for religious or charitable purposes and solicitors for subscriptions shall expire on the date provided in the permit, not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-109), 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 20-37. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Suspension by the town administrator. The permit issued to any person or organization under this chapter may be suspended by the town administrator for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any false statement, material omission, or untrue or misleading information which is contained in or left out of the application; or 
(2)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation by the board of mayor and aldermen. The permit issued to any person or organization under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the board of mayor and aldermen after notice and hearing, for the same causes set out in subsection (a) of this section. Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a permit shall be given by the town administrator in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permit holder at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or it shall be delivered by a sheriff's officer in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 16-09, § 1(9-108), 4-28-2016) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General power of town, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Consent for use of streets, etc. 
(a)  Consent is hereby given to the City of Knoxville, its successors or assigns, for the use of the rights-of-way, easements, public streets, highways, thoroughfares, alleys, and other similar property rights held by the town or located in the town, as the corporate limits of the town now exist or may hereafter be extended, in such manner as may be necessary, useful or convenient in connection with the construction, improvement, maintenance, operation and extension of a gas distribution system. 
(b)  The rights hereby granted shall at all times be exercised so as not to interfere unreasonably with the ordinary use of said rights-of-way, easements, public streets, highways, thoroughfares, alleys, and other similar property rights. 
(Code 1985, § 13-101; Code 2007, § 19-101) 
Secs. 22-2-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-21. - Manner of excavating; barricades and lights; temporary sidewalks; street closures. 
(a)  Any excavation or tunnel shall be done according to the terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing the work to be done. Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the board of mayor and aldermen or its duly appointed representative. 
(b)  Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and property from injury by or because of the excavation being made and to assist the uninterrupted flow of traffic. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, special attention shall be given in providing proper barricades and lights to protect pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. 
(d)  When possible under traffic conditions, the designated representative of the town may, by written approval, allow the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by the recorder or designated representative, if in such person's opinion it is necessary. The written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. 
(Code 1985, § 12-205; Code 2007, § 16-105) 
Sec. 22-22. - Restoration of streets, etc. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the public streets, rights-of-way and other public places to their original condition or equal. In case of unreasonable delay in such restoration, the designated representative of the town shall give notice to the permittee that unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled properly within a specified reasonable period of time, the municipality will do, or cause to be done, the work and charge the expense of doing the same to the permittee. If within the specified time the conditions of the above notice have not been complied with, the work shall be done or caused to be done by the town, an accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept, and the total cost shall be charged to the permittee who made the excavation or tunnel. 
(b)  The minimum requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Cleated metal tracks or other machinery that will damage an asphalt surface shall not be used on any paved surface. 
(2)  All pavement cuts shall be straight, even lines made by jackhammer, drop-hammer or saw. Heavy pavement breakers that may damage substructures or other property are prohibited. 
(3)  All backfill material beneath pavement shall be either fill material free of organic matter and rocks, and compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of maximum density in accordance with the provisions of AASHTO T-180; or crushed stone base compacted to a minimum of 80 percent of its rock density in accordance with the provisions of AASHTO T-85. Backfill shall be placed in layers of six inches or less. 
(4)  The top 12 inches of street restoration shall be in accordance with subsection (b)(4)a or b of this section: 
a.  Restoration method for less than three adjacent cuts. 
1.  Nine inches of compacted mineral aggregate base conforming to state department of highway specifications, Grading D, Class A, and shall be compacted to a minimum of 80 percent of AASHTO T-85. 
2.  Three inches of compacted asphalt surface course conforming to state department of highways specifications 903.11, Grading E. 
3.  The applicant shall maintain the pavement replacement for a period of one year after the replacement is completed and the bond may be retained for such period if deemed necessary. 
b.  Restoration method for more than three adjacent cuts or project type construction. 
1.  The applicant shall furnish a temporary replacement composed of six inches compacted mineral aggregate and six inches of compacted asphalt base. 
2.  Upon completion of all temporary replacement, the applicant would then remove the top two inches of all asphaltic base and replace with two inches of asphaltic surface course conforming to the state department of highways specifications 903.11, Grading E. 
3.  The applicant shall maintain the pavement replacement for a period of one year after the replacement is completed and the bond may be retained for such period if deemed necessary. 
(5)  For driveways or parking lots six inches of compacted mineral aggregate base and two inches of compacted asphalt surface may be used in lieu of the requirements of subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(6)  All surfacing of streets and paved areas shall match the existing road surface and not vary more than one-fourth inch when a straight edge is laid across the width (parallel to the center line) of the street cut. 
(7)  All concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be replaced to equal condition regarding thickness, shape, trueness, and appearance using 3,000 psi concrete. 
(8)  All streets, paved areas, and public rights-of-way shall be cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. 
(9)  During construction and before final surfacing, all street cuts shall be maintained in a manner that will provide a smooth driving surface either by a temporary cold mix patch or continuous maintenance of a gravel backfill. 
(10)  The foregoing constitute minimum standards and other methods providing equal or better conditions may be used with the advance written consent of the designated representative of the town. 
(Code 1985, § 12-206; Code 2007, § 16-106) 
Sec. 22-23. - Inspection. 
    The designated representative of the town shall from time to time inspect all excavations and tunnels being made and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to the recorder or designated representative at least 24 hours before the work of excavation and refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences (except for provisions of an emergency cut). 
(Code 1985, § 12-209; Code 2007, § 16-109) 
Secs. 22-24-22-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-50. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in or tunnel under any paved public street or pavement within a public right-of-way or other public place without having first obtained a permit as herein required, and without complying with the provisions of this division; and it shall also be unlawful to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of the town is open for business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun. 
(Code 1985, § 12-201; Code 2007, § 16-101) 
Sec. 22-51. - Applications. 
    Applications for such permits shall be made to the recorder, or to such person as may be designated by the board of mayor and aldermen to receive such applications, and shall state thereon the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, association, or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm, corporation, association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. Application for a single street cut, excavation, or tunnel shall be rejected or approved by the recorder or designated representative of the town by the end of the next working day following filing. Application may also be made for a permit involving multiple street cuts, excavations, or tunnels. Such application shall be rejected or approved within 24 hours after the next scheduled meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen or within ten days, whichever is less. 
(Code 1985, § 12-202; Code 2007, § 16-102) 
Sec. 22-52. - Fee. 
(a)  Generally. The fee for such permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Paved streets. $1.00 per square foot of surface excavated, with a minimum fee of $10.00 per permit. 
(2)  Paved areas within public rights-of-way, or other public places (driveways, parking lots, etc.). $0.50 per square foot of surface excavated, with a minimum fee of $10.00 per permit. 
(3)  Bores. $10.00 for each bore. 
(b)  Requested information. The town will negotiate "fees" with any public utility operating in the area and requesting negotiations based on the utility's past performance with regard to pavement replacement and cost of inspection but such negotiated fee shall not exceed subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 12-203; Code 2007, § 16-103) 
Sec. 22-53. - Deposit or bond. 
(a)  No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has deposited with the recorder a cash deposit. The deposit shall be in the sum of $200.00 per excavation or tunnel and shall ensure the proper restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. Where the amount of the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the cost of restoration the recorder, or such other person as may be designated by the board of mayor and aldermen, may increase the amount of the deposit to an amount considered by the recorder or designated representative to be adequate to cover the cost. If the applicant fails to comply with the restoration provision of this division, the expense to the town of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement, and of making the refill shall be deducted from the deposit. The balance shall be returned to the permittee without interest as provided herein after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. 
(b)  Any public utility intending to make excavations or tunnels may make and maintain with the town an annual deposit, surety bond, or letter of commitment in such form or amount as the designated representative of the board of mayor and aldermen deems adequate. 
(Code 1985, § 12-204; Code 2007, § 16-104) 
Sec. 22-54. - Insurance. 
    In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond hereinbefore required to ensure that the proper restoration is made, each applicant applying for an excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the designated representative of the town in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be less than $100,000.00 for each person, and $500,000.00 for each accident, and for property damages not less than $25,000.00 for any one accident, and a $75,000.00 aggregate. Public utilities performing their own work will not be required to submit a certificate of insurance if they are self-insured. 
(Code 1985, § 12-207; Code 2007, § 16-107) 
Sec. 22-55. - Time limits. 
    Each application for a permit shall state a reasonable length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is requested by the applicant and is granted by the designated representative of the town. 
(Code 1985, § 12-208; Code 2007, § 16-108) 
Secs. 22-56-22-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - ROAD ACCEPTANCE POLICY 

Sec. 22-84. - Procedural and minimal standards. 
(a)  These procedures and minimum standards are adopted under the authority granted by T.C.A. § 6-2-201, which entrusts the establishment and general supervision of roads and watercourses and local improvements to the board of mayor and aldermen; and by T.C.A. § 13-4-104 which provides that the legislative body shall receive the recommendation of the planning commission before accepting, vacating or changing the use of any road. 
(b)  These procedures shall govern the acceptance of all roads within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
(c)  The procedure for evaluation, dedication and acceptance of a road for public use and maintenance is a two-step process which involves the municipal planning commission, the town engineer, and the board of mayor and aldermen. There are two circumstances which may lead to a request for the acceptance of a road for public use and maintenance: 
(1)  The owner of land which is proposed for subdivision must request that the town accept any roads which are constructed during the subdivision process. In this case, the final plat constitutes a formal application for acceptance of the roads shown on the plat and the owner and/or developer need not take any further action. 
(2)  A resident and/or property owner of the town may petition for the acceptance of an existing non-public right-of-way considered to be of public importance. 
(Code 1985, § 12-301; Code 2007, § 16-201) 
Sec. 22-85. - Acceptance of a road through the platting process. 
(a)  Upon receipt of preliminary plat for a subdivision of land, the planning commission shall immediately submit a copy of the preliminary plat along with a profile of road grades and a cross section drawing of the pavement to the town engineer. The town engineer shall work with the town's planning staff and the developer to determine that the proposed roads will comply with minimum standards of design outlined in the town subdivision regulations and the construction methods set forth in the state department of transportation, standard specifications for road and bridge construction. During construction of roads, the developer and/or his contractor shall keep the town engineer advised concerning anticipated completion dates of the phases listed below. 
(b)  The following inspections shall be completed by the town engineer: 
(1)  After construction of subgrade. 
(2)  After construction of road base and drainage improvements. 
(3)  After construction of wearing surface and street sign installation and all other required improvements. 
(c)  The developer or his representative shall be responsible for notifying the town engineer for each inspection. The town engineer may, at his discretion, utilize core drillings or other techniques for determining compliance with the required standards. 
(d)  When the final plat for the proposed subdivision is submitted for approval, the town engineer shall inform the planning commission of any design deficiencies in the proposed roads. Upon completion of construction, the town engineer shall make a final inspection. His findings and recommendations shall be reported in writing to the planning commission. The planning commission shall utilize the report of the town engineer, together with its own findings, to make a recommendation to the board in accordance with T.C.A. § 13-4-104. 
(e)  The board of mayor and aldermen will act on the municipal planning commission's recommendation in accordance with the provisions of T.C.A. § 13-4-307 requiring a majority of the entire membership to pass on a recommended disapproval. 
(f)  The planning commission shall not approve a plat for recording prior to the board's acceptance of the roads or the posting of security as spelled out in the subdivision regulations. Any security held by the town shall not be released until the roads have been accepted. 
(Code 1985, § 12-302; Code 2007, § 16-202) 
Sec. 22-86. - Standards for acceptance of subdivision roads. 
    The standards for construction of subdivision roads are the same as those set forth in the town subdivision regulations (appendix B to this Code). The subdivision regulations establish minimum standards for roads which are intended for public dedication. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted in the subdivision regulations and any other applicable regulations, the highest standard shall apply. The state department of highways, standard specifications for road and bridge construction shall dictate materials and construction standards for actual road construction. 
(Code 1985, § 12-303; Code 2007, § 16-203) 
Sec. 22-87. - Acceptance of roads where land subdivision is not a factor. 
(a)  Residents or officials of the town or officials of other agencies who believe that an existing non-public road or a proposed new road is an important link in the town 's road network may petition the board of mayor and aldermen for acceptance of the road for public maintenance. The petition shall be referred to the municipal planning commission by the board of mayor and aldermen. Said petition shall include the following information: 
(1)  Names of all persons joining in the petition; 
(2)  Name, location, and length to the nearest foot, and a map drawn to the standards of a final plat of the right-of-way proposed for public acceptance; 
(3)  Names and addresses of all adjoining property owners; and 
(4)  Width of existing right-of-way and width of right-of-way available through dedication by adjoining property owners. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the petition, the planning commission staff shall initiate a review of the request and report all facts together with any recommendations to the municipal planning commission. Within 90 days of receipt of the petition, the planning commission shall make a report to the board of mayor and aldermen. This report shall include the following information: 
(1)  Names of all persons joining in the petition; 
(2)  Name, location, and length to the nearest foot of the right-of-way proposed for public acceptance; 
(3)  Names of all adjoining property owners; 
(4)  Width of existing right-of-way, width of right-of-way offered for dedication along the full length of the road, width of base, width of pavement, if any, condition of road, estimated average daily traffic, recommended classification, and degree of conformance to standards; 
(5)  Estimated cost required to improve the road so that it meets minimum town standards and proposed means of financing this cost if any; and 
(6)  The recommendations of the planning commission and the town engineer relative to disposition of the petition. 
(c)  The board of mayor and aldermen shall act upon the petition. 
(Code 1985, § 12-304; Code 2007, § 16-204) 
Sec. 22-88. - Standards for acceptance of existing and proposed roads not within a subdivision. 
(a)  Requirements. The minimum improvements required for acceptance of existing non-public rights-of-way and proposed new roads shall be recommended by the municipal planning commission based upon the location and function of the specific road. In making this determination, the following information shall be considered by the commission: 
(1)  Recommendations of the town engineer; 
(2)  Estimated average daily traffic; 
(3)  Zoning district within which the road is located; 
(4)  Estimated potential for residential and/or commercial development incurred by the opening of a new public road; 
(5)  Major traffic generators located on the road or which the road serves or is expected to serve; and 
(6)  Anticipated maintenance costs to the town during the next three years if the road is accepted. 
(b)  Right-of-way. The minimum width of right-of-way, lot line to lot line, shall be determined by the municipal planning commission after review of all pertinent factors. If at all possible, right-of-way widths should reflect those outlined by the subdivision regulations. However, these limits may be unreasonable in some cases and must therefore be used only as a general guide. 
(c)  Minimum improvements. The same improvements required for the acceptance of subdivision roads shall normally be required for the acceptance of existing private roads or proposed new roads where the subdivision of land is not contemplated. However, the municipal planning commission may recommend that improvements of a lower standard be accepted where exceptional circumstances warrant such a deviation. In reviewing a request for acceptance of a non-public right-of-way, the commission shall use the factors listed in subsection (a) of this section in determining whether a deviation from the minimum standards is warranted. 
(1)  The road shall be properly graded and adequately drained with ditches and tiles or curbs and gutters sufficient to carry the normal flow of storm water as determined by the town engineer. 
(2)  The road shall be constructed according to the standards for its functional classification as spelled out in the town subdivision regulations. All construction must be done in accordance with specifications outlined in the state highway department's standard specifications for road and bridge construction. 
(Code 1985, § 12-305; Code 2007, § 16-205; Ord. No. 03-02, 2-2003; Ord. No. 04-13, 3-2004) 
Secs. 22-89-22-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - ROAD CLOSING OR TERMINATING POLICY 

Sec. 22-120. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  These procedures and minimum standards are adopted under the authority granted by T.C.A. § 6-2-201, which entrusts the establishment and general supervision of roads and watercourses and local improvements to the board of mayor and aldermen; and by T.C.A. § 13-4-104 which provides that the legislative body shall receive the recommendation of the planning commission before accepting, vacating or changing the use of any road. 
(b)  These procedures shall govern the closing and termination of all roads within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
(c)  Any expenses incurred for engineering, materials and construction resulting from a road closing or termination are to be absorbed by the petitioners unless otherwise agreed to by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(d)  The procedure for requesting the closing or termination of a local street is a three step process which is initiated through the submission of a petition to the board of mayor and aldermen. The board then refers the request to the planning commission for evaluation and a recommendation. After completing its evaluation, the planning commission makes a recommendation by resolution to the board of mayor and aldermen. The board of mayor and aldermen will then hold a public hearing and make a decision. 
(Code 1985, § 12-401; Code 2007, § 16-301) 
Sec. 22-121. - Petition for closing or terminating roads. 
(a)  Generally. Any citizen of the town or group of citizens wishing to have a road closed or terminated shall petition the board of mayor and aldermen requesting the closing or termination of a road by name. A sketch map indicating the desired location of the closing or termination must accompany the petition. Unless petitioning parties agree otherwise in writing, the town will convey by quit claim deed title, to the center of the closed right-of-way, to the owner of each contiguous parcel or lot. 
(b)  Required signatures. At a minimum, the following signatures must appear on the petition: 
(1)  For a temporary dead-end or stub street. All of the owners of property contiguous to or having direct access to the temporary dead end street except for the owners of property against which the street stubs. 
(2)  For any other local street. All of the owners of property contiguous to or having direct access to the street except for the owners of property against which the street stubs, and, in addition, a majority of the owners of property who would be directly affected by a street closing or termination. All owners of lots in a subdivision or interconnected subdivisions are considered to be directly affected by a closing or termination in this category. 
(c)  Initiation of closure and termination. For all streets other than local streets, action for closing or terminating must be initiated by either the municipal planning commission or the board of mayor and aldermen. Nothing in the foregoing shall be deemed to abrogate the right of the board of mayor and aldermen or the municipal planning commission to initiate the closing or termination of local streets. 
(Code 1985, § 12-402; Code 2007, § 16-302) 
Sec. 22-122. - Planning commission evaluation and recommendation. 
(a)  The municipal planning commission staff will notify all utilities that provide services to the town of the action being considered and will request information concerning the effect that a closing or termination might have on existing utility systems and future plans. 
(b)  The municipal planning commission staff will evaluate with the assistance of the town engineer the advisability of the proposed closing or termination, and in the case of a proposed termination will examine the alternatives for accomplishing the termination within the standards established by the town subdivision regulations (appendix B of this Code). The planning staff will formulate a report to the municipal planning commission which shall encompass: 
(1)  A recommendation on the proposed termination or closing in light of planning guidelines and local policy. 
(2)  The recommended method of closing or terminating a road. 
(3)  A recommendation on any variances or exceptions to the subdivision regulations which might be desirable in order to accomplish a termination. 
(4)  A recommendation on the disposition of rights-of-way and retention of easements. 
(c)  Within 90 days, the planning commission shall make a report to the board of mayor and aldermen including its recommendation and all information supplied in the staff report. 
(d)  The board of mayor and aldermen shall act upon the petition by ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 12-403; Code 2007, § 16-303; Ord. No. 96-07, 5-1996) 
Sec. 22-123. - Minimum improvements and security. 
(a)  The same improvements required for the acceptance of subdivision roads as specified in the subdivision regulations shall normally be required for the termination or closing of a road. However, the town municipal planning commission may recommend that improvements of a lower standard be accepted where exceptional circumstances such as quality of existing construction or encroachment on minimum yards warrant such a deviation. In most cases, the termination or closing of a road will effectively change conditions found on a recorded plat, thus requiring an amendment to said plat. The town shall be responsible for the preparation and recording of a revised plat which shall be drawn to the standards of a final plat as spelled out in the town subdivision regulations (appendix B of this Code). Where improvements are to be financed by the petitioners or residents, the typical security provisions built into the platting process will be utilized to ensure that improvements meet minimum standards. 
(b)  Where the road being terminated or closed has not been platted, the board may require that a plat be drawn. If the board chooses not to require a plat, it may demand or request that the planning commission demand security through any of the methods provided for in the town subdivision regulations (appendix B of this Code). 
(Code 1985, § 12-404; Code 2007, § 16-304) 
Secs. 22-124-22-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - DRIVEWAYS AND OTHER ACCESS WAYS 

Sec. 22-145. - Policy. 
    The efficiency and safety of a street, road, or highway is greatly affected by vehicles entering, leaving, or crossing the roadway. Commercial, office, and residential developments are major contributors to increased volume of traffic upon municipal streets, roads, and highways. Such developments also give rise to increased traffic volume of a type and pattern characterized by frequent ingress and egress to the same. Therefore, such development significantly affects the efficiency and safety of streets, roads, or highways within the municipality. In the interests of safety, the town must regulate access to the streets, roads, and highways within its town limits in a uniform manner that is fair to the general public, land-owners, and developers. 
(Code 2007, § 16-401; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-146. - General provisions. 
(a)  All access ways shall meet the minimum access requirements of this article or as determined by a traffic impact study. 
(b)  The town municipal planning commission shall review access requests through the site plan review process and forward its recommendation to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  The town municipal planning commission shall review new proposed roadway accesses to an existing public road through the subdivision platting process. These roadway accesses shall meet the minimum access requirements of this article or as determined by a traffic impact study. 
(d)  The board of mayor and aldermen shall review access applications as provided in this article, except new roadway accesses to an existing public road created through the subdivision platting process. 
(e)  Developments requiring the submittal of a site plan or a preliminary subdivision plat may require a traffic impact study. 
(f)  The town municipal planning commission may require a traffic impact study as part of the rezoning submittal process when the requested zoning change increases the overall density from the base zone. 
(g)  State department of transportation access permits shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Code 2007, § 16-402; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997; Ord. No. 14-18, § 2, 12-11-2014 ) 
Sec. 22-147. - Traffic impact study requirements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The submission of a traffic impact study shall be required with rezoning, site plan and preliminary plat requests in accordance with the following table: 
24-Hour Trip Generation Traffic Study Scope 0-750 ADT Level I 750-6,000 ADT Level II > 6,000 ADT Level III  
(2)  Trip generation rates for proposed uses shall be calculated using the ITE Trip Generation Manual, 5th (or latest) edition. 
(3)  Upon being provided proof by the developer's traffic engineer that a lower level traffic impact study would be adequate for a proposed development, or that a traffic study is not warranted, the town engineering staff may reduce the level of study required or waive the requirement. 
(b)  Traffic impact study guidelines and procedures. 
(1)  These traffic impact study guidelines and procedures define when proposed rezoning, site plans and preliminary plat requests warrant a detailed traffic study and what information should be included in it. All applicants will be required to follow the town guidelines. 
(2)  The purpose of performing a traffic impact study, as defined by the institute of traffic engineers (ITE), is to: 
a.  Provide guidance for short term and long term planning of site access; 
b.  Provide guidance for on-site circulation and the interface between on-site circulation and off-site traffic; 
c.  Provide guidance for off-site improvements needed to permit the roadway system to function satisfactorily so as to accommodate site and non-site traffic; 
d.  Assist developers and land owners in making land use site planning decisions regarding traffic; 
e.  Identify the contribution a particular development makes to roadway system traffic volumes; 
f.  Provide a basis for estimating roadway improvement requirements attributable to a particular project; 
g.  Assess the compatibility with local transportation plans; 
h.  Enable staff to better evaluate zoning changes and development plans; and 
i.  Allow appointed and elected officials to know implications of their voting decisions. 
(c)  Scope of required traffic impact studies. Three levels of study have been identified based on the number of trips that a development is projected to generate in a 24-hour period: 
(1)  Level I studies require analysis of each access, per engineering staff, that the development has to an existing roadway. Access points to be analyzed include public and private roads, joint permanent easements, and private drives. 
(2)  Level II studies require analysis of each access that the development has to an existing roadway, and to the first control point beyond those access points. A control point is an intersection controlled by a traffic signal or stop sign on the existing roadway onto which the development has access. For cases where a traffic control device does not exist, engineering staff will determine the extent of the study. If a freeway interchange is near the property to be developed and is not signalized, engineering staff will determine if the ramps need to be included in the study. This level of study is commonly required for larger residential subdivisions, commercial developments, and office complexes. 
(3)  Level III studies require a complete traffic impact study. This study must address each access point, the first control point beyond each access point, and the nearest collector intersection or street of higher classification or as determined by the engineering staff. The exact area to be studied will be determined by the engineering staff with input from the study preparer. Level III studies are uncommon, as they are usually warranted only with very large mixed-use and commercial developments. 
(d)  Submission and review procedures for traffic impact studies. 
(1)  Applicants should conduct a preliminary trip generation assessment of any proposed rezoning, site plan or preliminary plat request to determine if a traffic impact study will be required. This preliminary assessment should be conducted well in advance of the actual submission of plans. 
(2)  If the preliminary assessment indicates that a traffic impact study will be required, the applicant should consult as early as possible in the plan-development process with the town's engineering staff to verify a development's projected trip generation, and to confirm whether or not a study will be required. If a study is required, the required level can be determined at that time. 
(3)  The applicant shall then select a licensed traffic or transportation engineer to prepare the study, who may need to consult with the engineering staff periodically to review the collected data and any assumptions made in the draft report. 
(4)  Four copies of the completed draft traffic impact study shall be submitted along with the development application and all other materials required for submission. 
(5)  The engineering staff shall review the draft traffic impact study in conjunction with the other elements of the development application. If the draft traffic impact study is not of the proper scope or is executed improperly, the applicant shall be notified of the deficiencies and be required to submit corrections on the same schedule that applies to the other elements of the development application. Failure to submit corrections in a timely manner may lead to a postponement of the application until the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
Since a completed traffic impact study must be submitted at the same time as the application for a development, it is critical that the applicant conduct steps one through three early in their planning of a proposed development. Failure to submit a traffic impact study, or submission of an inadequate study, is likely to slow the review process and may lead to postponements. 
(e)  Required qualifications for preparers of traffic impact studies. Traffic impact studies shall be prepared under the supervision of a qualified engineer who has specific training in traffic and transportation engineering and experience related to preparing traffic studies for existing or proposed developments. The study shall be signed and sealed by the supervising engineer. The ability to forecast and analyze traffic needs for both developments and roadway systems is essential. All design work implementing the recommendations of the traffic impact study shall be completed under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
(f)  Required specifications for traffic impact studies. 
(1)  Report requirements: Level I studies. 
a.  Intersection. 
1.  Description of site including a location map. 
2.  Type of project. 
(i)  If residential, number and type of units. 
(ii)  If commercial or office, include square footage and occupancy. 
3.  Site plan with access points shown to scale. 
b.  Existing conditions. 
1.  Distance from nearest intersection in both directions. 
2.  Distance to nearest drive or access points in both directions. 
3.  Location shown relative to opposing street, driveways, or access points. 
c.  Proposed conditions. 
1.  Width, radius, and markings of proposed street, driveway, or access point. 
2.  Proposed improvements adjacent to access point, including, but not limited to, acceleration, deceleration lanes, and pavement marking adjustments. 
(2)  Report requirements: Level II studies. 
a.  Introduction. 
1.  Description of site including a location map. 
2.  Type of project. 
(i)  If residential, number and type of dwelling units. 
(ii)  If commercial or office, square footage and type of occupancy. 
3.  Map of project with proposed access points shown. 
b.  Existing conditions. 
1.  Directional traffic counts on roads adjacent to property with access to development: Traffic counts should be no more than one year old. 
2.  Level of service of intersections (if applicable): 
(i)  Highway capacity software is recommended. 
(ii)  Other nationally recognized software can be used. 
c.  Trip generation rates. 
1.  Listing of trip generation rates. 
2.  Listing of sources for rates used. 
(i)  ITE 5th Edition of Trip Generation or latest edition. 
(ii)  If the type of proposed development is not addressed in the ITE manual, then other rates may be used as long as they are documented and have been approved by engineering staff. 
3.  Calculation of trip ends by type of generator. 
(i)  Traffic generated by phase. 
(ii)  100 percent occupancy and development. 
d.  Trip distribution. 
1.  Assumptions as to the directional distribution of traffic to and from the development. 
2.  Assumptions as to the peak hour percentages. 
3.  Assumptions as to the peak hour directional splits. 
4.  Assumptions as to the pass-by trips, if applicable, must be approved by engineering staff. 
e.  Analysis. 
1.  Level of service (LOS) and capacity analysis for peak periods. 
(i)  Compute the projected LOS and capacity analysis for each access point and control point to the adjacent road system based on the development by phase. 
A.  Highway capacity software is recommended. 
B.  Other nationally recognized software can be used. 
(ii)  Compare LOS before development to LOS after development if applicable. 
(iii)  Link analysis if applicable. 
2.  Intersection and roadway geometry; existing and proposed. 
(i)  Distances from existing streets, driveways, and/or median cuts. 
(ii)  Alignment with existing streets, driveways, and/or median cuts. 
(iii)  Intersection layouts. 
(iv)  Sight distance. 
(v)  Right-of-way width. 
(vi)  Lane width. 
3.  Site circulation. 
4.  Pedestrian facilities. 
(i)  Sidewalks. 
(ii)  Transit stops. 
(iii)  School bus stops. 
f.  Recommendations. 
1.  Site access. 
2.  Intersection improvements. 
(i)  Traffic control devices: modify existing or need for new. 
(ii)  Left and/or right turn lanes. 
(iii)  Acceleration and/or deceleration lanes. 
(iv)  Length of storage bays. 
3.  Off-site improvements. 
(i)  Modification to existing traffic control devices. 
(ii)  Additional traffic control devices. 
(iii)  Additional lanes at major intersections. 
(iv)  Additional roads. 
4.  Improvements by phasing (if applicable). 
g.  Appendix. 
1.  Raw traffic count data. 
2.  Documentation of analysis. 
(3)  Report requirements: Level III studies. In addition to the preceding information for Level I and II, the following information on trip assignment shall be provided in the report prior to the analysis and recommendation section: 
Trip assignment. 
1.  Show existing ADTs, proposed development traffic, and total traffic for all affected links on map which identifies the project and surrounding roads. 
2.  Show a.m. and p.m. peak hour turning movements for the existing traffic, the proposed development traffic, and the combined traffic at all project entrance intersections, and effected intersections within the study area. 
3.  Discuss the effects of phasing of the proposed project. 
(g)  Additional information. Additional information on traffic impact studies can be obtained from Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(Code 2007, § 16-403; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997; Ord. No. 14-18, § 3, 12-11-2014 ) 
Sec. 22-148. - Permit required. 
(a)  No driveway or other means of access to any right-of-way of any road, street, or highway within the limits of the town shall be constructed nor shall any existing driveway or other means of access be altered except pursuant to a permit issued by the town. The submission of an access permit application shall be required. 
(b)  For minor revisions to existing drives and residential drives onto non-local streets, an application for an access permit shall be accompanied by four copies of a plan of access which shall as a minimum, consist of clear drawings or a sketch showing the general layout and dimensions necessary to prove compliance with this article, and a brief description of the proposed use of the property. 
(c)  For residential drives onto local streets, an application for an access permit shall be accompanied with the building permit and shown on the required site plan. 
(Code 2007, § 16-404; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-149. - Permit approval. 
(a)  The planning commission and the board of mayor and aldermen shall review applications for access for all developments requiring the submittal of a site plan and residential drives onto non-local streets. Minor revisions to existing drives shall be reviewed by engineering staff. 
(b)  The planning commission, the board of mayor and alderman, and town staff shall review applications for access for compliance with the requirements of this article. The planning commission, the board of mayor and alderman, or the town staff may require such revisions, corrections, and additions to the plans of access and such additional supporting documentation of the plan of access as may be reasonable considering the locations of proposed and existing access, the traffic impact study if required, and considerations of public safety and welfare. All revisions, corrections, and additions required shall be recorded on a final copy of a subdivision plat, site plan, or "drawing or sketch" of the access requested for approval before issuance of a permit. 
(c)  An access permit shall be secured before issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  No final certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued until all applicable access control requirements as outlined in this article and other requirements of the individual access permit have been completed. 
(Code 2007, § 16-405; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-150. - Specifications; permanent access. 
    The following constitutes minimum specifications for access to streets, roads, and highways within the town and additional reasonable specifications may be imposed as required for public safety. Such additional specifications shall be required upon recommendation of the town engineer, his designee, or the planning commission and approval by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(1)  Distance requirements. 
a.  Distance from intersections. 
1.  The minimum distance of an access point from an intersection, measured from intersecting right-of-way to the edge of the driveway pavement, shall be as follows: 
Street Classification Minimum Distance Arterial streets 400 feet Collector streets 200 feet Local streets 1 100 feet Local Streets 2 50 feet  
Note: 
1 Denotes commercial and office zoned properties. 
2 Denotes residential and agricultural zoned properties. 
2.  Access shall be located and constructed so as to provide adequate stopping sight distance for drivers entering and exiting the property using a design speed of ten miles above the legal speed limit as determined by the town engineer or his designee in accordance with current AASHTO (A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) and adopted ITE (Institute of Traffic Engineers) standards. 
b.  Distance between driveways. For the following street classifications, the following requirements specify the minimum allowed distances between driveways 1 : 
Street classification Distance between driveways Arterial streets 400 feet Collector streets 200 feet Local streets 2 100 feet  
Note: 
1 Town may require joint permanent access easements to minimize the number of curb cuts. 
2 Residential properties are exempt from local street requirement for the distance between driveways. 
c.  Joint permanent access easements. Controlled access to a joint permanent access easement shall be maintained for a minimum length of 40 feet perpendicular from the right-of-way or as determined by the traffic impact study. 
(2)  Access to and from property being developed. 
a.  Number of access points. The number of access points of a property shall be determined by its road frontage. Lots which front on more than one street shall add total street frontage lengths together to determine total road frontage to calculate the number of driveways permitted. Circular drives shall be considered as two driveways. 
Street classification Length of 
road frontage Number of access points Arterial streets 0-400 feet 1 Arterial streets 401-800 feet 2 Collector streets 0-200 feet 1 Collector streets 201-800 feet 2 Local streets* 0-200 feet 1 Local streets 201-800 feet 2 All streets 801 feet and above 2 + 1/each 800 feet of 
additional road frontage  
    Circular drives shall be permitted to property with less than 200 feet of road frontage provided the following criteria are met: 
(i)  The property is zoned residential and the street on which the property fronts is located within a residential subdivision; 
(ii)  The maximum lot coverage in the front yard (area in front of the house): 35 percent; 
(iii)  The maximum driveway width: 15 feet; 
(iv)  The minimum distance between the driveways: 60 feet; and 
(v)  The setback from the side property lines: A total on two sides of at least 40 feet, but not less than ten feet on any one side. 
b.  Pavement or surface width of access points. The pavement or surface width of all access points on and within the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway shall be within the minimum and maximum limits (excluding turn radius) specified as follows: 
Minimum Maximum Residential (single-family, duplex and quadraplex) driveway 12 feet 25 feet One-way other than residential driveway 15 feet 26 feet Two-way other than residential driveway 25 feet 36 feet  
Roads with median shall be considered two one-way streets. 
24 feet maximum for two-way access. 
36 feet maximum for two-way access and center turn lane for left turns. 
(3)  Paved acceleration and deceleration lane requirement. Paved acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required along any arterial or collector street or highway at the determination of the board of mayor and alderman upon the recommendation of the town engineer or his designee. 
(4)  Circulation drives and frontage roads. Circulation drives (drives which interconnect all lot access points with all vehicle parking, loading, servicing, and like areas and structures) and frontage roads (roads which parallel the public streets giving access and which extend along the entire frontage of a particular property) shall be constructed in order to provide safe and efficient vehicular movement between specified access points as specified in subsection (2) of this section. The location, width, and design of all circulation drives and frontage roads shall be approved by the board of mayor and aldermen upon recommendation of the town engineer or his designee. All frontage roads shall be dedicated as public streets and shall be maintained by the public. 
(5)  Subdivision standards for circulation drives and frontage roads. Frontage roads and circulation drives shall be constructed in conformance with the subdivision regulations standards. Dedicated right-of-way for frontage roads shall be ten feet greater than the width of the newly constructed frontage road. All circulation drives shall be clearly defined and marked appropriately to assist public circulation into, on, and out of the property and through parking lot areas. 
(Code 2007, § 16-406; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997; Ord. No. 09-14, § 1, 8-27-2009) 
Sec. 22-151. - Access to two or more roads, streets, or highways. 
    In the event a parcel of land abuts and lies adjacent to two or more separate roads, streets, or highways, the board of mayor and alderman may limit or prohibit access to one or more such roads (provided that access to at least one such road shall always be permitted) if the safety and welfare of the public will be promoted by so doing. In so limiting or prohibiting access, consideration shall be first given to limiting or prohibiting access to the more heavily traveled abutting or adjacent road, street, or highway. Any party aggrieved by any action taken under the provisions of this section shall have the burden of establishing that such action taken does not promote the safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 16-407; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-152. - Variance. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the board of mayor and aldermen may grant approval for access and/or frontage roads other than as specifically herein permitted, provided such an access is reviewed with a recommendation by the town engineer or his designee and the planning commission. 
(Code 2007, § 16-408; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-153. - Temporary access. 
(a)  Temporary access ways may be granted by the board of mayor and alderman upon review with a recommendation by the town engineer or his designee and the planning commission at locations other than specified for permanent access where it is expedient for the purpose of staged development. Temporary access ways shall cease to exist at such time that any other means of access to a property occurs which more nearly conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Temporary construction access ways may be granted by the town engineer or his designee to facilitate construction. The length of time shall be based on the duration of the grading permit. 
(Code 2007, § 16-410; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Sec. 22-154. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal from adverse determinations on any application for an access permit shall be to the board of mayor and aldermen. Any party aggrieved or refused issuance of an access permit shall notify in writing the town recorder of applicant's desire to appeal the action taken. Such notice shall be given within 30 days of denial of the permit. 
(b)  Upon receipt of notice of appeal the town recorder shall place the appeal for consideration before the board of mayor and aldermen within 30 days of receipt of notice of appeal. The town engineer or his designee shall appear at such scheduled meeting, and the applicant may appear, to present the matter to the board of mayor and aldermen. The determination by the board of mayor and aldermen is administratively final. 
(Code 2007, § 16-411; Ord. No. 96-30, 1-1997) 
Secs. 22-155-22-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - UTILITY CONSTRUCTION/RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-177. - Penalties. 
    Any permittee or unauthorized party who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, in the appropriate court pursuant to action initiated by the town, be subject to the penalties as prescribed in the adopting ordinance for this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 13-208; Code 2007, § 16-508) 
Sec. 22-178. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this article is simply to encourage the coordination and cooperation of several unrelated agencies all performing some type of construction activity within the jurisdiction of the town. This article is designed to be preventative in nature by minimizing potentially conflicting construction activity within the same given space. Construction activity by the town and/or "others" shall be reviewed and approved by the town administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 13-202; Code 2007, § 16-502) 
Sec. 22-179. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has in T.C.A. § 13-4-104 delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations pursuant to a municipal plan and review and approve construction and developmental activity within its jurisdiction. Specifically, governmental units shall review and approve any construction activity within any street, park, or other public way, ground, place, or space. No public building or structure, or no public utility whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized in the municipality until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the town administrator or his designee in his capacity as staff to the town planning commission and board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1985, § 13-201; Code 2007, § 16-501) 
Sec. 22-180. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the town administrator or his designated representative. 
    Building means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or moveable property of any kind, also including utilities and substations. 
    Construction permit means a signed, written authorization by the town administrator that specifies work or construction requested by an applicant has been reviewed and activity may proceed as approved. 
    Exclusions. No construction permit shall be required for typical and/or routine maintenance of existing facilities. In situations where the work or construction may adversely affect other on-site or nearby off-site areas the town administrator may require a permit. Activities considered as exclusions include: 
(1)  Installation of a new service meter which is located behind the curb line or edge of street pavement. 
(2)  Repair on any individual service meters. 
(3)  Installation of a service line which is located behind the curb line or edge of street pavement across private property provided no trees are disturbed or removed. 
(4)  Regular maintenance on equipment, lines, poles, etc., which does not impact any adjacent structures, property, or trees. 
(5)  Other activities as determined by the town administrator. It is understood that removal of trees and tree trimming within the town's public rights-of-way are not excluded from the requirements for a construction permit. Therefore, prior approval must be obtained before such activities are undertaken. 
    Off-site area means that area outside the site area that is or may be affected by work or construction by the permittee and that may be adversely affected by such work or construction on the site. The off-site area may be adjacent property or property some distance away. 
    On-site area means the work or construction zone identified in the permittee's submission documents. 
    Others means any agency or individual not employed by, working on behalf of, or under the direct supervision and control of the town. 
    Permittee means any person, firm, or entity to whom a permit is issued in accordance with these regulations. 
    Planning commission. The town municipal planning commission serves this capacity for all property within the town. 
    Structure means any object constructed above or below the ground. 
(Code 1985, § 13-203; Code 2007, § 16-503) 
Sec. 22-181. - On- and off-site damage. 
    Should the town administrator determine that the action resulting from an approved or unapproved work or construction activity has an injurious or harmful effect on any existing "on- and/or off-site" structure then he shall require corrective action by the permittee or the unauthorized party which caused the problem to occur. The administrator shall require such permittee or unauthorized party to abate or restore such resultant conditions and to provide sufficient guarantee that the situation will not be duplicated. Such guarantee may take the form of bonds or other similar instruments to ensure compliance. 
(Code 1985, § 13-207; Code 2007, § 16-507) 
Secs. 22-182-22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-201. - Required for construction activity. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, agency, developer, contractor, or utility who may work or perform construction activity upon any site as specified herein, shall have a valid construction permit from the town administrator prior to proceeding with such work or construction. The town administrator shall have adequate time in which to review and approve a complete request. For normal installations, the town administrator will attempt to respond within three to five days. 
(Code 1985, § 13-204; Code 2007, § 16-504) 
Sec. 22-202. - Submission of required information. 
    When applying for a construction permit, the permittee shall submit the following information for the entire on-site tract, or project area at which the work or construction is to be performed: 
(1)  A descriptive site plan of the on-site work area. (Where available, the town requests that the applicant use a scale of one inch equals 100 feet.) 
(2)  Description of the proposed work or construction activity and its impact on the existing infrastructure on or near the site. 
(3)  When necessary, a traffic control plan shall be submitted stating the times and schedules for road closure or service interruption. The applicant shall use the guidelines specified in the manual of uniform traffic control devices for all activity in or near public rights-of-way and shall hold harmless the town from any claims/liabilities which may arise from any traffic control activities. 
(4)  The sequence of construction events as related to the overall project schedule. 
(5)  An erosion control plan, where necessary, indicating the mitigation measures to be employed by the applicant to minimize siltation and off-site erosion. 
(6)  Identify any trees which may be removed, trimmed, or damaged. This requirement shall be applicable to any tree, the circumference of which exceeds 20 inches when measured at a point 41/2 feet above the natural grade. 
(Code 1985, § 13-205; Code 2007, § 16-505) 
Sec. 22-203. - Plan review. 
    The administrator shall review the submitted plans with the assistance of the appropriate town staff and shall make a determination with respect to their sufficiency. The administrator shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies within three to five days. When a complete application has been accepted by the town administrator, then the review period shall begin. 
(Code 1985, § 13-206; Code 2007, § 16-506) 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic, T.C.A. title 55. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks or commonly used pedestrian walkway on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
    Loading zone means a space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or property. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this town. 
    Passenger loading zone means a place reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles while receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Police officer means every officer of the county sheriff department or any other officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations within this town. 
    Town traffic coordinator means the town engineer unless otherwise designated by the town administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 9-104; Code 2007, § 15-104) 
State Law reference- Traffic definitions, T.C.A. § 55-8-101. 
Sec. 24-2. - Application of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways and streets within the town except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(Code 1985, § 9-113; Code 2007, § 15-114(1)) 
Sec. 24-3. - State statutes adopted; miscellaneous weight limits. 
(a)  The town adopts T.C.A. title 55 and T.C.A. tit. 7, ch. 63 (T.C.A. § 7-63-101 et seq.). 
(b)  The town engineer or his designee may determine appropriate maximum gross vehicle weight limits for all vehicles operating upon roads, streets and public ways other than state or federal highways within the town. The town engineer or his designee shall post notices of such maximum weight limits at the termini of and along the right-of-way as appropriate of any such roads, streets or highways with respect to which the weight limit has been restricted. No motor vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the posted maximum weight limit may be operated upon such posted road, street or highway of the town; provided, however, that such notices of reduced maximum gross weight shall be posted for a period of not less than one week before such reduced maximum weight limit becomes effective. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms of this section may be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty clause for this municipal code in addition to any other penalty herein provided and in addition to loss of license. 
(Code 1985, § 9-101; Code 2007, § 15-101) 
Sec. 24-4. - Enforcement and obedience to traffic regulations. 
(a)  Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(1)  The county sheriff department and the state highway patrol are hereby authorized to enforce all street traffic laws of this town and all of the state vehicle laws. 
(2)  Officers of the county sheriff department and the state highway patrol are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, such officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(3)  Officers of any recognized firefighting organization, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  The fire official for the town, or his designee, is hereby authorized to enforce fire lane and emergency vehicle access requirements as directed in this chapter. 
(b)  Required obedience to this chapter. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(c)  Certain non-motorized traffic to obey traffic regulations. 
(1)  Every person propelling any bicycle, velocipede or push cart upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter and by the rules of the road portion of the state vehicle code, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(2)  Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(d)  Use of coaster, roller skates and similar devices restricted. No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such persons shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(e)  Public employees to obey traffic regulations. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the state vehicle code. 
(f)  Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(1)  Generally. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(2)  Privileges and exemptions. 
a.  A driver of an authorized emergency vehicle operating the vehicle in accordance with subsection (f)(1) of this section may: 
1.  Park or stand, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter that regulate parking or standing; 
2.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
3.  Exceed the speed limits so long as life or property is not thereby endangered; and 
4.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
b.  Subsection (f)(2)a of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall subsection (f)(2)a of this section protect the driver from the consequences of the driver's own reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(3)  Audible and visual signals required. 
a.  The exemptions granted under subsection (f)(2) of this section to a driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall only apply when the vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the applicable laws of this state, except that while parked or standing, an authorized emergency vehicle shall only be required to make use of visual signals meeting the requirements of the applicable laws of this state. 
b.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, while parked or standing, from making use of both audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the applicable laws of this state, in the discretion of the driver. 
(Code 1985, § 9-105; Code 2007, § 15-105; Ord. No. 04-08, 1-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 55-8-104-55-8-108) 
Sec. 24-5. - Obstructions to vehicle operator's visibility. 
(a)  Obstruction to visibility of intersections; visibility area defined. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or corporation owning real property at intersecting streets to install, set out or maintain or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, hedge, fence, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstructions to the view, whether movable or stationary, higher than 30 inches above the level intersection under the conditions stated below: 
(1)  The obstruction shall not be placed in that triangular area between the property lines and a diagonal line joining points on the property lines 25 feet from the point of their intersection, or a diagonal line joining points on the centerlines of the two streets 75 feet from the point of their intersection, whichever is more restrictive. 
(2)  In the case of rounded property corners, that triangular area shall be between the property lines extended and a diagonal line joining points on the property lines 25 feet from the point of intersection, or diagonal line joining points on the centerlines of the two streets 75 feet from the point of their intersection, whichever is more restrictive. 
(3)  Subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section shall also apply to the intersection of a public street right-of-way and a railroad right-of-way. 
(b)  Obstructions to visibility within town rights-of-way. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or corporation owning real property to install, set out or maintain or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, hedge, fence, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the view, whether movable or stationary, higher than 30 inches above the level of the adjacent roadway and located within the town rights-of-way. 
(c)  Obstructions to visibility at intersections and driveways-Exceptions. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to trees that are not more than 12 inches in diameter (trimmed to the trunk), that are trimmed to at least eight feet above the level of the intersection, and that are planted so as to leave a clear and unobstructed cross-view. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section also shall not apply to fire hydrants; public utility poles; street markers; guard rails; mailboxes; traffic control devices; existing permanent building; existing grades, which by reason of natural topography exceed 30 inches above the center of the adjacent intersection; and signs mounted eight feet or more above the ground provided the supports are not more than 12 inches in diameter. 
(d)  Same-Existing obstructions. No obstruction to cross-visibility shall be exempted from the application of this section because of its being in existence at the time of the adoption hereof. 
(e)  Same-Penalty. Any person or corporation violating subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day that the violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Same-Removal of obstructions by the town. In the event of any violation of subsections (a) through (d) of this section, the town, at the direction of the town traffic coordinator, is authorized to go on said real property and to take any usual and necessary action to effect full compliance with the provision of these subsections. The cost thereof shall be a charge against the person or corporation responsible and shall be a lien against the property from which such obstruction is removed. 
(g)  Existing obstructions to visibility within town rights-of-way. The town has the right to remove or alter any existing obstructions located within the town rights-of-way. 
(Code 1985, § 9-112; Code 2007, § 15-112) 
Secs. 24-6-24-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 24-29. - Town traffic coordinator; powers and duties. 
(a)  Position established. The position of town traffic coordinator is hereby established. The town engineer shall serve as town traffic coordinator in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this municipality. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the general duty of the town traffic coordinator to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the town, and to cooperate with other town officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the town. The town traffic coordinator shall seek qualified professional assistance on matters that require specialized engineering knowledge. 
(c)  Emergency and experimental regulations. The town traffic coordinator is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the town and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(d)  Authority for stop signs and yield signs. The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs, or other official traffic control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junctions at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before entering the intersection or junction. No such designation shall be effective unless appropriate devices are in place. 
(Code 1985, § 9-102; Code 2007, § 15-102) 
Sec. 24-30. - One-way streets and alleys; authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. 
(Code 1985, § 9-108; Code 2007, § 15-108) 
State Law reference- One-way streets, T.C.A. § 55-8-122. 
Secs. 24-31-24-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-49. - Speed limits. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle or means of conveyance at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law. 
(c)  Whenever the town traffic coordinator determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of the highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the town traffic coordinator may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle or conveyance except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law, and that limit shall be effective when posted by appropriate signs. 
(d)  Except when a special hazard exists which requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the limits hereinafter specified or established as hereinafter authorized shall be the maximum lawful speeds and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the following maximum limits: 
(1)  25 miles per hour when passing a school during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours. 
(2)  30 miles per hour on all streets within the town, except those covered by subsection (d)(3) of this section and those posted with appropriate speed limit signs by the town traffic coordinator. 
(3)  55 miles per hour on all highways of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and other highways which incorporate similar design and limited access control features. 
(e)  Whenever the town traffic coordinator on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation determines that the maximum speed permitted pursuant to this section is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon a street or highway, or part of such street or highway, the town traffic coordinator may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which: 
(1)  Increases the limit otherwise applicable pursuant to the terms of this section by a maximum of ten miles per hour, but not more than 55 miles per hour in any event; or 
(2)  Decreases the limit otherwise applicable as set forth in this section by a maximum decrease of ten miles per hour from the speed otherwise herein permitted. 
(f)  Any speed limit altered and amended by the town engineer pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, shall be established and effective from and after the posting of appropriate speed limit signs by the town traffic coordinator on such roads and streets and such portions of such roads and streets to which such altered speed zones are applicable. 
(g)  The town traffic coordinator shall cause the streets, roads, and highways of the town to be posted with appropriate signs identifying the speed limits in force and effect and applicable to such road or such portion of such road, street and highway. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle or conveyance through any intersection within the town at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street, road or highway regulated by traffic control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the intersecting streets. 
(Code 1985, § 9-103; Code 2007, § 15-103) 
State Law reference- Speed limits, T.C.A. § 55-8-152-55-8-156. 
Sec. 24-50. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Authority to install. The town traffic coordinator shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this town to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this town or the state vehicle code. 
(b)  When official devices are required for enforcement purposes. No provision of this article requiring the placement of official traffic control devices shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If this article does not require the placement of official traffic control devices, the applicable provisions hereof shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(c)  Official traffic control devices; presumption of legality. 
(1)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this article, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(2)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this article and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this article, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(d)  Town traffic coordinator to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones. The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(e)  Traffic lanes. The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(f)  Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(1)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(2)  No person shall place or maintain upon any highway any sign or signal bearing thereon any advertising. 
(3)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(4)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. Any such sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 109. 
(Code 1985, § 9-106; Code 2007, § 15-106) 
State Law reference- Traffic control devices, T.C.A. § 55-8-109 et seq. 
Sec. 24-51. - Turning movements. 
(a)  Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns. The town traffic coordinator is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(b)  Authority to place restricted turn signs. The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(c)  Limitations on turning around. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1985, § 9-107; Code 2007, § 15-107) 
State Law reference- Turning movements, T.C.A. § 55-8-140 et seq. 
Sec. 24-52. - Miscellaneous driving rules. 
(a)  Stop when traffic obstructed. No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(b)  Driving through funeral or other procession. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. 
(c)  Drivers in a procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(d)  Funeral processions to be identified. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the county sheriff's department. 
(e)  When permits required for parades and processions. No procession or parade, with the exception of funerals, containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles except the Armed Forces of the United States, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street unless granted a permit by the town administrator and in accordance with such regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(Code 1985, § 9-109; Code 2007, § 15-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-183. 
Sec. 24-53. - Truck traffic restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall drive or cause to be driven a motor vehicle having a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more along or upon the following highways and roads: 
(1)  Southbound traffic on Watt Road from Interstate 40/75 to Kingston Pike (U.S. 11/70). 
(2)  Campbell Station road from Interstate 40/75 to Kingston Pike. 
(3)  Everett Road from Interstate 40/75 to Kingston Pike. 
(4)  Old Stage Road from U.S. Highway 11 to Kingston Pike. 
(5)  Kingston Pike (U.S. 11/70) from Watt Road to Concord Road. 
(b)  This prohibition shall not apply to shipments originating or destined, as shown by a bill of lading, to within the town or trucks in transit to a repair facility. 
(c)  The town and the state department of transportation will have the identified highways and roads adequately posted to notify drivers where the prohibited use is to be enforced. 
(d)  Specific weight limits are hereby established for the following streets: 
(1)  Briar Gate Lane. 
(2)  Gates Mill Drive. 
(3)  Glen Willow Drive. 
(4)  Herron Road. 
(5)  Lark Meadow Drive. 
(6)  Woodedge Lane. 
(e)  The specific gross weight limits for those roads identified in subsection (d) of this section are: 
Type of Truck Gross Weight Limit Single axle 22,000 pounds Tandem axle 40,000 pounds Tri axle 50,000 pounds  
(f)  The town engineer is hereby authorized to post these roads with standard regulatory signs identifying the weight limits authorized. 
(Code 1985, § 9-112.1; Code 2007, § 15-113) 
Secs. 24-54-24-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unmanned traffic camera enforcement, T.C.A. § 55-8-198. 

Sec. 24-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citations and warnings means written communications intended to advise a vehicle owner of a violation of a part of this division and shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  The registration plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location of the violation; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded image; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid; 
(8)  A signed statement by a member of the county sheriff's office, agent of the county sheriff's office, or other state-certified law enforcement agent, that, based on inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 24-82; and 
(9)  Information advising the person alleged to be liable under this section: 
a.  Of the manner and time in which liability alleged in the citation occurred and that the citation may be contested in the municipal court; and 
b.  Warning that failure to contest in the manner and time provided shall be deemed an admission of liability and that a default judgment may be entered thereon. 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic control photographic system on a photograph; a microphotograph; an electronic image; videotape; or any other medium; and at least one image or portion of tape, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
    System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Traffic control photographic system means an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control sign, signal or device, and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control sign, signal or device. 
    Vehicle owner means the person identified by the state department of safety as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
(Code 2007, § 15-301; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 09-18, § 1, 8-13-2009) 
Sec. 24-81. - General standards and procedures. 
(a)  The county sheriff's office or an agent of the county sheriff's office, or other state-certified law enforcement agent, shall administer the traffic control photographic systems and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control photographic systems are installed. 
(b)  The town shall adopt procedures for the issuance of citations and warnings under this section. A citation or warning alleging that the violation of section 24-82 occurred, sworn to or affirmed by the county sheriff's office, or other state-certified law enforcement agent, or the town, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic control photographic system, shall be evidence of the facts contained therein and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation under this section. The citation or warning shall be forwarded by first-class mail to the owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration. Personal service of process on the owner shall not be required. 
(c)  Signs to indicate the use of traffic control photographic systems shall be clearly posted. 
(d)  In order to educate the public of the existence of a newly installed traffic control photographic system at an intersection, only warnings imposing no civil penalty and not requiring an appearance in municipal court shall be issued during the first 45 days following the initial activation of the traffic control photographic system. 
(e)  The program adopting a traffic control photographic system for use in the town shall be administered consistent with the provisions of T.C.A. § 55-8-198, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 2007, § 15-302; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 09-18, § 1, 8-13-2009) 
Sec. 24-82. - Offense. 
(a)  It is and shall be unlawful: 
(1)  At intersections in the town where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals, pursuant to this chapter and T.C.A. title 55, ch. 8 (T.C.A. § 55-8-101 et seq.) for a vehicle facing the signal to enter the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if no crosswalk, to enter the intersection when the signal light is showing red or "stop," except under circumstances allowed by T.C.A. § 55-8-110(a)(3)(A) for right turns on red or under other circumstances in which the laws of the state affirmatively allow motorists to enter intersections even when the signal light is showing red or "stop"; or 
(2)  For a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation specified in chapter 24. 
(b)  A person who receives a citation under this section may: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with instructions on the citation, directly to the municipal court; or 
(2)  Elect to contest the citation for the alleged violation. 
(c)  The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this section, except when he can provide sufficient evidence on the designated court date as determined by the town judge that the vehicle was in the care, custody, or control of another person at the time of the violation, and doing those things as described in subsection (d) of this section, in which circumstance the person who had the care, custody, and control of the vehicle at the time of the violation shall be issued a citation, as provided herein, and shall be responsible for the violation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if: 
(1)  An affidavit is provided to the court by him stating the name and address of the person or entity who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; 
(2)  An affidavit by him to the court stating that, at the time of the violation, the vehicle involved or its license plate was stolen, along with a certified copy of the police report reflecting such theft, or that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have his permission to use the vehicle, and stating the name and address of said person. An affidavit alleging theft of a motor vehicle or its plates must be provided by the registered owner of a vehicle receiving a notice of violation within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice of violation; or 
(3)  An affidavit by him to the court stating that, at the time of the violation, the vehicle involved was sold, along with a copy of the bill of sale, or that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of some person who purchased the vehicle, and stating the name and address of said person. An affidavit alleging sale must be provided by the registered owner of a vehicle receiving a notice of violation within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice of violation. 
If an individual identified pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section placed the vehicle in the care, custody or control of another at the time of the violation, said individual may likewise submit an affidavit pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section. If an individual identified pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of this section demonstrates to the court that he did not lease or rent the vehicle, or otherwise was not given care, custody or control of the vehicle, the owner of the vehicle shall remain responsible for the violation, and a citation as set forth above shall be reissued to the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 2007, § 15-303; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 09-18, § 1, 8-13-2009) 
Sec. 24-83. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any violation of section 24-82 shall subject the responsible person or entity to a civil penalty not to exceed $50.00, and possibly an assessment of court costs or fees. If the civil penalty is paid by the close of business on the Friday before the scheduled hearing, no court costs or fees will be assessed. In appropriate cases, the court may assess court costs and fees as set forth in this chapter and in chapter 12. The town may establish procedures for the trial of civil violators, and the collection of civil penalties, court costs and fees, and may enforce the penalties by a civil action in the nature of a debt. 
(b)  A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section shall not be considered a moving violation and may not be recorded by the county sheriff's department or the state department of safety on the driving record of the owner or driver of the vehicle and may not be considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
(Code 2007, § 15-304; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 09-18, § 1, 8-13-2009) 
Secs. 24-84-24-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, T.C.A. § 55-8-160, 55-21-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-110. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  Parking not to obstruct traffic. No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Greasing, changing oil or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(c)  Parking adjacent to schools. 
(1)  The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(2)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(d)  Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(1)  The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(2)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(e)  Standing or parking on one-way streets. The town traffic coordinator is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(f)  Standing or parking on one-way roadways. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The town traffic coordinator is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(g)  No stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(1)  The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 200 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(2)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(h)  Parking or stopping prohibited in fire lanes. The town traffic coordinator is authorized to designate fire lanes, fire apparatus access roads, or emergency vehicle access points in accordance with this Code, including chapter 10. Parking or stopping is prohibited in any designated fire lane, fire apparatus access road, or otherwise designated emergency vehicle access point as specified by the requirements of chapter 10. This shall apply to both public and private properties. Designated areas shall be maintained in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9-110; Code 2007, § 15-110; Ord. No. 04-08, 1-2004) 
Sec. 24-111. - Stopping, standing and parking restrictions. 
(a)  The town traffic coordinator is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to prohibit, regulate or limit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times or during specified hours. 
(b)  No prohibition, regulation or limitation relating to stopping, standing or parking imposed under this or any other ordinance of this town shall be effective unless official traffic control devices are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense and it shall be the duty of the town traffic coordinator to erect and maintain such devices. 
(c)  Where parking is restricted there shall be a minimum of two signs marking the ends of the restricted area. Where the restricted area extends for a distance of a full town block or on sections of roadway exceeding 300 feet in length with no intervening cross streets, there shall be a minimum of one sign every 300 feet. 
(Code 1985, § 9-111; Code 2007, § 15-111) 
Secs. 24-112-24-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Physically disabled parking, T.C.A. § 55-8-158 et seq. 

Sec. 24-136. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, a physically disabled driver is one who is disabled by paraplegia, amputation of leg, foot or both hands, or is disabled by loss of use of a leg, foot or both hands, or other condition, certified to by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in the state, resulting in an equal degree of disability (specifying the particular condition) so as not to be able to get about without great difficulty, including impairments that, regardless of cause or manifestation, confine such person to a wheelchair or cause such person to walk with difficulty or insecurity and includes, but is not limited to, those persons using braces or crutches, arthritics, spastics and those with pulmonary or cardiac ills who may be semi-ambulatory, for the purposes of this division, a physically disabled driver shall also include the owner of a motor vehicle with a vision of not more than 20/200 with correcting glasses. 
(b)  For the purposes of this division, the term "physically disabled passenger" means a person who meets the requirements for physically disabled drivers established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 9-201; Code 2007, § 15-201) 
Sec. 24-137. - State regulations adopted. 
    The town adopts the following sections of the Tennessee Code Annotated as regulations for motor vehicles which are operated within the corporate limits of the town: 
(1)  T.C.A. § 55-21-103, Distinguishing registration, license plates, placards. 
(2)  T.C.A. § 55-21-104, Symbol of registration and license plates. 
(Code 1985, §§ 9-202, 9-203; Code 2007, §§ 15-202, 15-203) 
Sec. 24-138. - Parking privileges. 
(a)  The parking privileges granted by this section are limited to any physically disabled driver or physically disabled passenger to whom the distinctive license plates or placards were issued and to qualified operators acting under the express direction of a physically disabled driver or physically disabled passenger. 
(b)  Any business, firm, or other person transacting business with the public from a permanent location may provide specially marked parking spaces for the exclusive use of persons qualifying for the rights and privileges extended by this chapter. 
(c)  Each such parking space shall be marked and maintained with the stylized wheelchair symbol designated by T.C.A. § 55-21-104, after July 1, 1983; provided, however, nonconforming markings or signs shall be acceptable during the useful life of such markings or signs which may not be extended by other than normal maintenance as long as such markings or signs provide reasonable notice of the specially marked parking space. 
(Code 1985, § 9-204; Code 2007, § 15-204) 
Sec. 24-139. - Unauthorized parking in spaces designated for physically disabled; penalty. 
    Any person, except a person who meets the requirements for the issuance of a distinguishing placard or license plates, disabled veterans license plate or distress flag or card, who parks in any parking space designated with the wheelchair disabled sign or displays the distress flag or card, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1985, § 9-205; Code 2007, § 15-205) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE ORDINANCES 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, T.C.A. § 13-4-101 et seq., 6-58-101 et seq.; municipal zoning, T.C.A. § 13-7-201 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Legal status; classification errors. 
    Subpart A of this Code is a codification of general ordinances. This subpart B is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development or land use. 
(1)  Inclusion of provisions in subpart A that pertain to land development or land use does not invalidate such provisions or excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
(2)  Inclusion of provisions in subpart B that do not pertain to land development or land use does not invalidate such provisions or excuse noncompliance with such provisions. 
Secs. 101-3-101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commissions, T.C.A. § 13-4-101 et seq. 

Sec. 101-23. - Creation and membership. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. § 13-4-101, there is hereby created a municipal planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. The planning commission shall consist of nine members; two of these shall be the mayor and another member of the governing body selected by the governing body; the other seven members shall be appointed by the mayor. All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. Except for the initial appointments, the terms of the seven members appointed by the mayor shall be for two years each. With respect to the initial appointments, of the seven members first appointed, three shall be appointed for a term of one year, and four shall be appointed for a term of two years, so that the expiration of the terms of the appointed members will not all occur in the same year. The terms of the mayor and the member selected by the governing body shall run concurrently their terms of office. Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor. 
(Code 1985, § 11-101; Code 2007, § 2-101) 
State Law reference- Authority to create planning commission, T.C.A. § 13-4-101. 
Sec. 101-24. - Organization, powers, and duties. 
    The planning commission shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions, and duties in accordance with T.C.A. title 13. 
(Code 1985, § 11-102; Code 2007, § 2-102) 
State Law reference- Planning commission powers and duties, T.C.A. § 13-4-103 et seq. 
Sec. 101-25. - Denial of preliminary and/or final plat by planning commission. 
    No approval for a preliminary and/or final plat shall be considered by the planning commission for an applicant who, prior to approval of the preliminary and/or final plat, is in violation of any other pertinent sections of this Code, the town zoning and subdivision regulations (appendixes A and B to this Code), or other town ordinances. 
(Code 1985, § 11-103; Code 2007, § 2-103) 
Secs. 101-26-101-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - VESTED RIGHTS IN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 101-54. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to comply with T.C.A. § 13-4-310(e), pursuant to which the town is authorized to specifically identify by ordinance: 
(1)  The types of development plans within the town's jurisdiction that will cause, once approved, property rights in development standards applicable to the specific development plan approved to become vested; and 
(2)  To specify what action constitutes approval of development plans within the town, after the occurrence of which will result in the development standards applicable to the specific development plan approved being vested as required by T.C.A. § 13-4-310. 
(Ord. No. 15-17, § 1(14-701), 11-12-2015) 
Sec. 101-55. - Plans constituting development plans and entitled to vesting. 
(a)  As provided in T.C.A. § 13-4-310(k)(5)(A), all preliminary plats, site plans, landscape plans, and final plats as provided for in the town's regulations shall be entitled to vesting to the extent allowed by T.C.A. § 13-4-310. 
(b)  As provided in T.C.A. § 13-4-310(k)(6), concept plans as provided for in the town's regulations shall be entitled to vesting to the extent allowed by T.C.A. § 13-4-310. 
(Ord. No. 15-17, § 1(14-702), 11-12-2015) 
Sec. 101-56. - Plan approval. 
    Approval of any development plan, as described in this article, shall occur upon the affirmative acknowledgment in writing by town staff of the satisfactory completion of all conditions and "subject to" requirements specified by the town municipal planning commission, and/or the town visual resources review board, and/or the town board of mayor and aldermen as part of the formal approval process. 
(Ord. No. 15-17, § 1(14-703), 11-12-2015) 
Secs. 101-57-101-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - EVERETT ROAD CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT FEE 

Sec. 101-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer means a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, commencing a land development activity or redevelopment activity, which when completed with dwelling units or contemplated construction will generate or attract traffic to the improved Everett Road, and which requires subdivision or site plan approval, or a building permit from the town. 
    Development means any change in land use, any construction of structures, or any change in the use of any existing structure, which when completed with dwelling units or contemplated construction will generate or attract traffic to the improved Everett Road and which requires subdivision or site plan approval, or a building permit from the town. 
    Road improvement area means the land area shown on Exhibit A, the development of which will result in development accessing the improved Everett Road and which will be subject to payment of the road improvement fee (See Road Improvement Area Map Exhibit A). 
    Road improvement fee means the required Everett Road Corridor fee calculated based on the total cost of the improvement within the road improvement area (See Exhibit B formula). 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and include re-subdivision of the land or area subdivided. 
(Code 2007, § 16-604; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-87. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish a uniform regulatory procedure for assessing and collecting fees from developments which contribute vehicular traffic to Everett Road within the town. Fees collected will be used for future improvements to Everett Road and/or to recoup Everett Road improvement costs incurred after the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
(Code 2007, § 16-601; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-88. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the powers conferred to the town by the state; T.C.A. § 6-2-201 et seq. 
(Code 2007, § 16-602; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-89. - Applicability. 
    This article shall only apply to all new subdivisions recorded after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived in which the resulting lots contribute traffic directly onto Everett Road by way of a driveway or subdivision street (See definition of subdivision in section 101-86). 
(Code 2007, § 16-603; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-90. - Road improvement fee and payment. 
(a)  The developer or lot owner shall pay the road improvement fee per dwelling unit, which has been calculated based on the factors set forth in Exhibit B. If this regulation is initiated through the subdivision process subject to planning commission review and approval, then said fee shall be paid in either of the following ways and will be determined by the planning commission during the final subdivision platting process: 
(1)  Upon application for a building permit for construction of any individual dwelling unit within the development; or 
(2)  The entire calculated fee amount for all proposed dwelling units planned for the development upon final subdivision plat or site plan approval and prior to any permitted construction. 
If this regulation is initiated by a subdivision not subject to planning commission review and approval, then the fee will be required upon application for a building permit for construction of any individual dwelling unit. 
(b)  In the case of a development which contemplates more than 20 dwelling units or multi-family residences, in lieu of payment of the road improvement fee at the time of final subdivision plat approval, the town municipal planning commission may authorize the town administrator to accept an appropriate irrevocable letter of credit from a federally insured lending institution acceptable to the town in the full amount of the road improvement fee for each of the dwelling units planned for inclusion in the development. Said letter of credit shall provide authorization to the town to draw the road improvement fee for each dwelling unit: 
(1)  As a condition of the issuance of a building permit authorizing the construction of the related dwelling unit or units in the case of multi-family structures; or 
(2)  Upon the closing of the sale by the developer of unimproved lots or parcels of land. 
The irrevocable letter of credit is intended to ensure that the road improvement fee for each dwelling unit in a development will be paid prior to the commencement of construction of the dwelling unit. Authorization of this method of securing the road improvement fees is within the absolute discretion of the town municipal planning commission to grant, which may take into account not only the circumstances and town history with the developer, but also the needs and resources of the town with respect to the road improvements to be made. 
(Code 2007, § 16-606; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-91. - Collection of road improvement fees. 
    Payment of all fees due shall be by cash, check, money order or other method acceptable to the town administrator or his designee. Fees may be submitted through the building division upon individual permit application with the building division transmitting to the recorder's office all fees collected in this manner and a copy of all related fee transaction documents for recordation. If the developer elects to make a lump sum payment for the entire development fee, this shall be done directly through the town recorder's office. 
(Code 2007, § 16-607; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-92. - Establishment of account. 
    The town shall establish a separate interest-bearing account into which all road improvement fees shall be deposited. Interest earned on the account into which the fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the town and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for the funds of such account. The town recorder's office shall maintain and keep financial records for each account. 
(Code 2007, § 16-608; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-93. - Use of proceeds. 
    The road improvement fees collected pursuant this article shall be used to subsidize the cost to the town of improving Everett Road. Fees may be used for future Everett Road improvements or to recoup funds expended on Everett Road improvements made after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Improvements may include right-of-way acquisition, design and engineering, construction and re construction. 
(Code 2007, § 16-609; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-94. - Refunds. 
    Any road improvement fee or portion thereof collected pursuant this article which has not been expended within 12 years from the date of the individual lot payment shall, upon application by the payor, be refunded to the payor. All funds collected shall be deemed to be expended in the same order in which they were collected; that is, the funds collected first shall be expended first. Refunds shall be made only upon written application to the town recorder's office. Refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property for which the road improvement fee was paid. 
(Code 2007, § 16-610; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-95. - Road improvement fee as condition of development approval. 
    Any required approval related to a development (i.e., rezoning, subdivision, site plan approval, building permit, etc.) shall be conditioned by the town municipal planning commission, or other approving authority of the staff of the town, upon the payment of the road improvement fee at the time when the final approval is granted, which approval would authorize the developer to commence construction on the land area governed by the approval granted. If not previously paid, no building permit for land located within the road improvement area in the town shall be issued until the road improvement fee herein established has been paid in full by the developer for the entire development or for the individual lot being petitioned for permitting. 
(Code 2007, § 16-605; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-96. - Exhibit A. 

(Code 2007, § 16-610, exh. A; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Sec. 101-97. - Exhibit B. 
(a)  Land use plan: As adopted, calls for very low density residential (two to four DU/acre). 
(b)  Assumptions: 
(1)  All property that may need an access point to Everett Road north of the intersection with Kingston Pike to the entrance of the Split Rail Farm (SRF) development (does not include common open space of Andover HOA-undevelopable). 
(2)  Area will develop at an average of three dwelling units (DU) per acre as called for on the land use plan. 
(3)  Assume 70 percent developable total acreage (other 30 percent includes-open space, road and utility network, detention, etc.). 
(4)  Based on February 2013 Traffic Impact Study by CDM Smith, average daily trip volume per DU = 11.02. 
(5)  Current trips/day along Everett Road near SRF entrance = 825 (per CDM Smith TIS). 
(c)  Total acreage, from Smith Road to the SRF entrance: 
Property Owner Acreage Longworth 20.9 Quinn 6.43 Split Rail Farm 52.13 Community Baptist Church 1.076 Bartlett 6.06 Nelson 3.7 Total Acreage 90.3  
(d)  Projected build out of area: 
(1)  90.3 acres × 70 percent (developable acreage) = 63.21 acres developable. 
(2)  63.21 acres × 3 DU/AC = 190 dwelling units developable in total corridor. 
(e)  Trip generation: 
(1)  Everett Road current trips/day = 825. 
(2)  Projected trip generation of future development: 190 DU × 11.02 trips/day = 2,094 trips. 
(3)  825 current trips + 2,094 projected trips = 2,919 total trips. 
(4)  Development trip generation = total dwelling units × 11.02/trips day. 
(5)  Development trip generation/2,919 total trips = Percentage of total trips attributable to new development. 
(f)  Cost analysis: 
    $1,815,000.00 (projected road cost with sidewalks) × XXX% = $XX,XXX or $X,XXX/DU. 
(Code 2007, § 16-610, exh. B; Ord. No. 14-19, § 1, 1-8-2015 ) 
Chapter 103 - AQUATIC BUFFERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

Sec. 103-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter will be known as the "Aquatic Buffer Ordinance." 
(Code 2007, § 14-202; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-2. - Definitions. 
    Any word or term not defined within this title of the municipal code or in chapter 2 of the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be construed to be used in this chapter as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the town's ordinances or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to it. 
    Aquatic buffer means a strip of undisturbed native vegetation, either original or reestablished, that borders streams, wetlands, and springs. 
    Aquatic corridor means an area of land and water which is important to the integrity and quality of a stream, wetland, and spring. An aquatic corridor consists of the actual body of water and the adjacent aquatic buffer. 
    Development means any manmade change, involving construction or reconstruction, to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, grading, clearing, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or other land disturbances. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Native vegetation means indigenous plants to East Tennessee. 
    Redevelopment. See Development. 
    Stormwater advisory committee (SAC) means a committee appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen that serves as an advisory review committee for this chapter. 
    Stream means perennial and intermittent watercourses identified through site inspection by TDEC. 
    TDEC 303(d) list means a compilation of the streams and lakes in the state that are "water quality limited" or are expected to exceed water quality standards in the next two years and need additional pollution controls. Water quality limited streams are those that have one or more properties that violate water quality standards. They are considered impaired by pollution and not fully meeting designated uses. Additionally, the 303(d) list prioritizes impacted streams for specialized studies called total maximum daily load (TMDL). 
    Total maximum daily load (TMDL) means a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a waterbody can receive and still meet water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the pollutant's sources. The Clean Water Act, section 303, establishes water quality standards and TMDL programs. In the state, TMDLs are established by TDEC. 
    Town administrator means the town administrator or his designated representative. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waterways means any stream, wetland, or spring. 
    Wetlands means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determination shall be made by the Army Corps of Engineers and/or the state department of environment and conservation. 
(Code 2007, § 14-207; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-3. - Statutory authorization. 
    Under the authority of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1977 (known as the Clean Water Act), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is specifically required to develop and oversee the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program which requires all communities operating a small municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to regulate the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the state. Under the authority of the Tennessee Water Quality Control Act of 1977 (T.C.A. § 69-3-101 et seq.) the state department of environment and conservation (TDEC) has interpreted that this mandate includes the regulation of aquatic buffers. The legislature of the state has in T.C.A. § 6-2-201, delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 2007, § 14-201; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-4. - Need. 
    Aquatic buffers serve as natural boundaries between local waterways and development. They protect water quality by filtering sediment, pollutants, and nutrients from runoff. Buffers are also essential in flood control, stream bank stabilization, stream temperature control, permitting the natural lateral movement of the stream channel, and wildlife habitat protection. The aquatic corridor, where land and water meet, warrants special protection in the form of buffers. 
(Code 2007, § 14-203; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-5. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and maintain native vegetation in the riparian areas of the aquatic corridor by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection, and long-term maintenance of aquatic buffers along all streams, wetlands, and springs in or adjacent to new development, modifications to existing development, and/or redevelopment, except as exempted in section 103-7, within the town. 
(b)  Establishing and maintaining aquatic buffers are intended to improve water quality in the town. The town is currently out of compliance and our streams are 303(d) listed by TDEC. This chapter, in conjunction with chapter 111, is intended to improve water quality in the town, to permanently remove the town's waterways from TDEC's 303(d) list, and to comply with state and federal regulations. 
(Code 2007, § 14-204; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-6. - Objective. 
(a)  It is the objective of this chapter to protect the physical and ecological integrity of waterways from surrounding upland activities. Aquatic buffers protect such integrity in the following ways: 
(1)  Filtering excess amounts of sediment, organic material, nutrients, and other chemicals; 
(2)  Providing flood protection; 
(3)  Reducing stormwater runoff velocities; 
(4)  Protecting channel bank areas from scour and erosion; 
(5)  Providing shade for cooling adjacent water, which allows waters to hold a great level of dissolved oxygen; and 
(6)  Providing leaf litter and large woody debris important to aquatic organisms. 
(b)  Aquatic buffers are most effective when stormwater runoff is flowing into and through the buffer as shallow sheet flow, rather than in a concentrated form. Therefore, it is critical that the design of any development include best management practices, to the maximum extent practical, that will result in stormwater runoff flowing into and through the aquatic buffer as shallow sheet flow. 
(Code 2007, § 14-205; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-7. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all new developments, modifications to existing developments, and/or redevelopments within the town, except for the following: 
(1)  Single-family residential lots in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(2)  At time of modification to an existing development and/or redevelopment, the modification cannot encroach closer to the stream top of bank or the floodway than the existing conditions, or per this chapter, whichever is less. 
(3)  Development, modifications to existing development, and/or redevelopment which prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
a.  Is covered by a valid, unexpired preliminary plat; 
b.  Is covered by a valid, unexpired site plan; 
c.  Is covered by a valid, unexpired building permit; or 
d.  Is covered by a valid, unexpired land disturbance permit. 
(Code 2007, § 14-206; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-8. - Conflict with other regulations. 
    Where the standards and management requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other laws, regulations, or ordinances regarding streams, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, timber harvesting, land disturbance activities, or other environmental protective measures, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Code 2007, § 14-214; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-9. - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this chapter. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 14-213; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-10. - Appeals. 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen (board) shall serve as the appellate body for this chapter and have the power to hear and decide appeals of this chapter. The board may refer an appeal to the stormwater advisory committee for a recommendation. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance or appeal to the town administrator. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance or appeal and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed request. The town administrator may require an alternatives analysis that clearly demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that minimal impact will occur as a result of the development. 
(c)  When the board is considering a request for a variance or an appeal, they may require additional information, such as, but not limited to, site design modifications, additional landscape planting, fencing, the placement of signs, and the establishment of water quality best management practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams, wetlands, and other water bodies. 
(Code 2007, § 14-212; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-11. - Width requirements for aquatic buffers. 
    The aquatic buffer widths shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  The aquatic buffer on streams shall be 25 feet from the top of bank on each side of the waterway or the width of the 100-year floodway, whichever is greater. 
(2)  The aquatic buffer adjacent to delineated wetlands and springs shall extend 25 feet perpendicular beyond the edges of the delineated wetlands and springs. 
(Code 2007, § 14-208; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-12. - Design standards for aquatic buffers. 
(a)  The vegetative target is a mature strip of undisturbed native vegetation (either original or re-established) that can provide erosion control to the stream, leaf litter, and wood debris. This area shall be measured perpendicular from the edge, adjacent to streams, delineated wetlands, and springs. If streams, wetlands, or springs do not have an established aquatic buffer, then a planting plan shall be required. Such a planting plan shall be submitted to town staff for approval and comply with the following: 
(1)  All planting plans shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet for small tracts and one inch equals 50 feet for large tracts on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets; 
(2)  A minimum of two complete sets of planting plans shall be submitted at the time of application. One reduced copy of a complete set on a sheet no larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches shall also be submitted. Once a planting plan has been presented to and approved by the town staff, four copies of the approved planting plan shall be submitted to the town hall; 
(3)  The planting plan shall include a "plant schedule" which lists the number and common and botanical name of all existing and proposed plantings. The "plant schedule" shall also list the height, spread, and where applicable, the caliper of all new plantings at the time of planting. 
(b)  Establishment of a vegetated aquatic buffer must adhere to the following conditions and shown on the planting plan: 
(1)  Stream banks must be planted with native vegetation that represent both woody (trees and shrubs) and herbaceous species as determined by a landscape architect. Density shall depend on the re-vegetation technique to be used and existing site conditions; 
(2)  No trees shall be planted in a utility district easement; 
(3)  No species may comprise more than one-third of the total planted trees or shrubs; 
(4)  Seedling/trees must be guaranteed at a 75 percent survivorship; and 
(5)  Invasive species must be removed and managed. 
(Code 2007, § 14-209; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-13. - Management and maintenance of aquatic buffers. 
(a)  Management of the aquatic buffer include specific limitation on alteration of the natural conditions. The following practices and activities are restricted within the aquatic buffer, except with prior approval by the town: 
(1)  Clearing or grubbing of existing vegetation; and 
(2)  Use, storage, or application of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(b)  The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted in the aquatic buffer subject to prior approval by the town and the following specific design or maintenance features: 
(1)  Crossings, provided the following criteria are followed: 
a.  The width should be the minimum width needed to allow for maintenance access and installation; 
b.  The crossing shall be at an angle that minimizes clearing requirements; and 
c.  The minimum number of crossings should be used within each development. 
(2)  Paths, provided the design and location are approved by the town. 
(3)  Utilities, provided the following criteria are followed: 
a.  The width should be the minimum width needed to allow for maintenance access and installation; and 
b.  The crossing should be at an angle that minimizes clearing requirements. 
(4)  Individual trees within the aquatic buffer may be removed if in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other structures, causing blockage of the stream, standing in the path of a proposed water or sewer main, or the roots of the tree are penetrating or in danger of penetrating a sewer line at a joint or pipe connection. The root wad or stump should be left in place, where feasible, to maintain soil stability. 
(c)  All final plats and site plans shall: 
(1)  Show the extent of any aquatic buffer on the subject property and be labeled as "aquatic buffer"; 
(2)  Provide a note to reference any aquatic buffer stating, "There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of soil and/or native vegetation except as permitted by the town"; and 
(3)  Provide a note to reference any protective covenants governing all aquatic buffers; 
(d)  Aquatic buffers shall count toward open space reservation requirements. 
(e)  All aquatic buffers must be protected during development activities. Prior to the initiation of development activities, ensure adequate visibility of the aquatic buffer by staking, flagging, or fencing. Permanent boundary markers, in the form of signage approved by the town, may be required to be installed prior to the recording of the final plat, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the issuance of a certificate of completion. 
(f)  Aquatic buffers shall be left in a stabilized condition upon completion of the development. The vegetative condition of the entire aquatic buffer must be monitored, and landscaping or stabilization performed to repair erosion, damaged vegetation, or other problems identified. Invasive species must be removed and managed. Only native vegetation may be used in conjunction with stabilization activities. Property owners shall remain responsible for maintaining the aquatic buffer. Where any tree or shrub which was required as part of an approved planting plan is removed, such tree or shrub shall be replaced with an equivalent tree or shrub approved by town staff. 
(g)  Subsequent town permits, such as land disturbance, grading, building, and sign permits, may be withheld if, after written notification, required landscaping or landscaping to be preserved is not properly maintained. 
(h)  All landscaping or stabilization activities within the aquatic buffer must have prior approval by the town. In addition, performing work in and around waters of the state may require coverage under a state and possibly a federal permit. 
(Code 2007, § 14-210; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Sec. 103-14. - Water pollution hazards. 
    The following land uses and/or activities are designated as potential water pollution hazards and must be set back from any water body by the distance indicated below: 
(1)  Non-residential storage of hazardous substances: 150 feet; 
(2)  Non-residential above or below ground petroleum storage facilities: 150 feet; 
(3)  Drainfields from on-site sewage disposal and treatment system (i.e., septic systems): 100 feet; 
(4)  Subsurface discharges from wastewater treatment plant: 100 feet, or as regulated by other state or federal agencies, whichever is greater; and 
(5)  Land application of biosolids: 100 feet, or a distance as required by 40 CFR 503, whichever is greater. 
(Code 2007, § 14-211; Ord. No. 05-15, 3-2005) 
Chapter 105 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Construction safety standards, T.C.A. § 68-120-101. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1-105-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 105-19. - International Building Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use, occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to any building or structure, the International Building Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix C, Appendix G, and Appendix I, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Building Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-101; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-20. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Building Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    "No building permit shall be issued unless and until an access permit as otherwise required by ordinance of the Town of Farragut has been issued." 
    "No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, if the matter for which application has been filed, if completed, would be in violation of any ordinance of the Town of Farragut. No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, who, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the Town of Farragut, nor shall any permit be issued for a premises that, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the Town of Farragut." 
    "A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all required building, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the Town of Farragut are met." 
(c)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: Permit drawings shall be no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(d)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
(1)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 square meters) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(2)  Exception. Group R3 buildings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(e)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: Any structure in excess of 7,000 gross square feet or two or more stories shall be of Type I, II, III or IV construction. 
(f)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: Any structure in excess of 7,000 gross square feet per story and is two or more stories shall be sprinklered per section 903.3 of the International Building Code. 
(g)  The International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: Fire walls shall be of noncombustible construction and shall have no penetrations or openings in Type V construction. 
(h)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Building Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(i)  The International Building Code, is amended by deleting section [A] 105.5 Expiration, and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    [A] 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued for new construction shall be become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. 
    All building permits shall expire according to the following schedule (from the date the permit is issued): 
New construction One year Additions 180 days Accessory structures 180 days Decks/porches 60 days Swimming pools 60 days New gas/mechanical 60 days Moving structures 30 days Demolition 30 days Mechanical changeouts 30 days  
(j)  Section [A] 107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    [A] 107.3.4.2 Construction documents. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(k)  Section 113 Board of appeals, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    [A] 113.4 Membership. The Farragut Board of Plumbing and Gas/Mechanical Examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    [A] 113.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    [A] 113.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    [A] 113.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    [A] 113.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    [A] 113.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    [A] 113.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    [A] 113.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(l)  Section 114 Violations, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    [A] 114.5 Revocation. The building official may also revoke a permit or approval if a permit holder shall, subsequent to the issuance of such permit or approval, violate the terms of the International Building Code or the provisions of any other pertinent sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or other ordinances of the Town of Farragut." 
(m)  Section [F] 501.2 Address identification, of the International Building Code, is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    [F] 501.2 Posting of designated street address. 
a.  All buildings (excluding accessory buildings) shall display the number assigned by the county addressing division to the frontage on which the building's front entrance is located. If a building is occupied by more than one unit, each separate outside entrance shall display a separate number. 
b.  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each building or each entrance to such building shall be placed either over or at the side of the main entrance of said building or upon the front of any porch or stoop thereof or over or at the side of any gateway leading thereto, or upon the steps thereof in such manner that the same may be plainly seen and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located and in such manner that the same shall not be hidden from view by any trees or shrubs or other obstruction. 
c.  If a unit does not allow ready or easy visibility of its address numerals from the street due to excessive set back, shrubbery or color, an address identification marker shall be placed near the entrance or driveway to the parcel. Such identification marker shall not exceed a total area of two square feet. 
d.  All building numbers displayed shall be permanent, legible figures not less than four inches nor more than six inches high and of a color contrasting to the building background. 
e.  In addition to the required assigned numerals on all buildings and the required address identification markers for units with excessive setbacks and/or visibility problems it shall also be permissible to have property address numerals painted on the curb in front of a lot. Such curbside designation shall be positioned in front of the unit or between the driveway and half the distance of the frontage along the public street. All painted numerals displayed on curbs shall be permanent, legible black colored numerals, which are no more nor less than four inches high, on a white contrasting background. All paint used shall be of alkyd resin, Type F traffic paint, or an equal approved by the town's engineering department. Numerals shall have glass beads or similar materials for reflective purposes. 
f.  A proper address shall be required for any permit issuance. Final approval of a certificate of occupancy of a building erected or repaired shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with this section. 
(n)  Section 708.1 General, of the International Building Code, is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    708.1 General. The following wall, ceiling, and floor assemblies shall comply with this section. 
a.  Walls, ceilings, and floors separating dwelling units in the same building as required by section 420.2. 
b.  Walls, ceilings, and floors separating sleeping units in the same building as required by section 420.2. 
c.  Walls, ceilings, and floors separating tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings as required by section 402.4.2.1. 
d.  Corridor walls, ceilings, and floors are required by section 1018.1. 
e.  Elevator lobby separation as required by section 713.14.1. 
(o)  Section 708 Fire partitions, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    708.10 Tenant separations. All tenants shall be separated by a minimum of a one-hour fire rated envelope. This shall include, but not be limited to, floors, walls, and ceilings. 
(p)  Section [F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more, of the International Building Code, is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    [F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more. Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with NFPA 72. 
(q)  Section [F] 907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
4.  In each private garage attached to and serving a dwelling unit. 
(r)  Section 1008.1.9.3 Locks and latches, of the International Building Code, is amended by deleting item 2 in its entirety. 
(s)  Section 1009.16.1 Roof access, of the International Building Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    1009.16.1.1 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment and appliances requiring access are installed on roofs or elevated structures, such access shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access, the extent of which shall be from grade or floor level to the equipment and appliances' level serving space. Such access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than 24 inches high or walking on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33 percent slope). 
    Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof edge not less than 30 inches (762 mm). 
b.  Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches (356 mm) on center. 
c.  Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than six inches (152 mm) deep. 
d.  There shall be a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) between rails. 
e.  Rungs shall have a minimum 0.75-inch (19 mm) diameter and be capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load. 
f.  Ladders over 30 feet (9,144 mm) in height shall be provided with offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds per square foot (488.2 kg/m 2 ). 
g.  Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means. 
    Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and shall have railings as required for service platforms. 
(t)  Section 1013.2 Where required, of the International Building Code, is amended by deleting the first sentence and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    "Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces or ground surfaces, mezzanine, equipment platforms, retaining walls, stairways, ramps, landings and any other locations that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below." 
(Code 2007, § 12-102; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-21. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-103; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-22. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Building Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-104; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-23. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Building Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Building Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Building Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-105; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-24. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-106; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-25-105-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 

Sec. 105-52. - International Residential Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix J, Appendix K, Appendix M, Appendix N, Appendix P, and Appendix Q, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Residential Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1101; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-53. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Residential Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Whenever reference is made to the term "board of appeals," such shall be deemed to refer to the town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners. 
(c)  The International Residential Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    All building permits shall expire according to the following schedule (from the date the permit is issued): 
New construction One year Additions 180 days Accessory structures 180 days Decks/porches 60 days Swimming pools 60 days New gas/mechanical 60 days Moving structures 30 days Demolition 30 days Mechanical changeouts 30 days  
(d)  The International Residential Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    "No building permit shall be issued unless and until an access permit as otherwise required by ordinance of the Town of Farragut has been issued." 
    "No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, if the matter for which application has been filed, if completed, would be in violation of any ordinance of the Town of Farragut. No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, who, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the Town of Farragut, nor shall any permit be issued for a premise that, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinance of the Town of Farragut." 
(e)  Section R101.1 Title, of the International Residential Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(f)  Section R113 Violations, of the International Residential Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    "The building official may also revoke a permit or approval if a permit holder shall, subsequent to the issuance of such permit or approval, violate the terms of the International Residential Code or the provisions of any other pertinent sections of the Farragut Municipal Code or ordinances of the Town of Farragut." 
(g)  Section R302.5.1 Opening protection, of the International Residential Code, is amended by deleting the phrase "equipped with a self-closing device." 
(h)  Section R303.4 Mechanical ventilation, of the International Residential Code, is amended by adding the phrase "or approved air exchanger on the HVAC system which will make up the required ventilation." 
(i)  Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems, of the International Residential Code, is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required if a two-hour fire separation resistance wall exists between units, if such walls do not contain plumbing and/or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the common wall. 
(j)  Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems, of the International Residential Code, is amended by deleting it in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required if a two-hour fire separation resistance wall exists between units, if such walls do not contain plumbing and/or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the common wall. 
(k)  Section R319 Site address, of the International Residential Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    Posting of designated street address. 
a.  All buildings (excluding accessory buildings) shall display the number assigned by the county addressing division to the frontage on which the building's front entrance is located. If a building is occupied by more than one residential unit, each separate outside entrance shall display a separate number. 
b.  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each building or each entrance to such building shall be placed either over or at the side of the main entrance of said building or upon the front of any porch or stoop thereof or over or at the side of any gateway leading thereto, or upon the steps thereof in such manner that the same may be plainly seen and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located and in such manner that the same shall not be hidden from view by any trees or shrubs or other obstruction. 
c.  If a unit does not allow ready or easy visibility of its address numerals from the street due to excessive set back, shrubbery or color, an address identification marker shall be placed near the entrance or driveway to the parcel. Such identification marker shall not exceed a total area of two square feet. 
d.  All building numbers displayed shall be permanent, legible figures not less than four inches nor more than six inches high and of a color contrasting to the building background. 
e.  In addition to the required assigned numerals on all buildings and the required address identification markers for units with excessive setbacks and/or visibility problems it shall also be permissible to have property address numerals painted on the curb in front of a lot. Such curbside designation shall be positioned in front of the unit or between the driveway and half the distance of the frontage along the public street. 
    All painted numerals displayed on curbs shall be permanent, legible black colored numerals, which are no more nor less than four inches high, on a white contrasting background. All paint used shall be of alkyd resin, Type F traffic paint, or an equal approved by the town's engineering department. Numerals shall have glass beads or similar materials for reflective purposes. 
f.  A proper address shall be required for any permit issuance. Final approval of a certificate of occupancy of a building erected or repaired shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with this section. 
(l)  Section R501.3 Fire protection of floors, 2, of the International Residential Code, is amended by deleting the phrase "or fuel-fired appliances." 
(Code 2007, § 12-1102; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 16-22, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2016) 
Sec. 105-54. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Residential Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1103; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-55. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Residential Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1104; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-56. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Residential Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Residential Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Residential Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1105; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-57. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1106; Ord. No. 13-12, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-58-105-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE BUILDING AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 105-88. - Accessible and Usable Building and Facilities adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of allowing a person with a physical disability to independently get to, enter, and use a site, facility, building or element, the Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities ICC A117.1-2009, ANSI American National Standard, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the accessibility code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-901; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-89. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the accessibility code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-902; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-90. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the accessibility code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-903; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-91. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the accessibility code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the accessibility code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the accessibility code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-904; Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-92-105-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 5. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 105-111. - National Electrical code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purposes of regulating the installation of electrical components, apparatus, wiring, and other applications of electrical components, within the municipality, the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this Code and is hereinafter referred to as the electrical code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-301; Ord. No. 96-17, 6-1996; Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-112. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, one copy of the electrical code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-302; Ord. No. 96-17, 6-1996) 
Sec. 105-113. - Modifications. 
    Within the electrical code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the office of the state fire marshal. 
(Code 2007, § 12-303; Ord. No. 96-17, 6-1996; Ord. No. 00-09, 4-2000) 
Sec. 105-114. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of the electrical code as herein adopted by reference. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 4-304; Code 2007, § 12-304) 
Sec. 105-115. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the electrical code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the electrical code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the electrical code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-305; Ord. No. 00-09, 4-2000) 
Secs. 105-116-105-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 6. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 105-144. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of buildings for the effective use and conservation of energy over the useful life of each building, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Energy and Conservation Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-601; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-145. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section C101.1 Title, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  Section R101.1 Title, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(d)  Section C109 Board of Appeals, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    C109.4 Membership. The town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    C109.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    C109.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    C109.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    C109.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    C109.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    C109.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    C109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(e)  Section R109 Board of Appeals, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    R109.4 Membership. The town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    R109.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    R109.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    R109.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    R109.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    R109.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    R109.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    R109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(f)  Section R402 Building thermal envelope, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by adding the following infiltration rates: 
    Blower Door-Air changes per hour at 50 pascals upon adoption shall be a maximum of six. 
    Blower Door-Air changes per hour at 50 pascals after 7/1/2014 shall be a maximum of four. 
    Blower Door-Air changes per hour at 50 pascals after 7/1/2015 shall be a maximum of three. 
(g)  Section R402 Building thermal envelope, Table R402.1.1 "Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component," of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by replacing "20 or 13 + 5" in the Wood Frame R-Value column with R-13 for "Climate Zone 4 except Marine." 
(h)  Section R402.4.1.2 Testing, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    Third party verifiers/testers shall be certified by a town recognized professional certifying agency, such as ENERGYSTAR, RESNET, or BPI. 
(i)  Section R403 Systems, of the International Energy Conservation Code, is amended by adding the following: 
    Duct leakage shall be satisfied by meeting one of the following options: 
Option A: Total Duct Leakage at Rough-In: 
Upon Adoption Total duct leakage shall be less than or equal to 6 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area and only after all ducts and air handlers have been installed. Leakage limits shall be assessed on a per-system, rather than per-home, basis. 07/01/2014 Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 5 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area. 07/01/2015 Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 4 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area.  
Option B: Total Duct Leakage at Post Construction 
Upon Adoption Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 12 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area and only after all components of the system have been installed (e.g., air handler and register grilles). Leakage limits shall be assessed on a per-system, rather than per-home, basis. 07/01/2014 Total duct leakage shall be less than or equal to 8 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area. 07/01/2015 Total duct leakage shall be less than or equal to 4 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area.  
Option C: Duct Leakage to Outdoors at Post Construction 
Upon Adoption Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 8 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area and only after all components of the system have been installed (e.g., air handler and register grilles). Leakage limits shall be assessed on a per-system, rather than per-home, basis. 07/01/2014 Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 6 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area. 07/01/2015 Duct leakage to outdoors shall be less than or equal to 4 CFM 25 pascals per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area.  
(Code 2007, § 12-602; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-146. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-603; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-147. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Energy Conservation Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-604; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-148. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Energy Conservation Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Energy Conservation Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-605; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-149. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-606; Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-150-105-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 7. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 105-167. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating fuel gas piping installations, including repairs, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and the appurtenances thereto, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Fuel Gas Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-401; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-168. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  The International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by deleting section 109 (IFGC), Means of appeal, in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section 109. Means of appeal. 
    109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
    109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    109.4 Membership. The Farragut Board of Plumbing and Gas/Mechanical Examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    109.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    109.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    109.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    109.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    109.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    109.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(d)  Section 403.5 Metallic tubing, of the International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by adding thereto said paragraph as follows: 
    "The use of copper tubing is prohibited, except for outside, underground use." 
(e)  Section 403.5.2 Copper and brass tubing, of the International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by deleting the same in its entirety. 
(f)  Section 403.5.3 Aluminum tubing, of the International Fuel Gas Code, is amended by deleting the same in its entirety. 
(Code 2007, § 12-402; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-169. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-403; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-170. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Fuel Gas Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-404; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-171. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Fuel Gas Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Fuel Gas Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-405; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-172. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-406; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-173-105-197. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 105-198. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating mechanical installations, including alterations, repairs, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and the appurtenances thereto, the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Mechanical Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1001; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-199. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Mechanical Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  The International Mechanical Code, is amended by deleting section 109, Means of appeal, in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section 109. Means of appeal. 
    109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
    109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    109.4 Membership. The Farragut Board of Plumbing and Gas/Mechanical Examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    109.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    109.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within ten days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    109.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    109.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    109.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    109.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(d)  Section 606 Smoke detection systems control, of the International Mechanical Code, is amended by adding a new section as follows: 
    Section 606.5 Systems with a capacity of 2,000 CFM or less. Recirculating air systems with a fan capacity of 2,000 cfm (0.9 m 3 /s) or less, but serving an area used for egress, shall have an automatic shutdown. Automatic shutdown may be by means of an approved smoke detector placed in the return air stream prior to any exhausting from the building or mixing with the fresh air makeup. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1002; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-200. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1003; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-201. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Mechanical Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1004; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-202. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Mechanical Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Mechanical Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1005; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-203. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1006; Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-204-105-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 9. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 105-230. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of regulating plumbing installations, including repairs, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and the appurtenances thereto, the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, and Appendix F, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Plumbing Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-201; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-231. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Plumbing Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  The International Plumbing Code, is amended by deleting section 109, Means of appeal, in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section 109. Means of appeal. 
    109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    109.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
    109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    109.4 Membership. The town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    109.5 Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    109.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    109.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    109.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    109.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    109.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    109.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(Code 2007, § 12-202; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-232. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-203; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-233. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Plumbing Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-204; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-234. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Plumbing Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Plumbing Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-205; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-235. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-206; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-236-105-263. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 10. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 105-264. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and each and all the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix A, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-501; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-265. - Modifications. 
(a)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Property Maintenance Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(b)  Whenever reference is made to the "board of appeals," such shall be deemed to refer to the town Board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners. 
(c)  Section 111.2.1, Alternate members, of the International Property Maintenance Code, is amended by deleting the same in its entirety. 
(d)  Section 302.4, Weeds, of the International Property Maintenance Code, is amended by deleting the first sentence in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. 
(Code 2007, § 12-502; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-266. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-503; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-267. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Property Maintenance Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Property Maintenance Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-504; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-268-105-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 11. - SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 

Sec. 105-298. - International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of protection for public health, welfare, and safety by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction, or installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this Code and hereinafter referred to as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-801; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-299. - Modifications. 
(a)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is amended by establishing the permit fees in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Section 101.1 Title, of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is amended by inserting the phrase "Town of Farragut" for NAME OF JURISDICTION. 
(c)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is amended by deleting section 108, Means of appeal, in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    Section 108. Means of appeal. 
    108.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    108.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. 
    108.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    108.4 Membership. The town board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall serve as the board of appeals. 
    108.5. Application. Application to board of appeals shall be made prior to commencement of construction. 
    108.6 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
    108.7 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
    108.7.1 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
    108.8 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of the majority of membership. 
    108.8.1 Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
    108.9 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(d)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is amended by deleting section 305.4, Structure wall as a barrier, in its entirety and substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    T.C.A. §§ 68-14-801-68-14-807, also known as "Katie Beth's Law," shall apply. 
(Code 2007, § 12-802; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-300. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-504, one copy of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 edition, has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-803; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-301. - Violation. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-804; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-302. - Presumed certification. 
    Any person, corporation, or entity, who accepts or charges a fee or compensation of any kind for the accomplishment of any act covered under the provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall, by the acceptance of such fee or compensation, be presumed to have certified simultaneously therewith that all such activity performed is in full compliance with the terms of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. Breach of the terms of such certification shall give rise to a private cause of action in favor of the aggrieved party against the party who accepts or charges the fee or compensation, as well as and in addition to any remedies enforceable by the municipality under the terms of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code or otherwise. 
(Code 2007, § 12-805; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-303. - Repeated inspections. 
(a)  A permit holder is required to contact the town office to request required inspections at such time as the construction is at the appropriate stage for the inspection to be completed. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have the appropriate construction and improvements in place at the time a request for inspection is made. When a request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, a penalty fee shall be assessed. If a second request for inspection is made and the codes official finds that the required construction and/or improvements are inadequate to perform the required inspection, an additional penalty fee shall be assessed. The purpose of these reinspection fees is to recover costs incurred for additional follow-up inspections. The penalty fee shall be collected prior to scheduling another inspection and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Said penalty fee shall be assessed when the permit holder fails to have the required construction and improvements in place in order for the codes official to perform the appropriate requested inspection. The permit holder shall be responsible for notifying the town at such time as he is ready for the follow-up inspection to be undertaken. 
(Code 2007, § 12-806; Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Secs. 105-304-105-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 12. - AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE 

Sec. 105-325. - Amusement device code adopted. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by T.C.A. §§ 6-54-501-6-54-506, and for the purpose of ensuring and improving the public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, and safety to life and property hazards incident to the installation, construction, alteration, repair, removal, and use of amusement rides and devices, the Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, as prepared and adopted by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the amusement device code. 
(Code 2007, § 12-701; Ord. No. 96-22, 6-1996) 
Sec. 105-326. - Modifications. 
(a)  Whenever the amusement device code refers to the "chief appointing authority," the "administrative authority," or the "chief administrator," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the governing body of the municipality. 
    Within the amusement device code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the Town of Farragut who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
(b)  Sections 108.1 through 108.5 of the amusement device code are amended by deleting said sections in its entirety and by substituting in lieu thereof the following: 
    "Section 108.1 Appointment. The board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners shall act and serve in the dual capacity as the board of adjustments and appeals under the terms of this code." 
(Code 2007, § 12-702; Ord. No. 96-22, 6-1996; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 5-10-2007) 
Sec. 105-327. - Available in recorder's office. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. § 6-54-502, one copy of the amusement device code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. 
(Code 2007, § 12-703; Ord. No. 96-22, 6-1996) 
Sec. 105-328. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the amusement device code as herein adopted by reference and modified. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 12-704; Ord. No. 96-22, 6-1996) 
Secs. 105-329-105-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 13. - LICENSING OF PLUMBING AND GAS/MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of contractors, T.C.A. § 62-6-101 et seq. 

Sec. 105-360. - Authority. 
    This article shall be known as the "The Plumbing and Gas/Mechanical Licensing Ordinance of the Town of Farragut." 
(Code 2007, § 12-1201; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-361. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to secure the protection of the general public safety and welfare, by regulating the installation and maintenance of all plumbing and gas/mechanical work in the town. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1202; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-362. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to every plumbing and heating/ventilation and air conditioning installation, including alterations, repairs, equipment, construction and/or appurtenances thereto, within the town. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1203; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-363. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners created by chapter 105. 
    Gas/mechanical contracting means the practice of installing gas and/or mechanical materials and equipment in accordance with the town's adopted codes and ordinances. 
    Gas/mechanical contractor means a person who has been issued such license by the town. 
    Plumbing contracting means the practice of installing plumbing materials and fixtures in accordance with the town's adopted codes and ordinances. 
    Plumbing contractor means a person who has been issued such license by the town. 
    Plumbing or gas/mechanical permit means the permit that is the required authorization for work to proceed at the location and under the conditions described in the permit. 
    Qualifying party means an individual who has taken and passed the required plumbing or gas/mechanical examination from the appropriate examining authority. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1204; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-364. - Administration. 
    The town administrator or his designee shall enforce the provisions of this article, and such persons, consistent with any constitutional limitations, may enter any building, structure, or premises in the town to perform any duty imposed by this article. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1205; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-365. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the town charged with the duty of enforcing this article, except one whose connection is as a member of the board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners or of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of plumbing or gas/mechanical installations or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of the building involved. No such officer or employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the town. 
(b)  Every person engaged in the business of plumbing or gas/mechanical contracting in the town shall present evidence of general liability insurance and/or assurance with coverage in an amount equal to or greater than the value of the work being performed, with a minimum of $300,000.00. 
(c)  Every person engaged in the business of plumbing or gas/mechanical contracting in the town shall present evidence of workman's compensation insurance in compliance with state regulations. 
(d)  All new plumbing or gas/mechanical work and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, shall be inspected to ensure compliance with all of the requirements of the most recently adopted code. 
(e)  When any part of a plumbing or gas/mechanical installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the work shall notify the town administrator or his designee and such parts of the installation shall not be concealed until they have been inspected and approved by the town administrator or his designee. On large installations where concealment of parts of work proceeds continuously, the person installing the work shall notify the town administrator or his designee so that he can make inspections periodically during the progress of the work. 
(f)  Upon the completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of a permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the person installing the same to notify the town administrator or his designee who shall inspect the completed installation. 
(g)  If the completed plumbing or gas/mechanical installation inspected pursuant to this article is found to be fully in compliance with the provisions of this article, the town administrator or his designee shall issue a certificate of approval. 
(h)  Upon notice from the town administrator or his designee that work on any permitted plumbing or gas/mechanical installation is being done contrary to the provisions of the adopted code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of such property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, oral notice given by the town administrator or his designee shall be sufficient, but it shall be immediately followed by written notice. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1206; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-2005) 
Sec. 105-366. - Board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners. 
(a)  Board membership. 
(1)  There is hereby established in the town a board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners, which shall consist of seven members. Such board shall be composed of one member holding a current and valid plumbing contractor license from the town and one member holding a current and valid gas/mechanical contractor license from the town, if such qualified applicants are available, and the remaining members from the public at large, including persons who possess valid plumbing or gas/mechanical licenses from other jurisdictions. 
(2)  Board members shall not own or be employees of the same contracting corporation, firm, partnership, or individual employer. 
(3)  Members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(4)  Terms of office for board members shall be three years. In case of resignation, death, or removal from office, another appointment shall be made to finish out the unexpired term of office of the former member. Members of the board may be removed for cause by the board of mayor and aldermen at any time. 
Attendance at scheduled meetings is a requirement for board membership. Unexcused absence from three meetings in any one year may be cause for removal from the board by the board of mayor and aldermen. Illness, job requirements, and military duty shall be considered excused absences. 
(b)  General powers and duties. The board shall recommend standards and procedures for the qualification, examination, and licensing of plumbing and gas/mechanical contractors under the provisions of this article. Such standards and procedures shall be submitted to the board of mayor and aldermen for approval and authorization to implement. The board shall exercise the powers and perform the duties provided for in this article and shall have such other duties and powers as are necessary to carry out the intent and provisions of this article. 
(c)  Examination of applicants. The board shall use the Block and Associates Competency Examination for the plumbing and gas/mechanical construction industry or any other nationally recognized examination designed to measure competency in the profession as the standard written examination. All exams shall be proctored by the testing agency. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1207; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999; Ord. No. 02-11, 8-2002; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-2005) 
Sec. 105-367. - Licenses for plumbing and gas/mechanical contractors. 
(a)  Application. Any person or entity desiring a license required by this article shall apply therefor to the board, in writing using the forms provided by the town, stating the type of license certificate applied for, his name and place of business, and the name of the supervisor of work to be done under the license. 
(b)  Qualifications of applicant. Subject to the authority of the board to set higher standards with board of mayor and aldermen approval, the following minimum standards and qualifications shall be met before the board grants a license required by this article. 
(1)  Plumbing contractor license. The applicant must establish a regular ongoing place of business, supervise or perform plumbing work, have a minimum of five years total full time work experience in the plumbing craft, have demonstrated competency, honesty, and integrity in the performance of plumbing work, have obtained a score established by the board's regulations on the written examination prescribed in this article, and must provide evidence of honesty and integrity in his former dealings with the public as demonstrated by at least three favorable work references from former clients or employers. Such clients or employers shall be selected at random by the board from a list submitted by the applicant of clients and employers for whom applicant has performed plumbing installation or repair for a period of two years. The applicant must have and keep current the bond and insurance specified in this article. 
(2)  Gas/mechanical contractor license. The applicant must establish a regular ongoing place of business, supervise or perform gas/mechanical work, have a minimum of five years total full time work experience in the gas/mechanical craft, have demonstrated competency, honesty and integrity in the performance of gas/mechanical work, have obtained a score established by the board's regulations on the written examination prescribed in this article, and must provide evidence of honesty and integrity in his former dealings with the public by at least three favorable work references from former clients or employers. Such clients or employers shall be selected at random by the board from a list submitted by the applicant of clients and employers for whom applicant has performed gas/mechanical installation or repair for a period of two years. The applicant must have and keep current the bond and insurance specified in this article. 
(c)  Public hearing on application for plumbing or gas/mechanical license. The board shall conduct a public hearing before a license is issued under this article to a plumbing or gas/mechanical contractor. Such hearing shall be announced in the official town newspaper a minimum of one week before the date of the scheduled hearing. The announcement shall state the time, date, and place of hearing and the name of the contractor in words as follows: 
    "On (date) there will be a hearing before the board of plumbing and gas/mechanical examiners of the Town of Farragut on a petition for a license to operate as a plumbing or gas/mechanical contractor, whichever the case may be, in the Town of Farragut. Any person who as a result of former dealings with (applicant's name), has reason to doubt his integrity or honesty or has a complaint about workmanship, is urged to come forward at the above time and place and announce such information. Evidence reviewed in the public hearing will be considered in determining the competency, integrity, and honesty of such applicant." 
(d)  Obtaining a license. An applicant for a license under this article must obtain the license within 30 days after successfully meeting all licensing requirements or the application shall be null and void, provided, however, in the event of possible extenuating circumstances affecting an individual, a maximum period of 90 days may be allowed for compliance with this article. 
(e)  Fees. No license shall be granted until the fee established in the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the town board of mayor and aldermen has been paid to the town. 
(f)  Issuance. The town administrator or his designee shall issue an appropriate license or certificate under this article to each person, who: 
(1)  Meets the qualifications therefor, pays the necessary fees, and who successfully passes the required examination; or 
(2)  Holds a valid state plumbing or mechanical contractor license which has been issued after May 11, 1992. 
(g)  Issuance by reciprocity. Any person not licensed under this article but who exhibits a valid and effective license issued by a lawfully organized board of licensing examiners or similar licensing body of another city in the United States having a standard of requirements equal to or superior of that of the town, shall be issued a license under this article without an examination, if such person otherwise meets the requirements of this article, for which the town shall collect a fee of $100.00. 
(h)  Contents. Each license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall specify the name of the person who has passed the examination and the name of the company. Such person shall be designated in the license as the qualifying person for all work done under the license. 
(i)  Work authorized. 
(1)  A plumbing contractor's license. A plumbing contractor's license shall entitle the person/entity to whom it is issued to contract for, supervise, and engage in the type of plumbing work described on said license within the town. 
(2)  A gas/mechanical contractor's license. A gas/mechanical contractor's license shall entitle the person/entity to whim it is issued to contract for, supervise, and engage in the type of gas/mechanical work described on said license within the town. 
(j)  Expiration and renewal. All licenses issued by the board under this article shall be issued for a period of 12 months beginning July 1 of each year and shall expire on June 30 of the following year. Licenses may be renewed upon payment of fees prescribed in this article. If the license has not been renewed within one year following the date of expiration, the examination must be taken again. The license must be renewed by the person/entity in whose name it was issued. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1208; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999; Ord. No. 13-13, § 1, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 105-368. - License required. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No person shall engage in the business of installing or altering within the town any plumbing or gas/mechanical devices, equipment, or appliances unless such person shall have received a plumbing or gas/mechanical license according to the type of work engaged in, whichever the case may be, depending upon the type of work contracted and license issued in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Any firm, corporation, or other such legal entity engaged in the plumbing or gas/mechanical business shall have employed a minimum of one qualifying person having a plumbing or gas/mechanical license, depending upon the type of work being engaged in by such firm or corporation, and everyone who does any actual plumbing or gas/mechanical work for such firm or corporation must be licensed or supervised as set forth in this article. 
(3)  When the qualifying person providing technical expertise for plumbing or gas/mechanical contract work for a firm or corporation leaves the firm or corporation, the firm or corporation shall have 90 days to employ another qualifying person. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Any person doing his own work personally in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, and who is the bona fide owner of and occupies or will occupy such dwelling, and who personally purchases all materials and performs all labor in connection therewith, shall not be required to have a license under this article. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this article, nor is it to be construed as exempting any such owner from obtaining a permit, except for minor repairs, and paying the required fees therefor. 
(2)  Apprentices or helpers are not required to have a license under this article. However, they will only be allowed to work for an individual or entity that holds a valid license, depending upon the type of work authorized to be done by such license holder. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1209; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-369. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  The board is hereby authorized to reprimand, suspend for any period up to one year, or to revoke any license issued under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If the license was obtained through nondisclosure or the application contains a statement or misrepresentation of a material fact; 
(2)  If the license holder is determined to have violated a provision of this article where the conduct in such violation constituted a serious threat to the public safety; 
(3)  For repeated violations of this article and the plumbing, gas, and mechanical codes by a license holder. A reprimand or suspension of up to 90 days may be issued for any such violation; 
(4)  For civil fraud or intentional misrepresentation by a license holder in the performance of licensed work for which a license was issued under this article; 
(5)  For allowing another to use the licensee's name to obtain permits; 
(6)  For doing business or work under the license of another or allowing a license to be used by another to do business; or 
(7)  For the license holder not providing job supervision for an apprentice or helper who is performing plumbing or gas/mechanical work at the job site for which the permit was issued, provided that a first offense under this article shall be subject to a reprimand or suspension not to exceed seven days. 
(b)  Before any disciplinary action is taken against a licensee under this article, the licensee shall have notice in writing, enumerating the charges against him, and be entitled to a hearing by the board not sooner than ten days from receipt of such notice. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present relevant testimony, oral or written, shall have the right to cross-examination, and shall have the right to be represented by an attorney. All testimony shall be given under oath. The board shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses for the purpose of hearings on licenses. The decision of the board shall be based upon the evidence produced at the hearing and made a part of the record thereof. 
(c)  Any person may bring a complaint before the board against a licensee for the purpose set forth in this article. If the board finds a complaint provides a reasonable basis to indicate a reason for disciplinary action under this article, a hearing on the license shall be scheduled as set forth in this article. 
(d)  A person whose license has been revoked under this article shall not be permitted to reapply for a period of one year from the date of revocation. With due cause, the board may waive any or all of such waiting period. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1210; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Sec. 105-370. - Work permit. 
(a)  When required. Except as otherwise provided in the plumbing, gas, and mechanical codes, all plumbing or gas/mechanical work performed in the town, including installing, altering, or repairing any plumbing or gas/mechanical devices and equipment, shall be undertaken only after the issuance of a permit by the town administrator or his designee. Emergency repairs and replacements may be made under the condition that a permit shall be obtained within five days calendar days of commencement of work. 
(b)  When not required. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, the term "minor repairs" shall be as defined in the adopted plumbing, gas, and mechanical codes. 
(2)  No permit shall be required for minor maintenance and repair. 
(3)  No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance, or alteration of plumbing or gas/mechanical devices, appliances, or equipment to be installed by or for a public service corporation, for the use of such corporation in the distribution, or metering of services, or for the use of such a corporation in its operations. 
(c)  Who entitled to receive. Permits required by this article shall be issued only to: 
(1)  Licensed plumbing contractors as authorized by this article. 
(2)  Licensed gas/mechanical contractors as authorized by this article. 
(3)  Homeowners doing their own work as authorized by this article. 
(d)  Permit fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate fees have been paid. 
(e)  Effect. A permit issued under this article shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this article, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the town administrator or his designee from thereafter requiring correction of errors in construction, or of violations of this article. 
(f)  Invalidity if work not commenced or is abandoned. A permit issued under this article shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after the time the work is commenced; provided that, for cause, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the town administrator or his designee. 
(g)  Revocation. The town administrator may revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact on which the permit was based, or when the permit has been otherwise erroneously issued. In all such cases, no permit fees shall be refunded. 
(Code 2007, § 12-1211; Ord. No. 99-13, 5-1999) 
Chapter 107 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 107-1-107-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - TOWN CENTER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 107-19. - Definitions. 
    Any word or term not defined within this Code or in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be construed to be used in this chapter as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the town's ordinances or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to it. 
(Code 2007, § 14-302; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-20. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of these regulations is to supplement the zoning district requirements for the town center district (TCD). The purpose of the TCD zoning district is to create a downtown that is a pedestrian-oriented mixed use district. To succeed in the creation and the long term sustainability of such a development, the town recognizes that appearance is important to a healthy mixed use development. The town also understands that there are recognized criteria that should be considered in the design of such a development. The town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) can adequately address height, width, and relationship to the street (setbacks), but roof forms, proportion, composition, rhythm, proportion of openings, materials, and colors cannot be adequately addressed in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(Code 2007, § 14-301; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-21. - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this article. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2007, § 14-310; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-22. - Planning commission. 
    To ensure compliance and coordination of these requirements with the town center district (TCD) zoning district, the requirements of this article shall be included in the site plan for planning commission review and approval. 
(Code 2007, § 14-308; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-23. - Appeals. 
    The board of zoning appeals (BZA) shall serve as the appellate body for this article and have the power to hear and decide appeals of the article. Application for appeal shall follow the procedures established in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(Code 2007, § 14-309; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-24. - Street furniture. 
    Street furniture shall include public elements such as streetlights, benches, trash containers, tree guards, bike racks, above-ground planters, and sculptural pieces and private elements such as news stands, mailboxes, and express delivery service drop-offs. Such furniture should be functional and durable. Functionalism in placement is essential. Pedestrian access to the parking spaces shall not be obstructed. Benches and other street furnishings shall be placed in ways that facilitate use. For example, good seating arrangements include angled configurations that encourage conversation. Seating placed in a manner to create a visual pattern of repetition in the sidewalk will not achieve their functional potential. Public elements of street furniture shall have design coordination and require low maintenance. 
(Code 2007, § 14-303; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-25. - Signs. 
    Signs shall not be required to have a uniformity of appearance. The most important issue in sign design in the TCD district is how an individual sign relates to the building on which it is placed. 
(1)  The following signs are permitted for each first (ground) story tenant space: 
a.  General occupant sign. Any number of wall signs per entrance to the premises, not to exceed a cumulative total of six square feet in size and eight feet in height; 
b.  One address sign per building entrance, not to exceed two square feet; 
c.  Temporary window signs, not to exceed 25 percent of total window area, or ten square feet, whichever is less; 
d.  Real estate sign. One sign, provided it is posted within the window and does not exceed six square feet; 
e.  Perpendicular wall sign. One sign which shall be hung perpendicular to the building, shall not exceed nine square feet, and shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to grade; 
f.  Wall sign. One sign not to exceed a ratio of 0.75 square feet per linear feet of exterior tenant space on which the sign is to be mounted, provided it is integrated with the building architecture; 
g.  Permanent window sign. Allowed only if no wall sign is used. One sign which shall not exceed 12 square feet or 25 percent of the total window area, whichever is less. Sign shall be permanently adhered to the window; 
h.  Architectural design and illumination. Architectural design and illumination shall be in compliance with the town's adopted architectural design standards for signs in the town center. 
(2)  The following signs are permitted for each second, third, and fourth story tenant space: 
a.  Address sign. One address sign per building entrance, not to exceed two square feet. If multiple tenants access through a single door, the address for all the tenants shall be posted on the exterior of the door; 
b.  Door sign. One sign restricted to the street door entrance, not to exceed five square feet; and 
c.  Real estate sign. One sign provided it is posted within the window or on the door, not exceed six square feet. 
No sign shall be internally or externally illuminated. 
(3)  On streets classified as primary within the TCD, two ground-mounted signs shall be permitted at the entrances to the TCD development. Such signs shall advertise the entire development, shall not exceed 40 square feet, shall be set back 20 feet from the right-of-way, shall not exceed six feet in height, and shall be a minimum of 400 feet apart. Such signs may be illuminated. 
(Code 2007, § 14-304; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. 15-10, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-2015) 
Sec. 107-26. - Building construction. 
(a)  A minimum of 75 percent of the exterior wall construction for all structures shall be constructed of face brick. The 75 percent coverage requirement shall be calculated by measuring all facades of the structure, excluding the openings for windows, trim, and doors. Each exterior wall shall maintain the 75 percent minimum coverage with face brick. There shall be no exposed concrete block on any exterior wall. 
(b)  All buildings shall be fire-sprinklered in accordance with adopted fire and building codes and be of noncombustible construction. 
(Code 2007, § 14-305; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-27. - Building facades. 
    All buildings shall consist of the traditional facade, which includes the building cornice, the upper facade, and the storefront. The building cornice serves to visually cap the building, completing its appearance. The upper facade always contains regularly spaced window openings surrounded by decorative details. The storefront shall be designed to be as transparent as possible. This allows a maximum of natural light and relieves the closed-in feeling. It also gives the potential customer a good view into the store (Diagram 1). 
(1)  The building cornice. The building cornice is made of brick, wood, metal or other materials and gives a building roof line a finished look. The cornice prevents the upper facade from falling off into the air. The decorative cornice provides the cap to the building. Flat cornices shall not be permitted. 
(2)  The upper facade. The upper facade includes all upper stories. Each story shall contain regularly spaced window openings surrounded by decorative details. 
(3)  The storefront. A minimum of 75 percent of the street facing building facade between two feet and eight feet in height shall be comprised of clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas. The bottom edge of any window or product display window used to satisfy the transparency standard shall not be more than three feet above the adjacent sidewalk. The product display windows used to satisfy these requirements shall have a minimum height of four feet and be internally lighted. Such internal lights shall not be directed toward the sidewalk or street. The storefront is composed primarily of a front door and large display windows surrounded by enframing piers and storefront cornice (transom windows, display windows). To emphasize the feeling of containment, a storefront might be set back slightly (six inches to a foot) from the front of the building. To welcome customers, consider a recessed entry. The configuration keeps the display windows close to the sidewalk and emphasizes the door. Storefronts associated with tenant spaces located at building corners are required to meet this on only one street facing facade. The street facing building facade that does not have the storefront must provide windows or some other type architectural feature so the wall is not blank (Diagram 2). 


(4)  Doors and entrances. Each different building facade shall have a primary entrance door facing a public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement. Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses. 
(Code 2007, § 14-306; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 107-28. - Block view. 
    All buildings/facades in a block shall be viewed as a whole. The size and proportion of window and door openings shall be similar to those on surrounding facades. The same applies to the ratio of window area to solid wall for the facade as a whole. The roof forms and colors shall create a rhythmic harmony in appearance. This does not mean to imply all are to be the same, but that all are to flow and follow the ten basic criteria that should be considered in the overall design of the development: height, width, relationship to the street, roof forms, proportion, composition, rhythm, proportion of openings, materials, and colors (Diagrams 3, 4 and 5). 
(1)  Height. Buildings/facades should have similar height. A four-story building should not be located immediately adjacent to a much shorter two-story building. The height variations should flow up and down gradually without drastic drop offs. At the same time, there should be varying heights, the same height for the entire block length appears contrived and sterile. 
(2)  Width. Facade widths should not vary drastically. A narrow facade should not be sandwiched between two much wider facades and a wide facade should not be sandwiched between two much narrower facades. The width variations should flow up and down. 
(3)  Relationship to street. The buildings/facades should have consistent setbacks with that of its neighboring buildings/facades. A building/facade recessed to the maximum setback should not be located in the middle of a row of buildings/facades located at the minimum setback. 
(4)  Roof forms. The form of the roof and building cornice should be similar to those on adjacent facades. 
(5)  Proportion. The characteristic proportion, the relationship between height and width, should be respected. The block should look proportional, not disjointed. 
(6)  Composition. The composition for the buildings/facades (i.e., the organization of its parts) should be similar to that of surrounding building/facades. 
(7)  Rhythm. Rhythms that carry throughout the block, such as window spacing, should be incorporated into the facades. 
(8)  Proportion of openings. The size and number of window and door openings should be similar to those on surrounding facades. The same applies to the ratio of window area to solid wall for the facade as a whole. 
(9)  Materials. Facades should be composed of materials that complement adjacent facades. Individual facades should not stand out against others. 
(10)  Colors. The colors of the buildings/facades should tie in to its neighbors. 



(Code 2007, § 14-307; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 10-25-2007) 
Secs. 107-29-107-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - SINKHOLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, adopted November 9, 2017, amended article 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 3, §§ 107-60-107-68, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 05-13, 7-2005; Code 2007, §§ 14-401-14-409; Ord. No. 11-23, §§ 1-3, 12-8-2011. 

Sec. 107-60. - Short title. 
    This article will be known as the "sinkhole ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-61. - Definitions. 
(1)  For the purpose of this article, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is permissive. Any word or term not defined within the municipal code or in chapter 2, Definitions, in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, shall be construed to be used in this article as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the town's ordinances or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to it. 
(2)  The following words and terms are defined as follows: 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Karst. A region made up of porous limestone or other carbonate rock containing deep fissures and characterized by sinkholes, underground caves, and streams. 
    Sinkhole. A naturally occurring depression characterized by closed contours on a topographic map, with or without a visible throat. Also included are manmade depressional areas having no visible outlet, which do not retain water for any significant length of time during rainy periods and areas determined to be sinkholes by a qualified professional in accordance with subsection 107-67 (3) below. 
    Sinkhole area. The area including the sinkhole and 50 feet from the sinkhole lip elevation. 
    Sinkhole drainage area . The land area around a sinkhole that contributes surface drainage to it. 
    Sinkhole elevation. The lowest elevation point in the sinkhole. 
    Sinkhole floodplain elevation. The elevation at the sinkhole lip. 
    Sinkhole lip elevation. The highest closed contour elevation of a sinkhole. 
    Sinkhole throat. The passageway between the sinkhole and the subsurface groundwater system. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-62. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-2-201, delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-63. - Need. 
    Certain areas of the town and surrounding areas drain exclusively or predominantly to sinkhole systems. As such, these sinkhole systems must remain available for the temporary storage and drainage of surface runoff in a manner similar to established riparian floodways and floodplains. Sinkhole areas are also known to be unstable for construction and drainage. Structures placed on soil foundations in sinkhole areas may be subject to flooding, settling, or collapse. 
    It is not possible to determine a generalized rule for sinkhole capacity. Each sinkhole behaves differently from all other sinkholes, and the discharge from each is a function of unknown subterranean stream configurations. Sinkholes must not be used as an integral part of the drainage system unless no other outlet is feasible, as shown in a study by a licensed engineer with expertise in hydrology and approved by the town engineer. 
    Sinkholes are known to be part of fragile drainage systems which discharge directly to the subsurface aquifer. Any substance or object, including construction siltation, placed within a sinkhole has the potential of clogging the throat of the sinkhole and/or polluting groundwater. Any permitted disturbance in or around a sinkhole shall be in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-64. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect existing and future development from flooding due to sinkhole overflow and backup; to protect underground drainage systems from clogging due to sediment and debris; to protect the structural integrity of buildings, roads, pedestrian facilities, and utilities built near sinkholes; and to work with the State of Tennessee to protect groundwater resources from contamination due to pollutant runoff into sinkholes. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-65. - Appeals. 
(1)  Once a sinkhole determination has been made and the sinkhole(s) have been identified on a plat, site plan, or any other construction document, the board of zoning appeals (BZA) shall serve as the appellate body for this article. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance to the Town of Farragut. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance request. The applicant shall have the burden of proof for justifying any variance from the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Whenever the town's staff and/or planning commission determines that an appeal from any part of this article involves potential drainage concerns or related impacts to water quality, it shall first be submitted to the town's stormwater advisory committee for review and recommendations to the BZA. 
(4)  When the BZA is considering a request for a variance, they may require additional information such as, but not limited to, site design modifications, to more fully evaluate the request. 
(5)  Standards for variances. In granting a variance, the BZA shall ascertain that the following criteria are met: 
a.  The granting of any variance is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the surrounding area, detrimental to the public welfare, or in conflict with the town's plans or policies for development. 
b.  Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or conditions exist (such as topography, or siting) fully described in the findings of the BZA, that do not apply in the surrounding area. 
c.  For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the BZA, the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of his/her land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance. 
d.  Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
e.  If a property's size or shape is found to be the grounds for the variance, the property must be a "lot of record" and have totally separate ownership from the adjoining parcels. 
(6)  In the exercise of its approval of a variance, the BZA may impose any such conditions as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-66. - Appeals of decisions. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the town may appeal any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the town to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Tennessee. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-67. - Developmental requirements. 
(1)  General site controls and restraints. The developer is responsible for consulting with any unit of government that would have requirements applicable to the development of the subject tract and the area surrounding it. The developer shall become acquainted with the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, driveways and other access ways ordinance, stormwater ordinance, tree protection ordinance, this article, and other ordinances, regulations and codes which regulate the development of land in the town. Further, the developer shall consult with the town regarding all applicable review policies and procedures precedent to the submission of any site plan, subdivision plat, or land disturbance permit application. 
(2)  Sinkhole and related feature identification . All identifiable closed contour depressions, sinkhole related features, and springs or cave openings shall be located and shown on site plans, subdivision plats, and other development related plans. The developer shall, at a minimum, utilize available and required topographic survey information, United States Geological Survey (USGS) information, and a field (on the ground) site inspection of the subject property to locate the above noted features. 
(3)  Dispute of sinkhole-Determination. Where a developer disputes that an area contains a sinkhole(s), a detailed site reconnaissance and evaluation shall be conducted by a State licensed professional geologist or geotechnical engineer having experience and expertise with sinkholes. This professional shall be recognized and approved by the town. The professional shall perform whatever evaluations deemed necessary to establish whether a sinkhole(s) exists on the site. The findings of the professional shall be presented to the developer, the town, and the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation for final disposition. The burden of proof is on the developer to disprove the existence of sinkholes. Once a sinkhole determination has been made, the sinkhole(s) shall be indicated on all preliminary plats, final plats, site plans, or any other construction document. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Sec. 107-68. - General requirements. 
(1)  Placing substances and objects in sinkholes. No person shall place or cause to be placed any substances or objects, other than stormwater runoff, in any sinkhole or sinkhole drainage area in such a way so as to allow such substances or objects to be washed into a sinkhole or sinkhole throat during storm events. 
(2)  Filling or obstructing sinkhole drainage outlets and springs . No person shall fill or obstruct the drainage outlet from a sinkhole or system of sinkholes; or fill over a sinkhole outlet, spring, or cave opening without approval from the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Division of Water Supply and Division of Water Pollution and the Town of Farragut. 
(3)  Filling sinkholes . Except as provided below, no fill shall be placed, and no construction shall occur below a sinkhole's lip elevation. Identified sinkholes should be avoided by design and separated from construction activities, except as provided for in this article (Sinkhole Ordinance). 
    The limited filling of sinkholes may be permitted by the town upon a finding that: 
a)  The avoidance of a sinkhole is clearly not possible given existing conditions, for example when widening an existing collector or arterial street. The town's staff may seek additional review and approval from the planning commission and the stormwater advisory committee whenever they determine that the circumstances warrant. 
b)  A sinkhole is identified during or after approved site construction activities, the town determines that it was not reasonably identifiable prior to construction using standard practices, and development activities have progressed to the point that redesigning to avoid filling the sinkhole is shown to be impracticable and fully documented by the developer. The town's staff may seek additional review and approval from the planning commission and the stormwater advisory committee whenever they determine that the circumstances warrant. 
c)  The planning commission has determined that such fill and construction is appropriate to advance a competing and adopted public policy, plan, or ordinance; is related and proportional to the public interests involved; and avoidance of the sinkhole is not reasonable given the specifics of the site and surrounding area. For example, the planning commission may permit the limited filling of a sinkhole area to facilitate the construction of a critical walkway extension to further the town's adopted connectivity goals. 
    In all cases where fill or construction is permitted below the sinkhole lip elevation the following shall apply: 
a)  Any permitted fill and construction shall be limited to the minimum necessary to carry out the project. 
b)  The town may require a developer to prepare alternative designs that avoid the sinkhole and evaluate their feasibility. 
c)  A study and sinkhole management plan shall be prepared by a state-licensed geotechnical engineer to ensure the structural stability of the proposed fill and/or construction area. The plan and study shall identify all tests that will be completed to determine subsurface conditions. It shall also include recommended mitigation actions that shall be implemented. 
d)  All sinkhole related plans and activities shall be coordinated with the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. All required state or other permits shall be obtained prior to approval by the town. 
e)  All related plans, studies, and permits shall be reviewed by the town's engineer and other applicable staff prior to any filling or construction within a sinkhole. The town may further impose appropriate additional conditions and restrictions intended to mitigate impacts related to any such permitted fill or construction. 
(4)  Stormwater runoff into sinkholes . All persons draining stormwater runoff into sinkholes shall coordinate with the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Division of Water Supply and Division of Water Pollution to ensure appropriate compliance with applicable provisions. Every effort shall be made to prevent changes in the volume and rate of runoff into sinkholes from preconstruction levels to post construction levels. Copies of approved permits and any pertinent site-specific provisions shall be submitted to the town prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
(5)  Disturbance in sinkhole drainage areas . The immediate area around a sinkhole shall be disturbed as little as possible. Adequate sediment and erosion control measures shall be put in place prior to any disturbance. The use of mechanized grading equipment near the sinkhole throat shall be avoided. All use of explosives shall be in compliance with the state fire marshal's office, and shall be avoided whenever possible. The underground system of caves and streams is dynamic and explosions in the vicinity can alter or block underground drainage passage ways. 
(6)  Building construction in sinkhole areas and sinkhole drainage areas . Sinkhole areas are known to be unstable for construction. Structures placed on soil foundations in sinkhole areas may be subject to both settling and collapse of the sinkhole. Uncontrolled fill placement may present additional settlement hazards. Mitigation of these possible undesirable consequences shall, at a minimum, be addressed as follows: 
    All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the sinkhole lip elevation unless at the time of sinkhole identification and determination during the platting or site planning process the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission finds: 
(a)  That the applicant provides sufficient and proper evidence for the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission to determine that there is no danger other than that which would normally be encountered in the construction of a similar building in other areas; 
(b)  That the drainage function of the sinkhole will not be compromised by the construction within said 50 foot line; 
(c)  That there will be no hazard to groundwater; and 
(d)  That the applicant has obtained all necessary permits necessary from the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
    As part of the evaluation involving (a) thru (d) above, the planning commission may require the submittal of all necessary engineering and scientific studies to document any findings or determinations made under this subsection. Including but not limited to geotechnical analysis, structural engineering reports, and drainage or flood studies. 
    A structural engineer must approve all building foundations constructed within sinkhole areas; except where the planning commission has reduced the required building setback in accordance with this subsection (subsection 6). 
    The sinkhole elevation, the sinkhole lip elevation, and the minimum building setback from the sinkhole lip elevation shall be indicated on all preliminary plats, final plats and site plans. 
    The finished floor elevation (FFE) of any habitable structure located within a sinkhole drainage area or a sinkhole area, as defined by this article, shall be at least one foot above the sinkhole floodplain (lip) elevation; except within any portion of a sinkhole area that does not also fall within the drainage area (i.e. where a building site is located downslope and below the sinkhole). In such areas, the FFE shall be at least one foot above the highest adjacent grade. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall also be located in accordance with this elevation standard. The sinkhole floodplain elevation and corresponding FFE (minimum floor elevation MFE) shall be indicated on all preliminary plats, final plats, and site plans; along with a corresponding explanatory note. Verification of this elevation must be submitted to the town. 
(7)  Easements . When appropriate, sinkholes shall be designated as drainage easements on all preliminary and final plats. All sinkholes, whether designated as a drainage easement or not, shall be identified on preliminary and final plats. If feasible, sinkholes shall be placed on community open space land. 
(Ord. No. 17-15 , § 1, 11-9-2017) 
Chapter 109 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

Sec. 109-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign which identifies or advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, or activity that has been discontinued for 90 days or more. 
    Address sign means a sign depicting the official street address. Such signs may be located on awnings. 
    Architectural compatibility means visual harmony and consistency with regard to color, building materials, and style. 
    Awning means a rooflike cover that is temporary or portable in nature that projects from the wall of a building and is supported primarily from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Awning sign means a sign located on an awning. 
    Building memorial/cornerstone sign means a sign indicating the name of a building and the date of construction and which is cut into a masonry surface. Such signs are permanent with the building and do not change when there is a change of occupancy. 
    Changeable copy sign means any sign where letters or numbers displayed on the sign are designed to be changed frequently to display different messages. 
    Construction sign/subdivision construction sign means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, indicating the name of the future development, the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the project. 
    Delivery sign means a sign indicating the delivery or loading points and which is limited to directional messages for vehicular traffic. 
    Directional building identification sign means a sign which identifies a particular building within a multi-building complex and which are limited to directional messages, principally for vehicular traffic. 
    Directional parking sign means a sign indicating the entrance to or exit from an off-street parking lot. Such signs may display a distinctive identifying symbol or emblem of the establishment. 
    Directory sign means a sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building and which is limited to the building name, the building address, the tenant names, and the location of tenants within a building. 
    Environmental award sign means a sign which identifies sites which have been the recipient of an environmental award given by the town following recommendation by the Farragut Advisory Council on the Environment (FACE). 
    Flag pole means a straight, vertical pole or staff anchored in the ground on which a flag is or can be displayed. 
    General occupant sign means a sign located within five feet of the building entrance within non-residential districts and located on a building wall within residential districts. The text content of such signs is not restricted to identification purposes. 
    Government flag means a flag representing the United States, the state, the town, the armed forces, and public and/or non-profit board accredited learning institutions. 
    Ground-mounted sign means a sign erected on a freestanding frame and not attached to any building. Such signs may be two-sided, provided that both sides cannot be seen simultaneously from any point. 
    Height clearance sign means a sign indicating clearance for vehicles. 
    Historic plaque means a sign which identify sites deemed of local, state, or national importance by the town board of mayor and aldermen or by the state or federal historic commissions. 
    Landscape award sign means a sign which identifies sites which have been the recipient of a landscape award given by the town, the county, or an organization recognized by the visual resources review board. 
    Marquee sign means a wall sign which is limited to the titles and ratings of movies/plays currently playing at a theater. 
    Menu board means a changeable copy sign that serves primarily to list the food and beverage products offered for sale by an establishment. 
    Neon border means one tube of neon lighting bordering the roof line of a building provided it is straight, it is of a single color, it does not touch a sign, and it does not give the perception of touching a sign. All other neon lighting shall be considered a sign that requires a permit. 
    Parking lot directory sign means a sign located within a parking lot which list the tenants or occupants of a building and indicates the general direction to the tenants' entrance into the building. Such signs are intended to direct vehicles to their destination within a multiple use or multiple building complex. 
    Pedestrian mall means an open-aired pedestrian or walk way in a multiple use building on which tenant spaces front. 
    Permanent window sign means any sign placed at either the internal or external surface of a window that is intended to be visible from the outside of a building, remains for more than 30 consecutive days or more than 60 days within any consecutive 180-period, is constructed of a permanent type material, or is internally illuminated. For the purposes of this article, a permanent window sign shall be considered a wall sign. 
    Pole sign means a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole so that the bottom edge of the sign face is 14 feet or more above grade. 
    Portable sign means any sign that is not affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. 
    Roof sign means any sign which projects in part or in whole above the top edge of a building wall. 
    Security system sign means a sign which identifies a security system that is installed on the premises. 
    Sign means any letter, number, figure, symbol, trademark, graphic, logo, design, or device mounted or otherwise placed and intended to be visible from outside of a building, used to attract attention in order to advertise, identify, announce, notify, direct, or communicate. 
    Sign area means the entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure. 
    Sport field sponsorship message board means a freestanding roofed structure with a sign face upon which names of sponsors and sport field activities are posted. 
    Subdivision homeowner association notification sign a means sign which notifies residents of a residential development the events planned for or by the homeowners' association or neighborhood. 
    Subdivision real estate sign means a temporary sign erected at the entrance of residential developments that are under construction and which is limited to indicating the names of builders, prices of lots, prices of homes for sale, names of sales representatives, names of owners/developers, name of the development, and other similar information. 
    Temporary window sign means any sign constructed of paper, fabric, or other light material that is displayed on the internal surface of a window, but is designed or intended to be visible from the outside of a building and is displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
    Under-canopy sign means a sign that is hung perpendicular to a building under a canopy which projects over the public entrances into a building. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to and projecting not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building. No such sign shall extend above the top edge of a building wall or roof line. For the purposes of this article, a permanent window sign shall be considered a wall sign. 
(Code 2007, § 9-404; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998; Ord. No. 00-22, 6-2000; Ord. No. 02-13, 9-2002; Ord. No. 03-06, 5-2003; Ord. No. 05-07, 4-2005; Ord. No. 09-27, § 1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 6-23-2011) 
Sec. 109-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Sign Ordinance of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee." This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 
(Code 2007, § 9-401; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-3. - Purpose; intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive system of sign regulation which will promote and carry out the goals and objectives of the town. These regulations are intended to assist in the economic development of the town, but without lessening a quality of life which the citizens of the town strive to maintain and improve to the extent possible. To this end, it is the intent of this chapter to establish regulations which: 
(1)  Regulate the type, placement, and size of signs within the town; 
(2)  Protect and enhance the scenic beauty of the natural environment in the town and the surrounding area; 
(3)  Emphasize the assets of community appearance and high environmental quality in promoting economic development; 
(4)  Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by prohibiting improperly designed or located signs which could distract, confuse, mislead, or obstruct vision; 
(5)  Ensure safe construction and maintenance of signs; 
(6)  Protect and enhance public and private property; 
(7)  Ensure equity in the distribution of the privilege of using the public visual environment to communicate private information; and 
(8)  Improve the appearance of the town's business area, especially along major thoroughfares. 
(Code 2007, § 9-402; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-4. - Scope. 
    This chapter shall not regulate signs which are not visible from outside of a building. Nor shall this chapter regulate non-commercial flags and non-commercial emblems on mailboxes which are located on residentially used land. Thus, the primary intent of this chapter shall be to regulate signs of a commercial nature intended to be viewed by the public. 
(Code 2007, § 9-403; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-5. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
    The provisions of this chapter are considered to be minimum requirements. Wherever there is a discrepancy between the minimum standards noted in this chapter and those contained in any other lawfully adopted regulation or ordinance of the town, the highest standard shall apply. 
(Code 2007, § 9-408; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-6. - Administration. 
(a)  Sign administrator to enforce chapter. The town administrator or his designee shall act as the sign administrator and shall enforce and carry out all provisions of this chapter. In the event there is a question concerning the general intent or meaning of any provision of this chapter, the sign administrator shall have the authority to make such administrative decisions and interpretations. Administrative interpretation shall in no way be construed as permitting or granting an exception to the provisions of this chapter. When the definition of a sign is questioned by the sign administrator, the sign administrator may consult with the visual resources review board about such question. 
(b)  Application and permit process. Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, permits are required for all types of signs. It shall be unlawful for any person, agency, firm, or corporation to erect, structurally repair (other than normal maintenance), replace, alter, relocate, change the panels of, change the establishment being advertised on a sign, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the town. 
(1)  Applicants shall submit a completed sign application and the required fee to the town hall prior to commencing any work on installation of a new or replacement sign. The required fee is per the schedule approved by the town board of mayor and aldermen. Per the approved fee schedule, an additional penalty fee shall be paid if work is commenced prior to receiving a permit from the town. Public entities are waived from the fee requirement; 
(2)  A separate application must be completed and submitted for each new or replacement sign; 
(3)  Wall sign applications shall be reviewed by the sign administrator for conformance with the requirements. The sign administrator shall approve or deny the application within 15 working days of submittal. When architectural compatibility of a sign is questioned by the sign administrator, the sign administrator may consult with the visual resources review board about such compatibility; 
(4)  All wall sign applications shall accompany two complete sets of plans which include a dimensioned schematic drawing of the building showing the proposed sign location, the businesses located on either side, the width of the building wall or lease space upon which the sign is to be mounted, and a dimensioned drawing of the sign; 
(5)  Ground-mounted sign applications shall be reviewed by the visual resource review board for conformance with the requirements of this article and with the comprehensive planning program of the town prior to the issuance of a sign permit; 
(6)  Ground-mounted sign applications shall be submitted on or before the Monday 15 days prior to the visual resources review board meeting at which a ground-mounted sign application is to be considered; 
(7)  All ground-mounted sign applications shall be accompanied by four complete sets of plans which include a dimensioned site plan of the parcel showing the proposed sign location, a proposed landscaping plan for the sign base, a detail of the sign lighting, and a dimensioned drawing of the sign showing the height and length; and 
(8)  A sign permit shall become null and void if erection is not commenced within 180 days of issuance. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for 180 days any time after the work is commenced, the sign permit shall be void and a new permit shall be first obtained to resume work. A new permit shall be required if changes have been made in the original plans. After a permit expires, a partially completed sign structure must be removed within 30 days if no new permit is issued. 
(c)  Text amendment process. Amendments to the text of this chapter shall first be reviewed by the visual resources review board and the town municipal planning commission with recommendations regarding the proposed change forwarded to the town board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 2007, § 9-409; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-7. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Noncompliance with this chapter shall be deemed a violation. When the sign administrator finds violations of the provisions of this chapter, the administrator shall document such findings and take the appropriate action to correct said violations. A citation to municipal court may be issued to the owner, agent, or employee for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, sign, premises, or sign thereon, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, or participates in, assists in, or maintains any violation hereunder may be found responsible of a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article. 
(Code 2007, § 9-410; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998) 
Sec. 109-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  The town board of zoning appeals shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the sign administrator and/or the visual resources review board in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  To authorize, upon an appeal relating to said property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship. Variances shall not be granted to allow a larger sign or a sign which is otherwise not permitted in this chapter. Variances shall be granted only where by special physical characteristics of the lot, parcel, or tract exist, that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of an otherwise permitted sign. 
(b)  Appeals procedure. 
(1)  After a written denial of a sign permit from the sign administrator, a party may make an application for interpretation or variance using forms available at the town hall; 
(2)  The application and fee must be submitted to the town hall on or before the Monday 16 days prior to the regular monthly board of zoning appeals meeting. The required fee is per the schedule approved by the town board of mayor and aldermen. The board of zoning appeals shall consider and decide all appeals within 30 days of first hearing the appeal; and 
(3)  The minutes of the board of zoning appeals shall fully set forth such circumstances or conditions warranting the granting of a variance. 
(Code 2007, § 9-411; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998; Ord. No. 99-38, 10-1999) 
Sec. 109-9. - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Existing signs which were legally in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which do not conform to the specific provisions of this article are declared legal nonconforming signs. 
(b)  Any legal nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and maintenance after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided: 
(1)  The sign is not relocated or replaced; 
(2)  The structure or size of the sign is not altered in any way except toward compliance with this chapter. This does not refer to the change of text of changeable copy signs or normal maintenance; 
(3)  No new or additional signs are added to the premises; and 
(4)  Other than changing the text of changeable copy signs, no other existing signs are changed or replaced on the premises. 
(c)  A legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this Code regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than 50 percent damage or deterioration, as based on appraisal, it must be brought into conformance with this code or removed. 
(Code 2007, § 9-407; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998; Ord. No. 02-13, 9-2002) 
Sec. 109-10. - General restrictions. 
    All signs erected, replaced, reconstructed, expanded, or relocated on any property within the town shall conform with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Signs not requiring permits. The following types of signs are exempted from permit requirements but must be in conformance with all other requirements of this article: 
a.  Address signs; 
b.  Building memorial/cornerstone signs; 
c.  Construction signs; 
d.  Environmental award signs; 
e.  General occupant signs; 
f.  Town, state, and American flags; 
g.  Height clearance signs; 
h.  Historic plaques; 
i.  Landscape award signs; 
j.  News racks and other vending machine signs; 
k.  Neon border, as defined in this chapter; 
l.  Political signs; 
m.  Public or quasi-public information, safety, and regulatory signs; 
n.  Real estate signs; 
o.  Scoreboards on publicly owned athletic fields; 
p.  Security system signs; 
q.  Subdivision construction signs; 
r.  Subdivision real estate signs; 
s.  Temporary decorations for recognized holidays; 
t.  Temporary signs approved with a special events permit; and 
u.  Temporary window signs. 
(2)  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts: 
a.  Abandoned signs, which shall be removed by the property owner; 
b.  Any sign placed on public property or right-of-way without the written consent of the public authority having jurisdiction over the property; 
c.  Any sign which bears or contains statements, or words of an obscene, pornographic, or immoral character; 
d.  Any signs with flashing, chasing, pulsating, twinkling, dancing, scintillating, and/or oscillating lights or any other rotating, revolving, or otherwise moving part; 
e.  Awning signs, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter; 
f.  Banners, except as provided for elsewhere in this article and the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code); 
g.  Non-governmental flags, except non-commercial flags located on residentially used land; 
h.  Off-premises signs, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter; 
i.  Off-premises outdoor advertising; 
j.  Pennants, ribbons, festoons, buntings, streamers, spinners, balloons, or other types of lighter-than-air or wind-activated signs and attention getting devices; 
k.  Portable signs, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter; 
l.  Roof signs, except commonly recognized religious symbols for churches and other places of worship; 
m.  Search lights; 
n.  Signs attached to, suspended from, or painted on any vehicle which is regularly parked on any street or private property when one of the purposes of so locating such vehicle is to display, demonstrate, and advertise, or attract the attention of the public; 
o.  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals; and 
p.  All other signs not specifically permitted. 
(3)  Criteria in determining sign area. 
a.  The sign area for all signs shall be measured by drawing an imaginary single, regular geometric shape of a rectangle, circle, or equilateral triangle around the sign. The text and other graphics do not have to be physically, visually, or topically connected. 
b.  For a sign with two parallel faces, only the area of a single face shall be considered. If the faces of a multiple-faced sign are not parallel, then the total sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the individual, non-parallel faces. 
(4)  Criteria in determining sign height for ground-mounted signs. The sign height shall be measured by the vertical dimension from the ground level at the base of the sign, including the supporting structure, to the top most point of the sign. Unless otherwise specified in this article, if the ground level at the base of the sign is lower than the adjacent street grade, the height shall be computed from the adjacent street grade, excluding elevated bridges or interchanges. 
(5)  Criteria in determining setback for ground-mounted and pole signs. The setback shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of a property line. All signs shall be located outside of the visibility triangle. For the purposes of this article, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
(6)  Construction specifications. All signs shall be installed in compliance with all building and fire codes adopted by the town. All electrical service to ground-mounted and pole signs shall be under ground. Any lighting of signs shall be installed so as to prevent any glare upon adjoining properties or rights-of-way. 
(7)  Sign maintenance and removal. 
a.  All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced. The sign administrator shall have the right to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated. 
b.  When any sign is removed, all structural components shall be removed with the sign and such removal shall be in compliance with all building and fire codes adopted by the town. All structural components of ground-mounted and pole signs shall be removed to ground level. The structural components of all other signs, including painted wall signs, shall be removed back to the original building configuration. All visual remains of the sign shall be removed. 
(Code 2007, § 9-405; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998; Ord. No. 05-24, 1-2006; Ord. No. 06-31, § 1, 11-2-2006) 
Sec. 109-11. - Sign regulations by land use and/or zoning districts. 
    All signs shall comply with the following regulations. Any sign that is not specifically permitted shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this chapter, commercial purposes shall include all uses permitted within the commercial districts and office purposes shall include all uses permitted within the office district. 
(1)  Signs permitted in all zoning districts. The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts: 
a.  Building memorial/cornerstone signs. One non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed six square feet in size and six feet in height. 
b.  Environmental award signs. One non-illuminated sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed four square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines and shall be removed within one year of receiving the award. 
c.  Government flags. 
1.  A total of three government flags per lot, parcel, or tract. Flags shall be displayed on a flag pole. Flag poles shall not exceed the maximum building height of the zoning district and shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line and ten feet from side and rear property lines. Such poles shall meet the construction standards of the industry per the size of flag that is to be flown on the pole. 
2.  An unlimited number of flags shall be allowed on nationally recognized holidays and shall be allowed to be erected no sooner than two days prior to a holiday and shall be removed within two days after the holiday. 
d.  Historic plaques. One non-illuminated sign per site, not to exceed six square feet in size and eight feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
e.  Landscape award signs. One non-illuminated sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed four square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines and shall be removed within one year of receiving the award. 
f.  Political signs. One non-illuminated sign per candidate per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed 12 square feet in size and six feet in height. No such signs are permitted on any public rights-of-way or other public property. Such political signs shall not be posted prior to 30 days before an election and shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located within five days after any election to which it refers. 
g.  Public or quasi-public information, safety, and regulatory signs. The location, height, and size of such signs to be located on public and private streets shall be determined by town staff based on the current edition of the manual of uniform traffic control devices. The location and height of such signs which are to be located on private property shall be determined by town staff based on the current edition of the manual of uniform traffic control devices. The size of such signs which are to be located on private property shall comply with the following size regulations: 
1.  Advisory signs, such as "No Parking," "Exit," "Entrance," "Handicapped Parking," etc., shall not exceed 12 inches 18 inches in size; 
2.  Regulatory signs, such as speed limit signs, "One Way," "Slow," "Right Turn Only," etc., shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size; 
3.  Warning signs, such as "Stop," "Road Closed," "Stop Ahead," "Detour," "No Trespassing," etc., shall not exceed 24 inches by 24 inches in size; and 
4.  Public or quasi-public information signs, such as schools, libraries, parks, etc., shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size. 
h.  Security system signs. 
1.  Two non-illuminated ground-mounted signs per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed one square foot in size and two feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
2.  One non-illuminated wall signs per entrance, not to exceed one square foot in size. 
i.  Temporary decorations for recognized holidays. 
1.  Noncommercial seasonal displays and banners that are customarily associated with a national, local, or religious holiday, provided such are not used to advertise the name of a product, service, or business. 
2.  Banners used for holiday decorations shall be affixed to a wall, board, or some other type of inflexible surface so that it does not move in the wind, or shall be hung in a vertical manner and tautly secured at two opposite edges by horizontal brackets. 
3.  Such displays and banners shall be removed promptly after the holiday. 
j.  Temporary signs approved with a special events permit. 
(2)  Signs permitted on land for residential uses. The following signs are permitted on land used for residential purposes. Recreational facilities developed as part of a residential development shall also follow these regulations: 
a.  Address signs. 
1.  One wall sign, not to exceed two square feet in size. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2 inches nor more than six inches high. 
2.  One ground-mounted sign per driveway entrance, not to exceed two square feet in size. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2 inches nor more than six inches high. 
3.  The street address numbers may also be painted on the curb at the driveway entrance. The numerals displayed on curbs shall be four inches high. 
b.  Directional building identification signs. In multi-building apartment complexes, each building shall be allowed one directional sign, not to exceed two square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. Each building shall be allowed one non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed six square feet in size. 
c.  General occupant signs. One non-illuminated wall sign per dwelling unit, not to exceed two square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
d.  Open house real estate signs. One non-illuminated on-premises open house sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed six square feet in size and six feet in height. In addition, directional off-premises open house signs, not to exceed six square feet in size and three feet in height, shall be allowed to be erected for directive purposes. Such off-premises signs may be located in the public right-of-way. These open house signs shall not be erected before 5:00 p.m. Friday and must be removed by 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
e.  Permanent subdivision signs. A total of 40 square feet of sign area shall be permitted per single-family or multi-family development entrance, with either one ground-mounted sign not to exceed 40 square feet or two ground-mounted signs not to exceed 20 square feet each. Such signs and the structures/walls on which they are affixed shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines and shall be located within a platted sign easement. Such signs, excluding the supporting structure, shall not exceed six feet in height and shall not be erected until a preliminary plat or a site plan has been approved. If signs are to be illuminated, external illumination shall be used. 
f.  Real estate signs. One non-illuminated sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed six square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, rental, or lease of the real estate involved. 
g.  Subdivision construction signs. One non-illuminated sign per single-family or multi-family development entrance, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Such sign shall not be erected until a preliminary plat or site plan has been approved. The sign shall be removed within 15 days of the completion of the permanent sign or the expiration of the preliminary plat or site plan, whichever comes first. 
h.  Subdivision homeowner association notification signs. 
1.  One non-illuminated ground-mounted sign shall be permitted per single-family or multi-family development entrance. Such sign shall be placed at the rear of the permanent subdivision sign so that it is only visible to vehicles exiting the development. 
2.  Where a single-family or multi-family development does not have a permanent subdivision sign at its egress point or because of the setback or angle of the permanent subdivision sign is such that the message area would not be readable; one non-illuminated single-faced freestanding homeowner association notification sign shall be permitted per egress point. Such freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall be located on property which is part of the subdivision and which is zoned the same as the subdivision. Where such sign is proposed on property which is not owned by the homeowners' association, an appropriate easement shall be recorded as a condition for approval of the sign. Such signs shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscaping requirements provided for in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) and the sign face shall be oriented so that it is only visible to vehicles exiting the development. The back of the sign face shall be constructed of material which is non-reflective and the sign shall be generally compatible with other entrance features in the immediate area. 
3.  All homeowner association notification signs shall not exceed six square feet in size and four feet in height. 
4.  Subdivision real estate signs. One non-illuminated sign per single-family or multi-family development entrance, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Such sign shall not be erected until a preliminary plat or site plan has been approved. The sign shall be removed when 75 percent of the units within the development, as based on the approved preliminary plat, have received certificates of occupancy. 
(3)  Signs permitted on land for freestanding commercial purpose, office, country club, golf course, school or government-owned facilities. The following signs are permitted on land used for a freestanding commercial purpose, office, country club, golf course, school, or all government-owned facilities which are located on a freestanding parcel. These regulations do not apply to multiple use buildings or facilities: 
a.  Address signs. 
1.  One non-illuminated wall sign per entrance/door to the premises, not to exceed two square feet. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2 inches nor more than eight inches high. 
2.  The street address numbers may also be painted on the curb at the driveway entrance. The numerals displayed on curbs shall be four inches high. 
b.  Construction signs. One non-illuminated sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall not be erected until a site plan has been approved. The sign shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the completion of a permanent sign, or the expiration of the site plan or building permit, whichever comes first. 
c.  Delivery signs. 
1.  One ground-mounted sign denoting delivery points, not to exceed four square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. 
2.  One non-illuminated wall sign per delivery bay not to exceed four square feet in size. 
d.  Directional building identification signs. In multi-building complexes, each building shall be allowed one directional sign, not to exceed two square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of street pavement and five feet from the edge of the driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. 
e.  Directional parking signs. One ground-mounted directional parking sign per entry/exit to a parking lot, not to exceed two square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of the street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. 
f.  General occupant signs. Any number of wall signs per entrance to the premises, not to exceed a cumulative total of six square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
g.  Ground-mounted signs. 
1.  One sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 20 square feet in size, six feet in height, and is set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Such sign area may be increased in size by two square feet for each one additional foot the sign is set back from the front property line, not to exceed a maximum sign size of 40 square feet. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot, such signs shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
2.  All ground-mounted signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. All letters, figures, emblems, and logos used on the sign shall be legible from the nearest adjacent street at which the sign face is directed. Individual letters or figures used within a logo or emblem are not required to be legible, however, the logo or emblem as a whole must be legible. 
3.  An address for the building shall be attached to the top of the ground-mounted sign, but shall not be factored into the permitted sign area or sign height. Such address, however, shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign height by more than 18 inches nor exceed the width of the sign area, including support structures. The individual figures shall not be less than eight inches nor more than 15 inches high. Such figures shall be displayed parallel to the ground. 
4.  Signs for schools and government owned facilities may have changeable copy provided the copy is not written in lights. Signs for gasoline service stations may have changeable copy in order to post the gasoline prices. Such copy shall not be written lights. 
5.  A digital street clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a ground-mounted sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
6.  A decorative analog street clock shall be considered a ground-mounted sign and shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines; 
(ii)  Each sign face shall not exceed 14 square feet and the number of sign faces shall be limited to four; 
(iii)  Shall not exceed 16 feet in height; 
(iv)  Shall have no electronic letters or numbers; 
(v)  Shall not display any message; and 
(vi)  The clock shall be submitted to the visual resources review board for review and approval for the purpose of ensuring that the clock is architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
7.  No sign permit shall be issued until a building permit has been issued. 
8.  A school shall be permitted one non-illuminated single-faced freestanding changeable copy message board sign. The sign face shall be oriented so that it is only visible to vehicles exiting the school. Such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in size, four feet in height, and shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from all front property lines and 30 feet from all side and rear property lines. The back of the sign face shall be constructed of material which is non-reflective. In addition to being required to be screened with landscaping from adjacent rights-of-way, such signs shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements provided for in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
h.  Height clearance signs. One sign per clearance, not to exceed four square feet each. 
i.  Interstate/interchange pole signs. Business establishments that cater to interstate travelers by providing gas, food, or lodging and are located within the C-2 Regional Commercial District shall be permitted to have one internally illuminated interchange pole sign. Such signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The building for the commercial use and the sign shall be located within 500 feet of the right-of-way of the Campbell Station Road/I-40/I-75 interchange; 
2.  The sign area shall not exceed 400 square feet; 
3.  Such sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line and ten feet from the side and rear property lines; 
4.  The sign shall have a maximum of two sides provided both sides cannot be seen simultaneously from any point; 
5.  The maximum top elevation of any such sign relative to mean sea level shall be 1,030 feet or 60 feet above the centerline elevation of the interstate road at the point nearest the sign, whichever is less. A certified survey which verifies the sign height shall be submitted to the sign administrator within ten days after the sign is installed; and 
6.  The minimum top elevation of any such sign relative to the ground level shall be 30 feet. 
j.  News racks and other vending machine signs. Only the name and price of the products being sold out of the vending machines may be listed on the machine. 
k.  Off-premises directional church signs. Cemeteries, memorials, and other similar uses as approved by the board of mayor and aldermen and which are located on streets classified as local, local collector, major collector, and minor arterial on the major road plan shall be permitted to have off-premises directional signs. The signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The sign shall be located within the rights-of-way at intersections approved by the board of mayor and aldermen; 
2.  The exact location of the sign shall be determined by town staff at the time of installation. The location and height of the sign shall be based on the current edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
3.  The sign shall match the existing signs in color, construction material, and size. The individual figures on such signs shall also match existing figures on existing signs in color and size and shall be painted with reflective paint; 
4.  The individual sign for each entity shall be purchased and maintained by such entity; and 
5.  The supporting structure of the sign shall be owned and maintained by the town. 
l.  Off-premises directional signs. Business establishments that cater to interstate travelers that have exited the interstate at the Campbell Station Road interchange and that provide gas, food, or lodging, are located within the C-2 Regional Commercial District, participate in the TDOT trailblazer program, and that front on streets classified as local collectors or local on the major road plan, shall be permitted to have off-premises directional signs. The signs shall be modeled after the interstate directional/logo signs known as trailblazers and shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The individual logos for each business shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches; 
2.  The individual logos shall be made of reflective material; 
3.  The individual logos shall be owned and maintained by the individual business and the space shall be rented on an annual basis from the town; 
4.  A directional arrow with mileage shall be listed under each logo. The figure size shall be four inches; 
5.  The sign structure, the directional arrows, and mileage indicators shall be owned and maintained by the town; 
6.  The sign shall be located within the rights-of-way of streets classified as arterial or major collector on the major road plan; and 
7.  The exact location of the sign shall be determined by town staff at time of installation. The location and height of the sign shall be based on the current edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
m.  Permanent window signs. Such signs shall be counted as part of the total wall sign area allowed. 
n.  Real estate signs. One non-illuminated sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed 20 square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, rental, or lease of the real estate involved. 
o.  Scoreboards on athletic fields. One scoreboard per athletic field, not to exceed 120 square feet in size and 20 feet in height. 
p.  Sport field sponsorship message board. One non-illuminated message board per athletic field. The sign face on which information is posted shall not exceed three feet in height and four feet in width and 12 square feet in size. The maximum mounting height of the sign face shall not exceed six feet. The maximum structure height, inclusive of the sign face, supporting structures, and roof, shall be nine feet. All message boards shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from all front property lines and 100 feet from all side and rear property lines. 
q.  Temporary window signs. Any number of non-illuminated, temporary window signs, not to cover more than 25 percent of the total window area. 
r.  Wall signs. 
1.  Unless provided for elsewhere in this section, wall signs shall be limited to the side of a building which fronts upon a public street or faces upon a customer parking area. 
2.  If a building has 300 linear feet of wall length or less, there shall be a maximum of one wall sign per building, unless a building fronts on more than one street, in which case a wall sign may be permitted on each street frontage. Such wall signs are permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted. 
3.  If a building has more than 300 linear feet of wall length, there shall be a maximum of one sign per principal building entrance, such signs shall be located within the entrance vicinity, plus one additional sign, which may be located anywhere on the building wall. Such signs shall be spaced a minimum of 50 feet apart. Each sign shall be calculated separately and the total sign area of all signs combined shall not exceed the 1:1 ratio of one square foot of sign area per each linear foot of building wall upon which the signs are mounted. No individual sign shall exceed 350 square feet. Such signage shall be limited to one wall. 
4.  If a building has no paved surfaces located in the front yard, one wall sign shall be permitted on the side of the building which fronts upon a public street and one wall sign shall be permitted on the side of the building which faces upon a customer parking area. Such wall signs are permitted a total area of one-half square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 175 square feet. 
5.  A wall clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a wall sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
6.  Within the C-2 Regional Commercial District, one wall sign on the building elevation that faces the interstate is also permitted, provided such elevation is at least 100 linear feet in length. Such wall sign is permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 350 square feet. 
7.  All wall signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure and shall be consistent in terms of style, color, and illumination with the other signs on the building. 
(4)  Signs permitted on land for multiple use buildings or multiple building complexes for commercial purposes, offices, or government facilities. The following signs are permitted on land used for multiple use buildings used for commercial purposes, offices, or government facilities or land used for multiple building complexes used for commercial purposes, offices, or government facilities: 
a.  Address signs. One non-illuminated wall sign per entrance/door to the premises, not to exceed two square feet. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2) inches nor more than eight inches high. 
b.  Construction signs. One non-illuminated sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Such signs shall not be erected until a site plan has been approved or a building permit has been issued. The sign shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the completion of a permanent sign, or the expiration of the site plan or building permit, whichever comes first. 
c.  Delivery signs. One ground-mounted sign denoting delivery points, not to exceed four square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. One non-illuminated wall sign per delivery bay not to exceed four square feet in size. 
d.  Directional parking signs. One ground-mounted directional parking sign per entry/exit to a parking lot, not to exceed two square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of the street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. 
e.  Directory signs. In a multiple use building where individual uses do not have an exterior wall sign, a directory sign shall be permitted. The signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The number of directory signs shall be limited to one per principal exterior entrance. In the case of a pedestrian mall where the individual tenant's principal exterior entrance is to a sidewalk and not to a parking lot or street, one directory sign may be placed at each entrance into the pedestrian mall; 
2.  The information on such signs must not be legible from adjacent streets or properties; 
3.  If illuminated, such signs shall be externally illuminated; 
4.  The sign can be a wall sign or a ground-mounted sign, but it shall not exceed six feet in height and must be located within ten feet of the building entrance or pedestrian mall entrance; 
5.  The maximum size of the sign is dependent on the total number of a building's tenants. A total of one to 11 tenants shall not exceed 12 square feet and a total of 12 or more tenants shall not exceed 18 square feet; 
6.  The building name letters shall not exceed five inches and the tenant name letters shall not exceed two inches, with each tenant listing to be limited to the same color, size, and shape; and 
7.  Such sign shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. Compatibility shall be based on color, building materials, and style. 
f.  General occupant signs. Any number of wall signs per entrance to the premises, not to exceed a cumulative total of six square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
g.  Ground-mounted signs. 
1.  One sign per street entrance from which access is provided to the lot, parcel, or tract, plus one sign per each street that is classified as an arterial or collector on the major road plan and on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts but does not access. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot on the same street, such signs shall be a minimum of 400 feet apart. Such signs shall be located within 20 feet of the street entrance. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot on two different streets, such signs shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
2.  Such signs shall not exceed 60 square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line and ten feet from side and rear property lines. 
3.  The above signs may be substituted for a sign which does not exceed 20 square feet in size, six feet in height, and is set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Such sign area may be increased in size by two square feet for each one additional foot the sign is set back from the front property line, not to exceed a maximum sign size of 60 square feet. 
4.  All ground-mounted signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. All letters, figures, emblems, and logos used on the sign shall be legible from the nearest adjacent street at which the sign face is directed. Individual letters or figures used within a logo or emblem are not required to be legible, however, the logo or emblem as a whole must be legible. 
5.  An address for the building/complex shall be attached to the top of the ground-mounted sign, but shall not be factored into the permitted sign area or sign height. Such address, however, shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign height by more than 18 inches nor exceed the width of the sign area, including support structures. The individual figures shall not be less than eight inches nor more than 15 inches high. Such figures shall be displayed parallel to the ground. 
6.  A digital street clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a ground-mounted sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
7.  A decorative analog street clock shall be considered a ground-mounted sign and shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines; 
(ii)  Each sign face shall not exceed 14 square feet and the number of sign faces shall be limited to four; 
(iii)  Shall not exceed 16 feet in height; 
(iv)  Shall have no electronic letters or numbers; 
(v)  Shall not display any message; and 
(vi)  The clock shall be submitted to the visual resources review board for review and approval for the purpose of ensuring that the clock is architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
8.  No sign permit shall be issued until a building permit has been issued. 
h.  Ground-mounted signs and parking lot directory signs. 
1.  In lieu of the 60 square foot ground-mounted signs permitted above, smaller ground-mounted signs and parking lot directory signs may be used. 
2.  Such ground-mounted signs shall meet the same criteria stated in the ground-mounted signs section above, except that the signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in size and the text of such signs shall be restricted to the name of the building, shopping center, or complex. 
3.  In addition to the smaller ground-mounted sign, a parking lot directory sign shall be permitted. Such signs are not intended to be legible from adjacent streets and shall meet the following criteria: 
(i)  The number of such signs shall be limited to one sign per street entrance; 
(ii)  Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from all property lines and ten feet from the edge of driveway pavement; 
(iii)  Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in size and six feet in height; 
(iv)  The information on such signs shall be limited to the tenants' names and addresses and a directional arrow indicating the location of the tenants' entrance into the building; 
(v)  The letters and numbers on the signs shall not exceed five inches in height with each tenant listing to be limited to the same color, size, and shape. Each tenant listing shall be limited to three square feet in size; and 
(vi)  Such signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. Compatibility shall be based on color, building materials, and style. 
i.  Height clearance signs. One sign per clearance, not to exceed four square feet each. 
j.  News racks and other vending machine signs. Only the name and price of the products being sold out of the vending machines may be listed on the machine. 
k.  Permanent window signs. Such signs shall be counted as part of the total wall sign area allowed. 
l.  Real estate signs. 
1.  One non-illuminated wall sign at each available lease space not to exceed 16 square feet in size and eight feet in height. Real estate information may also be incorporated into the permanent ground-mounted sign, provided the maximum permitted height and sign face area of the ground-mounted sign are not exceeded and the real estate sign is architecturally and visually compatible with the remainder of the permanent ground-mounted sign. In addition, where such real estate information is to be incorporated into the permanent ground-mounted sign, one non-illuminated wall sign shall be permitted at each available lease space not to exceed two square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
2.  In the event the entire multi-tenant development is for sale or lease, one non-illuminated ground mounted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in size and six feet in height shall be permitted. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
3.  All real estate signs shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, rental, or lease of the real estate involved. 
m.  Temporary window signs. Any number of non-illuminated, temporary window signs per premises, not to exceed a total of 20 square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the total window area, whichever is less. 
n.  Under-canopy signs. When the roof of a building is extended as a canopy over the public entrances into the building, one non-illuminated sign per principal entrance shall be permitted. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in size, shall have a minimum clearance of nine feet to grade, and shall be hung perpendicular to the building. 
o.  Wall signs. 
1.  Each separate use within a building which has its own separate and exclusive exterior public entrance to the building shall be allowed one wall sign. Such wall signs are permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall of lease space upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 350 square feet, unless otherwise provided for in this section. Such wall signs shall be limited to the side of a building which fronts upon a public street, faces upon a customer parking area, faces upon a pedestrian mall, or is the point of the principal public access into the establishment, unless otherwise provided for in this section. 
2.  If an individual tenant space has more than 300 linear feet of building wall of lease space, there shall be a maximum of one sign per principal entrance, such signs shall be located within the entrance vicinity, plus one additional sign, which may be located anywhere on the lease space wall. Such signs shall be spaced a minimum of 50 feet apart. Each sign shall be calculated separately and the total sign area of all signs combined shall not exceed the 1:1 ratio of one square foot of sign area per each linear foot of lease space wall upon which the signs are mounted. No individual sign shall exceed 350 square feet. Such signage shall be limited to one wall. 
3.  If a building has no paved surfaces located in the front yard, an individual tenant space which is located in the end of the building and fronts upon a public street and faces upon a customer parking area, one wall sign shall be permitted on the side of the building which fronts upon a public street and one wall sign shall be permitted on the side of the building which faces upon a customer parking area. Such wall signs are permitted a total area of one-half square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 175 square feet. 
4.  In the case where a building has a pedestrian mall, the landlord may opt for a different wall signage alternative. When a wall has a pedestrian mall access, each separate use which faces upon such wall shall be permitted one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet. In addition, each separate use which faces upon the pedestrian mall shall be permitted one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet with the total signage for mall uses not to exceed 100 square feet. In no case shall a use have more than one sign. Such signs shall be placed on the wall that has the pedestrian mall access and which fronts upon a public street or faces upon a customer parking area. The maximum sign area allowed on such wall shall be two square feet per linear foot of building wall length. 
5.  A building with multiple uses that all share the public exterior entrances into the building shall be allowed one wall sign. Such buildings are permitted a total sign area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 350 square feet. Such wall signs shall be limited to the side of a building which fronts upon a public street or faces upon a customer parking area. 
6.  A wall clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a wall sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
7.  Within the C-2 Regional Commercial District, one wall sign on the building elevation that faces the interstate is also permitted. Such wall sign is permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall of lease space upon which the sign is mounted, provided such building wall of lease space is at least 100 linear feet in length and the sign does not exceed 350 square feet. 
8.  All such wall signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure and shall be consistent in terms of style, color, and illumination with the other signs in the complex. 
p.  Wall signs in the Office District, Three Stories (O-1-3) and Office District, Five Stories (O-1-5); shared entrance building. 
1.  A building with multiple uses that all share the public exterior entrances into the building and that has more than 225 feet of building wall facing a public street shall be permitted four wall signs. Each sign shall be roughly proportional in size and general appearance. The cumulative total square footage of all four signs shall not exceed one square foot per each linear foot of building wall which faces a public street, not to exceed 350 square feet. Such wall signs shall be limited to two on the side of a building which fronts upon a public street and shall be a minimum of 50 feet apart. Building elevations that do not face a public street shall be limited to one wall sign per elevation and shall be centered on said elevation. 
2.  A wall clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a wall sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
3.  All such wall signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure and shall be consistent in terms of style, color, and illumination with the other signs in the complex. All wall signage shall be limited to two colors on all building elevations. 
(5)  Signs permitted on land for banks and other lending institutions. In addition to the applicable regulations above, the following additional signs are permitted on land used for banks and other lending institutions: 
a.  Automatic teller machines. One sign, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted at the machine. One sign, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted above the drive-thru lane on the overhead canopy; and 
b.  Drive-thru teller lanes. One sign, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted at the service window. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted above the lane on the overhead canopy. 
(6)  Signs permitted on land for theaters. In addition to the applicable regulations above, the following additional signs are permitted on land used for theaters: 
a.  Marquee signs. A marquee sign shall be limited to the side of the theater building with the principal public entrance. Such signs are permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 350 square feet; and 
b.  Poster case signs. One poster case per movie screen or stage, not to exceed 16 square feet in size each, including frames. Illumination shall be in such a manner so as to light the poster for readability only. Poster case signs shall be used in lieu of any temporary window signs. Such signs shall be mounted on the building wall with the principal public entrance. 
(7)  Signs permitted on land for other businesses with drive-thru windows. In addition to the applicable regulations above, the following additional signs are permitted on land used for other businesses with drive-thru windows: 
a.  Wall signs. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted at the ordering point. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted at the pick-up point. 
b.  Canopy signs. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed two square feet in size, which shall be posted above the lane on the overhead canopy. 
(8)  Signs permitted on land for restaurants with drive-thru windows. In addition to the applicable regulations above, the following additional signs are permitted on land used for restaurants with drive-thru windows: 
Menu board signs: 
1.  Generally. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed 30 square feet in size and six feet in height; and 
2.  Order box signs. One sign per drive-thru lane, not to exceed one square foot in size and 30 inches in height. 
(9)  Signs permitted for gasoline stations/convenience stores. For the purposes of this chapter, gasoline service stations/convenience stores shall be considered freestanding commercial uses and such sign regulations shall apply. If such establishments also have a restaurant with a drive-thru window, such drive-thru window sign regulations shall apply. In addition to these signs, the following additional signs are permitted: 
a.  Canopy signs. Two signs, not to exceed nine square feet in size each, which shall be posted on two different sides of the canopy over the gas pumps. 
b.  Gas pump signs. Any number of signs, not to exceed a total area of eight square feet per gas pump island. The content of such signs shall be limited to the federally required safety information, the octane level, credit card information, the gas brand name, car wash information, and other similar information. Only one sign permit shall be required for all the gas pump islands on the site. 
c.  Car wash signs. In addition to the wall signs permitted elsewhere in this chapter, one additional wall sign located on the wall of the vehicle entrance shall be allowed. Such wall signs are permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 20 square feet. 
d.  Car wash order box signs. One sign per car wash entrance, not to exceed one square foot in size and 30 inches in height. 
(10)  Signs permitted on land for large medical campuses on tracts of land ten acres or larger. The following signs are permitted on land used for large medical campuses located on tracts of land larger than ten acres: 
a.  Address signs. One non-illuminated wall sign per entrance/door to the premises, not to exceed two square feet. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2 inches nor more than eight inches high. 
b.  Construction signs. One non-illuminated sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. Such signs shall not be erected until a site plan has been approved or a building permit has been issued. The sign shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the completion of a permanent sign, or the expiration of the site plan or building permit, whichever comes first. 
c.  General occupant signs. Any number of wall signs per entrance to the premises, not to exceed a cumulative total of six square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
d.  Ground-mounted signs. 
1.  One sign per street entrance from which access is provided to the lot, parcel, or tract, plus one sign per each street that is classified as an arterial or collector on the major road plan and on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts but does not access. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot on the same street, such signs shall be a minimum of 500 feet apart. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot on two different streets, such signs shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
2.  Such signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line and ten feet from side and rear property lines. 
3.  The above sign may be substituted for a sign which does not exceed 20 square feet in size, six feet in height, and is set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Such sign area may be increased in size by two square feet for each one additional foot the sign is set back from the front property line, not to exceed a maximum sign size of 40 square feet. 
4.  All ground-mounted signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. All letters, figures, emblems, and logos used on the sign shall be legible from the nearest adjacent street at which the sign face is directed. Individual letters or figures used within a logo or emblem are not required to be legible, however, the logo or emblem as a whole must be legible. 
5.  An address for the building/complex shall be attached to the top of the ground-mounted sign, but shall not be factored into the permitted sign area or sign height. Such address, however, shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign height by more than 18 inches nor exceed the width of the sign area, including support structures. The individual figures shall not be less than eight inches or more than 15 inches high. Such figures shall be displayed parallel to the ground. 
6.  A street clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a ground-mounted sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
7.  No sign permit shall be issued until a building permit has been issued. 
e.  Height clearance signs. One sign per clearance, not to exceed four square feet each. 
f.  News racks and other vending machine signs. Only the name and price of the products being sold out of the vending machines may be listed on the machine. 
g.  Parking lot directory signs. Parking lot directory signs shall be located at key decision making locations within the parking lot in relation to building entrances. The physical layout of the campus shall determine the total number of signs needed. Such signs are not intended to be legible from adjacent streets and shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from side and rear property lines, 60 feet from front property lines, and five feet from the edge of driveway pavement; 
2.  The entire sign structure shall not exceed 30 square feet, the sign area of such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in size, and the sign shall not exceed six feet in height; 
3.  At a single key decision making location within the parking lot, if one parking lot directory sign is not large enough to accommodate the essential directional information, two such signs may be placed side by side; 
4.  The letters and numbers on the signs shall not exceed five inches in height with each tenant/occupant listing to be limited to the same color, size, and shape. 
5.  Such signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. 
h.  Permanent window signs. Such signs shall be counted as part of the total wall sign area allowed. 
i.  Real estate signs. 
1.  One non-illuminated wall sign per lease space not to exceed 16 square feet in size and eight feet in height. Real estate information may also be incorporated into the permanent ground-mounted sign, provided the maximum permitted height and sign face area of the ground-mounted sign are not exceeded and the real estate sign is architecturally and visually compatible with the remainder of the permanent ground-mounted sign. In addition, where such real estate information is to be incorporated into the permanent ground-mounted sign, one non-illuminated wall sign shall be permitted at each available lease space not to exceed two square feet in size and eight feet in height. 
2.  In the event the entire campus is for sale or lease, one non-illuminated ground mounted sign not to exceed 20 square feet in size and six feet in height shall be permitted. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
3.  All real estate signs shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, rental, or lease of the real estate involved. 
j.  Temporary window signs. Any number of non-illuminated, temporary window signs per premises, not to exceed a total of 20 square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the total window area, whichever is less. 
k.  Wall signs. 
1.  There shall be a maximum of one wall sign per building wall which fronts upon a public street or faces upon a customer parking area, unless specifically provided for in this section. Such wall signs permitted a total area of one square foot per each linear foot of building wall upon which the sign is mounted, not to exceed 350 square feet. 
2.  One wall sign with the name of the medical campus shall be allowed on a building wall which fronts upon a public street. No other wall signs shall be located on the same wall as such sign. 
3.  With the exception of individual medical offices, each separate principal medical use within a building shall be allowed one wall sign. Such wall signs shall be limited to the side of a building which fronts upon a public street or faces upon a customer parking area. No other wall signs shall be located on the same wall as such signs, unless specifically provided for in this section. 
4.  If a wall is less than 75 feet long and is a glazed store front type exterior (glass), a second wall sign shall be allowed. Such second wall sign shall be a non-illuminated, no added color, etched sign in the glass. There shall be a maximum of two such signs per campus. 
5.  An emergency room shall be allowed one wall sign for each building wall approach to the emergency room portion of the building with a maximum of two such wall signs. No other wall signs shall be located on the same wall sign as such signs. 
6.  A wall clock that is limited to time and temperature shall be considered a wall sign. Such sign shall not display any moving light messages. 
7.  All wall signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structures and shall be consistent in terms of style, color, and illumination with the other signs in the complex. 
(11)  Signs permitted on land for churches and other places of worship. The following signs are permitted on land used for freestanding churches and other places of worship: 
a.  Address signs. One non-illuminated wall sign per entrance/door to the premises, not to exceed two square feet. The individual figures shall not be less than 31/2 inches nor more than eight inches high. The street address numbers may also be painted on the curb at the driveway entrance. The numerals displayed on curbs shall be four inches high. 
b.  Construction signs. One non-illuminated sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 32 square feet in size and ten feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall not be erected until a site plan has been approved. The sign shall be removed within 15 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the completion of a permanent sign, or the expiration of the site plan or building permit, whichever comes first. 
c.  Directional parking signs. One ground-mounted directional parking sign per entry/exit to a parking lot, not to exceed two square feet in size and 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of the street pavement and five feet from the edge of driveway and parking lot pavement. If signs are to be illuminated, internal illumination shall be used. 
d.  Ground-mounted signs. 
1.  One sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts, not to exceed 20 square feet in size, six feet in height, and is set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Such sign area may be increased in size by two square feet for each one additional foot the sign is set back from the front property line, not to exceed a maximum sign size of 40 square feet. When more than one ground-mounted sign is permitted on a single lot, such signs shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
2.  All ground-mounted signs shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. All letters, figures, emblems, and logos used on the sign shall be legible from the nearest adjacent street at which the sign face is directed. Individual letters or figures used within a logo or emblem are not required to be legible; however, the logo or emblem as a whole must be legible. 
3.  An address for the building shall be attached to the top of the ground-mounted sign, but shall not be factored into the permitted sign area or sign height. Such address, however, shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign height by more than 18 inches nor exceed the width of the sign area, including support structures. The individual figures shall not be less than eight inches nor more than 15 inches high. Such figures shall be displayed parallel to the ground. 
4.  Signs may have changeable copy provided the copy is not written in lights. 
5.  No sign permit shall be issued until a building permit has been issued. 
e.  Off-premises directional church signs. Churches and other places of worship as approved by the board of mayor and aldermen and which are located on streets classified as local, local collector, major collector, and minor arterial on the major road plan shall be permitted to have off-premises directional signs. The signs shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The sign shall be located within the rights-of-way at intersections approved by the board of mayor and aldermen; 
2.  The exact location of the sign shall be determined by town staff at the time of installation. The location and height of the sign shall be based on the current edition of the manual of uniform traffic control devices; 
3.  The sign shall match the existing signs in color, construction material, and size. The individual figures on such signs shall also match existing figures on existing signs in color and size and shall be painted with reflective paint; 
4.  The individual sign for each entity shall be purchased and maintained by such entity; and 
5.  The supporting structure of the sign shall be owned and maintained by the town. 
f.  Real estate signs. One non-illuminated sign per lot, parcel, or tract, not to exceed 20 square feet in size and six feet in height. Such signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines and shall be removed within 15 days after the sale, rental, or lease of the real estate involved. 
g.  Wall and roof signs. 
1.  Because of the unique architectural elements (i.e., belfries, cupolas, domes, steeples, etc.) that are often associated with churches and other places of worship and the common use of symbols incorporated into these unique architectural elements, any number of wall and roof signs shall be permitted. Such signs shall be architecturally compatible with the building. The visual resources review board (VRRB) shall review and approve the entire sign package for the building. 
2.  The total square footage of sign area allowed shall be based on the linear length of the widest building length which fronts upon a public street and the linear length of the widest building length which fronts upon a customer parking area. For each one foot of linear length of building, one square foot of sign area shall be permitted. Each sign shall be measured separately. 
3.  Roof signs allowed shall be limited to commonly recognized religious symbols associated with churches and other places of worship. No text is permitted. The symbol height shall be no taller than one-fifth of the height of the architectural element on which the symbol is mounted, but in no case to exceed 15 feet in height. Roof signs shall be architecturally compatible with the architectural element on which it is located. If illuminated, roof signs should be internally illuminated only. 
4.  Wall signs may be placed on any wall of the building. 
(Code 2007, § 9-406; Ord. No. 98-06, 4-1998; Ord. No. 99-37, 10-1999; Ord. No. 00-22, 6-2000; Ord. No. 02-06, 5-2002; Ord. No. 02-19, 12-2002; Ord. No. 03-06, 5-2003; Ord. No. 05-07, 4-2005; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 3-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-04, 3-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 4-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-31, §§ 2-5, 11-2-2006; Ord. No. 06-32, § 1, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 06-35, §§ 1, 2, 2-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 1-18-2007; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 3-1-2007; Ord. No. 08-04, §§ 1-3, 4-24-2008; Ord. No. 06-04, § 1, 3-9-2006; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 10-11, §§ 1-3, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 11-26, § 1, 1-12-2012; Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 7-28-2016 ) 
Chapter 111 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 111-1. - Definitions. 
    Any word or term not defined within this chapter or in chapter 2 of the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be construed to be used in this chapter as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the town's ordinances or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to it. 
    One-year frequency storm means a storm event defined to be 21/2 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Two-year frequency storm means a storm event with a 50 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 3 3/10 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Five-year frequency storm means a storm event with a 20 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 4 1/10 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Ten-year frequency storm means a storm event with a ten percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 4 8/10 in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information 
    Twenty-five-year frequency storm means a storm event with a four percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 51/2 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Fifty-year frequency storm means a storm event with a two percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 6 1/10 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    One hundred-year frequency storm means a storm event with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 61/2 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Five hundred-year frequency storm means a storm event with a one-fifth of one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; defined to be 7 6/10 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the town administrator shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    As-built plans means drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed. 
    Best management practice or BMPs means physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the town, and that have been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
    Community water means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, seeps, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the town. 
    Contaminant means any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Design storm event means a hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility. 
    Discharge means dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Easement means an acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of another. 
    Erosion means the removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
    First flush means pollutants deposited onto exposed areas can be dislodged and entrained by the rainfall-runoff process. Usually the stormwater that initially runs off an area will be more polluted than the stormwater that runs off later, after the rainfall has "cleansed" the catchment. The stormwater containing this high initial pollutant load is called the "first flush." The existence of this first flush of pollutants provides an opportunity for controlling stormwater pollution from a broad range of land uses. First flush collection systems are employed to capture and isolate this most polluted runoff, with subsequent runoff being diverted directly to the stormwater system. 
    Hotspot (priority area) means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Illicit connections means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system. Connections made pursuant to past approvals by the town or other governmental authority with jurisdiction over the area shall not be considered illicit. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. 
    Maintenance means any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. The term "maintenance" shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. The term "maintenance" shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
    Maintenance agreement means a document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or municipal separate stormwater system means the conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342. 
    Off-site facility means a structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    On-site facility means a structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    Peak flow means the maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event. 
    Priority area means a hotspot as defined in this section. 
    Runoff means that portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system. 
    Sediment means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level. 
    Sedimentation means soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in stream beds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
    Soils report means a study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees. 
    Stabilization means providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage. 
    Stormwater management means the programs to maintain quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
    Stormwater management facilities means the drainage structures, conduits, ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of. 
    Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
    Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural BMPs means devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff. 
    Surface water means and includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially, including, but not limited to, streams, ponds, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs. 
    Town administrator means the administrator for the town or his designated representative. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Watershed means all the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. 
(Code 2007, § 14-503; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-2. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the town and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the town, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the town's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, reservoirs, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, springs, seeps, and groundwater of the town. 
(2)  Enable the town to comply with the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges. 
(3)  Allow the town to exercise the powers granted in T.C.A. § 68-221-1105, which provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to: 
a.  Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality; 
b.  Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this statute, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits; 
c.  Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality; 
d.  Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed developments; 
e.  Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities; 
f.  Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of the permit; 
g.  Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been contaminated; and 
h.  Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public or private. 
(Code 2007, § 14-501; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-3. - Administering entity. 
    The town administrator or his designee shall administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2007, § 14-502; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 111-4. - Conflicting standards. 
    Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP manual adopted by the municipality under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail. 
(Code 2007, § 14-540; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-5. - Request for waivers. 
    Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the town administrator for approval. 
(Code 2007, § 14-511; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-6. - Conditions for waiver. 
    The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(1)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the town administrator; or 
(2)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility shall be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility shall be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(Code 2007, § 14-512; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Secs. 111-7-111-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 111-31. - Enforcement authority. 
    The town administrator shall have the authority to issue notices of violation and citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 2007, § 14-538; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-32. - Stormwater advisory committee; general responsibilities. 
    The committee shall provide guidance to town staff for developing and implementing an ongoing program of stormwater management directed at the protection and improvement of water quality of the local water resources and serve as the appellant body of the municipality for noted sections in this article in accordance with T.C.A. § 68-221-1106(d). 
(Code 2007, § 14-536; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 111-33. - Appeals process. 
(a)  In accordance with T.C.A. § 68-221-1106(d), the stormwater advisory committee shall serve as the appellate body for this article and have the power to hear and decide appeals of this article. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance or appeal to the town administrator. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance or appeal and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed request. The town administrator may require an alternatives analysis that clearly demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that minimal impact will occur as a result of the development. 
(c)  When the stormwater advisory committee is considering a request for a variance or an appeal, they may require additional information, such as, but not limited to, site design modifications, in order to fully evaluate the request. 
(Code 2007, § 14-537; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 111-34. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  Written notice. Whenever the town administrator finds that any permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this article or a permit or order issued hereunder, the town administrator may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten days of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the town administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The town administrator is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The town administrator may order any person who violates this ordinance or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the town administrator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the town administrator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, the town administrator may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; or 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(Code 2007, § 14-539; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Secs. 111-35-111-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 111-57. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this division, who violates any provision of this article, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the town administrator shall be guilty of a civil offense. 
(Code 2007, § 14-541; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-58. - Penalties. 
    Under the authority provided in T.C.A. § 68-221-1106, the municipality declares that any person violating the provisions of this article may be assessed a civil penalty by the town administrator of not less than $50.00 and not more than $5,000.00 per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 2007, § 14-542; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-59. - Measuring civil penalties. 
    In assessing a civil penalty, the town administrator may consider: 
(1)  The harm done to the public health or the environment; 
(2)  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
(3)  The economic benefit gained by the violator; 
(4)  The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation; 
(5)  Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the municipality; 
(6)  The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for specific categories of violations; and 
(7)  Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment. 
(Code 2007, § 14-543; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-60. - Recovery of damages and costs. 
    In addition to the civil penalty in section 111-59(2), the town may recover: 
(1)  All damages proximately caused by the violator to the municipality, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this article, or any other actual damages caused by the violation. 
(2)  The costs of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this article. 
(Code 2007, § 14-544; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-61. - Other remedies. 
    The town may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this article, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions. 
(Code 2007, § 14-545; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-62. - Remedies cumulative. 
    The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Code 2007, § 14-546; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-63. - Appeals of penalties. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1106(d), any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this division may appeal said penalty or damage assessment to the stormwater advisory committee as set out herein. Failure to so appeal shall be deemed as consent of the violator to the damage assessment or civil penalty and it shall become final. 
(Code 2007, § 14-547; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 111-64. - Appeals to be in writing. 
    The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the town administrator within 30 days after the civil penalty and/or damage assessment is served in any manner authorized by law. 
(Code 2007, § 14-548; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-65. - Public hearing. 
    Upon receipt of an appeal, the stormwater advisory committee shall hold a public hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting not to exceed 60 calendar days from the date of the appeal. Ten days' prior notice of the time, date, and location of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. Ten days' notice by registered mail shall also be provided to the aggrieved party, such notice to be sent to the address provided by the aggrieved party at the time of appeal. The decision of the stormwater advisory committee shall be final. 
(Code 2007, § 14-549; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 111-66. - Appealing decisions of the stormwater advisory committee. 
    Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the stormwater advisory committee pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. title 27, ch. 8 (T.C.A. § 27-8-101 et seq.). 
(Code 2007, § 14-550; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 111-67-111-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 111-91. - Building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a grading permit where the same is required by this article. 
(Code 2007, § 14-505; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Secs. 111-92-111-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRADING PERMIT 

Sec. 111-111. - Required. 
    Every person shall be required to obtain a grading permit from the town when a site plan is required per the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) or when a preliminary plat is required per the town subdivision regulations (appendix B to this Code). An application for a grading permit as provided in section 111-112 shall be submitted during the process of applying for either a site plan or preliminary plat. 
(Code 2007, § 14-504; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-112. - Application. 
(a)  Each application shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant. If the applicant is a business or other legally created entity, the responsible individual shall also be indicated; 
(2)  Business or residence address of applicant. A physical address is required. A post office box is not acceptable; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of record in the office of the assessor of property. A physical address is required. A post office box is not acceptable; 
(4)  Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor who shall perform the land-disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan; 
(6)  A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity; 
(7)  Where the proposed work encroaches the highest closed contour elevation of a sinkhole, the applicant shall obtain the appropriate permits from the state department of environment and conservation; 
(8)  The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the town from imposing additional development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this article, on the development of property covered by those permits. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan as required in section 111-155. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan, as required in section 111-154, providing for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed. 
(3)  Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by payment of grading permit and other stormwater management fees, which shall be set by resolution or ordinance. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, if the matter for which application has been filed, if completed, would be in violation of any ordinance of the town. No permit shall be issued to an applicant, or any shareholder of the entity serving as the applicant, who, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of this Code or ordinances of the town nor shall any permit be issued for a premises that, prior to the issuance of the permit, is in violation of any other sections of this Code or ordinances of the town. 
(Code 2007, § 14-506; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-113. - Review and approval of application. 
    In order to avoid as much as reasonably possible unnecessary expense to the applicant for a grading permit and unnecessary disturbance of land and related effects to property within the town, a grading permit may only be approved by the town administrator when: 
(1)  The related site plan or preliminary plat has been approved by the planning commission; or 
(2)  When in the town administrator's sole discretion, he concludes: 
a.  The planning commission has previously considered the site plan or preliminary plat; 
b.  The site plan or the preliminary plat is on the next scheduled agenda of the planning commission for final approval; and 
c.  The only outstanding modifications requested by the planning commission during its previous consideration of the site plan or preliminary plat are minor in nature, do not involve the sufficiency of the erosion and sediment control plan or the stormwater management plan during the land disturbing activity, and which modifications the applicant affirms to the town are in the process of being made to the plat or plan. 
(3)  If a grading permit is approved pursuant to subsection (2) of this section and the applicant fails to obtain the final approval of the plan or plat at the next meeting of the planning commission by making the required modifications, then the provisional grading permit shall expire and the applicant shall immediately cease all work pursuant to the provisional grading permit until final approval of the site plan or preliminary plat has, in fact, been obtained from the planning commission. 
(Code 2007, § 14-507; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-114. - Permit duration. 
    Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within 180 calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within 18 months from the date of the commencement of construction. 
(Code 2007, § 14-508; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-115. - Notice of construction. 
    The applicant shall notify the town administrator ten working days in advance of the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the town administrator. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any violations that exist. 
(Code 2007, § 14-509; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-116. - Performance security. 
(a)  In order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan, a performance security shall be posted with the town prior to the issuance of a permit. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs (e.g., for inflation, damages, or enforcement). The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. Alternatively, the town administrator shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost estimates. 
(b)  The performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state that the structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this division. The town administrator shall make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan, in compliance with the provisions of this division, and that the long term stabilization measures have been completed on all disturbed areas of the site. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages may be made at the discretion of the town administrator. 
(Code 2007, § 14-510; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-117. - Grading permit not to be issued where waiver requested. 
    No grading permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. 
(Code 2007, § 14-514; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Secs. 111-118-111-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 4. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 111-148. - Downstream damage, etc., prohibited. 
    In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town administrator that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream: 
(1)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(2)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property. 
(Code 2007, § 14-513; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-149. - Stormwater design or BMP manual. 
(a)  Adoption. The town adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manual (the "BMP manual") the then current versions of the following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this article as if fully set out herein: 
(1)  TDEC Guide to the Selection and Design of Stormwater Best Management Practices, latest edition; and 
(2)  TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, latest edition. 
(b)  Criteria, requirements. The BMP manual includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the specific design performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the governing body of the municipality, upon the recommendation of the town administrator, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitory and local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Code 2007, § 14-515; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-150. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
    Unless granted a waiver or judged by the town administrator to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms specified in this article or in the BMP manual and reduce the generation of post construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual. 
(3)  If determined by the town administrator to involve stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources, the town may require the stormwater management plan to meet additional performance criteria, or to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(4)  If determined by the town administrator to involve stormwater discharges from hotspots, the town may require the stormwater management plan to apply specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(5)  Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for grading permits shall consult with the town administrator to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(6)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities. 
(Code 2007, § 14-516; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-151. - Drain pipes. 
    Material for pipes used for conveyance of stormwater within the town shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Cross drains and any other pipe under the pavement surfaces shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). Storm drains within the roadway prism, but not under the pavement, shall also be RCP. 
(2)  Any pipe, culvert, or drainage system dedicated to the town, whether inside or outside the right-of-way, shall be constructed of RCP. 
(3)  RCP is required if the failure of the pipe would cause flooding or potential property damage on adjacent properties. RCP is required for all storm pipes and culverts that carry through water from adjacent properties ("off-site water"). 
(4)  RCP is required for all detention basin outlet structures. 
(5)  Material for driveway pipes may be RCP, corrugated metal pipe (CMP), or double-walled high-density-polyethylene-pipe (HDPE) as desired by the responsible agency, corporation, or individual. RCP is required underneath any driveways or entrances that are heavily traveled or which would have the potential to flood areas within the public right-of-way or any structure. 
(6)  Double-walled HDPE pipe and CMP may be used to convey stormwater generated on the particular property (on-site drainage), such as parking lots, buildings, etc. Both pipe materials (HDPE and CMP) may be used to convey water under driveways in locations where a pipe is outside the roadway prism, has adequate cover, and would not cause flooding of adjacent properties or rights-of-way in the event of pipe failure. 
(7)  Installation of all pipe must be done with adequate pipe bedding, backfill material, and coupling bands as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. 
(8)  All pipes, regardless of their material, shall be a minimum of 18 inches in diameter. 
(Code 2007, § 14-517; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-152. - Design standards for detention and/or retention ponds. 
(a)  The calculated peak flow rate of stormwater runoff resulting from a one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency 24-hour duration storm shall be no greater after development of the site than that which would result from a one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency 24-hour duration storm on the same site prior to development. 
(b)  Adequate attention must be given to safety and sanitation in the design of any detention facility. This includes, but is not limited to, a minimum of two percent slope in the bottom of all detention ponds, a minimum of 3:1 (H:V) side slopes or with traversable access to the pond's vegetated bottom and side slopes for maintenance, proposed contours should reflect 15 percent additional area for each two-foot contour of the detention or retention pond based on the appropriately sized pond for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, 25-, and 100-year storms, a minimum of 4,500 cubic feet of storage volume, and a minimum of one foot of freeboard from the highest water surface elevation for the largest required design storm to the top of the berm before the 15 percent additional volume is added. First-flush volume and treatment shall be provided as described in the BMP manual. 
(c)  The plans shall include sufficient design information to show that the facility will operate as required. This shall include the existing (or before site development) peak flow discharges, the after site development peak flow discharges, and/or volumes of stormwater runoff based on the proposed site development, as well as all necessary computations used to determine the reduced peak flow rates for the design storms. The capacity of the facility shall be sufficient to control the volume of stormwater runoff resulting from one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency 24-hour duration storms within the peak rate of flow requirements stated in this subsection. 
(d)  Discharge from the stormwater detention pond shall be routed to a ditch, channel, or stormwater facility of adequate capacity. Calculations showing the capacity of the receiving stormwater facility and its capability to convey a ten-year frequency storm shall be provided. If the receiving stormwater facility is incapable of conveying a ten-year frequency storm, calculations showing the capacity of the receiving stormwater facility and its capability to convey a two-year frequency storm shall also be provided. The above calculations will be routed to the closer of the second existing street crossing or blue-line stream. If energy dissipation is required, calculations must be submitted to confirm that proposed energy dissipation is adequate for the design. Such dissipation structures must be located outside any buffer area and a sufficient distance from adjacent property to prevent any adverse impact, such as erosion and scouring, to those adjacent properties, buffers, or receiving drainage way. 
(e)  The town administrator has authority to condition the approval of a permit upon the compliance with additional requirements, including, but not limited to, correctly sizing and installing offsite conveyance facilities or other stormwater management solutions required to reduce the adverse impact of the proposed development on other properties or the development. 
(f)  If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the town administrator may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(Code 2007, § 14-518; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-153. - Requirements for developments draining to a sinkhole. 
(a)  Development on property where the proposed work encroaches the highest closed contour elevation of a sinkhole will require copies of the appropriate permits from the state department of environment and conservation (TDEC) prior to site development approval. After review of the state permit, the town administrator may require additional information related to structural integrity and flood protection. If the proposed development does not require TDEC approval, a letter from TDEC obtained by the applicant shall be submitted to the town prior to the issuance of a permit, stating that a TDEC permit is not required. 
(b)  For development or redevelopment projects requiring attenuation or retention of the one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency 24-hour duration storms with sinkholes entirely on site, calculations shall be provided showing that 100-year 24-hour design storm will not flood any structures assuming plugged conditions (zero cubic feet per second (0 cfs) outflow) for the sinkhole. These calculations must include the entire contributing watershed for the sinkhole. An easement is required around the sinkhole to include an area that is a minimum of five feet horizontally outside the highest closed contour elevation. 
(c)  For development or redevelopment projects requiring attenuation or retention of the one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequency 24-hour duration storms with sinkholes partially on site, calculations must be provided showing that there will not be a rise in water surface elevations between the 100-year pre-developed and the 100-year post-developed 24-hour design storm assuming plugged conditions (zero cubic feet per second (0 cfs) outflow) for the sinkhole. An easement is required at a minimum of five feet horizontally outside the highest closed contour elevation on the section of the sinkhole located on the developed property. A rise in the 100-year water surface elevation is allowable when no structures will be flooded and all parties with ownership of the sinkhole agree in writing to allow the rise. In this case, an easement is required around the sinkhole to include an area that is a minimum of five feet horizontally outside the highest closed contour elevation. 
(Code 2007, § 14-519; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-154. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
    The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the town administrator to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted with all site plan applications and all preliminary plat applications. To accomplish this goal, the stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Topographic base map. A scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet for small tracts and one inch equals 50 feet for large tracts on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches which extends a minimum of 50 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates: 
a.  Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, seeps; and the type, size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures. 
b.  Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
c.  All other existing significant natural and artificial features; 
d.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; 
e.  Proposed structural BMPs; and 
f.  A written description of the proposed development and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(2)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article. These calculations shall show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and the guidelines of the BMP manual. All hydrologic and hydraulic computations utilized in the design of stormwater detention facilities must be prepared by a registered engineer proficient in the field of hydrology and hydraulics and licensed to practice engineering in the state. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable; 
b.  Time of concentration; 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil moisture conditions; 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.  Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities; 
g.  Flow velocities; 
h.  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and 
i.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(3)  Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(4)  Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility. 
(5)  Landscaping plan. The applicant shall present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the BMP manual, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in the state. The plan shall comply with the landscape plan requirements and filing deadlines established in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(6)  Maintenance easements. The applicant shall ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record. 
(7)  Maintenance agreement. 
a.  The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent property owners. 
b.  The maintenance agreement shall: 
1.  Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation. 
2.  Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this article. The property owner will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the town administrator. It shall also grant permission to the town to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained. 
3.  Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to, the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual. 
4.  Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the town administrator. 
5.  Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the town administrator shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the town's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property. 
(Code 2007, § 14-520; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-155. - Erosion and sediment control plan requirements. 
    The erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land-disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with all site plan applications and all preliminary plat applications. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least the following: 
(1)  Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and infrastructure required. 
(2)  A topographic map with a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet for small tracts and one inch equals 50 feet for large tracts on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches with contour intervals of two feet or less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity. 
(3)  All existing waterways, including intermittent and wet-weather. Include any designated floodways or flood fringe. 
(4)  A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified. 
(5)  An inventory of tree cover and, as appropriate, individual trees, as provided for in chapter 113. This information may be shown on the tree preservation/removal plan. 
(6)  The location and a detail of proposed tree protection measures and an indication as to whether any special measures will be needed to help save selected trees and/or tree cover. This information may be shown on the tree preservation/removal plan. 
(7)  Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling. 
(8)  Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site. 
(9)  A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics. 
(10)  Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements. 
(11)  Proposed drainage network. 
(12)  Proposed drain pipe or drainage ditch sizes. 
(13)  Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development. Specifically, the plan must address the degree to which waterways can accept stormwater off site when stormwater is concentrated and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of off-site waterways and drainage areas, etc. 
(14)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and erosion and sedimentation control plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMPs. 
(15)  Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan. 
(16)  Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the town administrator. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the work day by sweeper, broom or hand shovel to the satisfaction of the town administrator. Washing or disposing of sediment, soil or debris into stormwater system or waterway is strictly forbidden, and failure to remove that sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(17)  Proposed structures: location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site. 
(18)  A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the groundwater system through infiltration. 
(Code 2007, § 14-521; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-156. - Post construction; as-built plans. 
    All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for all structures required by either the site plan or the preliminary plat located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan shall show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. A final inspection by the town administrator is required before any performance security will be released. The town administrator shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security on the completion of various stages of development. In addition, certificates of occupancy or certificates of completion shall not be granted until corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the town administrator. 
(Code 2007, § 14-522; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-157. - Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(a)  Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by the town administrator. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
(1)  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
(2)  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
(3)  Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 90 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 90 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(4)  In order to ensure the long term maintainability of slopes, slopes that are 2.5-3.0:1 shall be matted and planted with grasses that do not require mowing. Matting and grasses shall be approved by town staff. Exotic invasive species shall be prohibited. Slopes steeper than 2.5:1 are prohibited. Retaining walls or knee walls shall be constructed so as to maintain slopes gentler than 2.5:1. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of this section, a landscaping plan prepared per the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(Code 2007, § 14-523; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005; Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 6-25-2009) 
Sec. 111-158. - Inspection of stormwater management facilities. 
    Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed as provided for in section 111-154(7)b.2. 
(Code 2007, § 14-524; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-159. - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the town administrator during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Code 2007, § 14-525; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-160. - Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. 
    If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required for stormwater facilities under this article, the town administrator, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the town administrator shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the town administrator may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the town administrator under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. 
(Code 2007, § 14-526; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-161. - Requirements for all existing locations and developments. 
    Where the town administrator finds in his sole discretion that conditions on a site are causing substantial erosion, sediment or contaminants to enter stormwater, or are inhibiting the proper flow of stormwater upon the site, he may apply the following requirements to all locations and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this article: 
(1)  Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the town administrator. 
(2)  Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed. 
(3)  Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion. 
(4)  Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage ways. 
(5)  Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to prevent pollution of waterways. Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Ponds. 
1.  Detention pond; 
2.  Extended detention pond; 
3.  Wet pond (retention pond); 
4.  Alternative storage measures. 
b.  Constructed wetlands. 
c.  Infiltration systems. 
1.  Infiltration/percolation trench; 
2.  Infiltration basin; 
3.  Drainage (recharge) well; 
4.  Porous pavement. 
d.  Filtering systems. 
1.  Catchbasin inserts/media filter; 
2.  Sand filter; 
3.  Filter/absorption bed; 
4.  Filter and buffer strips. 
e.  Open channel: Swale. 
(Code 2007, § 14-527; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-162. - Requirements for existing problem locations. 
    When the town administrator has made the finding provided in section 111-161, he shall notify the owners in writing of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting such locations and developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems to be made at the owner's expense. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance that the owner shall have to complete specific actions. 
(Code 2007, § 14-528; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-163. - Inspection of existing facilities. 
(a)  The town administrator may, to the extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of this article, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Routine inspections; 
(2)  Random inspections; 
(3)  Inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; 
(4)  Inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; 
(5)  Inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality's NPDES stormwater permit or are determined to be detrimental to the public health or welfare; and 
(6)  Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
(b)  Inspections may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Reviewing maintenance and repair records; 
(2)  Sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and 
(3)  Evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs. 
(Code 2007, § 14-529; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-164. - Corrections of problems subject to appeal. 
    Corrective measures imposed by the town administrator under this section are subject to appeal as described in section 111-63. 
(Code 2007, § 14-530; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-165. - Illicit discharges; scope. 
    Sections 111-166 through 111-169 shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Code 2007, § 14-531; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-166. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
    No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources: 
a.  Water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
b.  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water; 
c.  Diverted stream flows; 
d.  Rising ground water; 
e.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
f.  Pumped uncontaminated groundwater; 
g.  Foundation or footing drains; 
h.  Crawl space pumps; 
i.  Air conditioning condensation; 
j.  Springs; 
k.  Non-commercial washing of vehicles, or car washing of less than two consecutive days in duration for a charity or non-profit fundraising or similar noncommercial activity; 
l.  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
m.  Swimming pools (if dechlorinated-typically less than three PPM chlorine); 
n.  Firefighting activities; and 
o.  Any other uncontaminated water source. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the town administrator as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the town administrator has so specified in writing. 
(Code 2007, § 14-532; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-167. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection, except those connections originally made with the approval of the town or other governmental authority with jurisdiction over the area. 
(Code 2007, § 14-533; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-168. - Reduction of stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2007, § 14-534; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Sec. 111-169. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, or the municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the town administrator in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the town administrator within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years. 
(Code 2007, § 14-535; Ord. No. 05-16, 10-2005) 
Chapter 113 - TREE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Any word or term not defined within this section or in chapter 2 of the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be construed to be used in this chapter as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the town's ordinance or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to it. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of disturbance means an area on an individual piece of property which is proposed to be altered by cutting and filling, building, roadway, and/or parking lot construction, the placement of utilities, and/or any other activities which could affect the survival of existing trees. 
    Caliper means the diameter of the stem of a tree as measured six inches above the ground for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches above the ground for larger diameter trees. Caliper is used as a measurement standard for relatively small trees. 
    Certified arborist means a practicing arborist certified by the National Arborist Association. 
    Commercial logging and timber harvesting means the cutting and removal of trees from a site for commercial purposes, leaving the stump and root mass intact. 
    Construction activity means any activity which requires a site plan and/or a preliminary plat to be reviewed by the town municipal planning commission. Such activities might include, but not be limited to, the following: the construction of new buildings or expansions to existing buildings and the development of new roadways and other improvements. 
    Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH) means the diameter, in inches, of a tree trunk as measured 41/22 feet above the ground. If the tree splits into multiple trunks below 41/2 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. Diameter-at-breast-height is used as a measurement standard for relatively large trees. 
    Dripline means a vertical line extending from the outermost portion of the tree canopy to the ground. 
    Environmentally sensitive areas means areas where tree removal could create adverse impacts on storm water runoff, erosion control and/or water quality. Such areas include, but are not necessarily limited to, mapped floodplains and wetlands, sinkholes, streamside management zones, areas adjacent to perennial, intermittent, and/or ephemeral streams, and/or steep slopes. 
    Ephemeral stream means a wet weather stream which flows in a diffuse manner and not within a well-defined channel. Such streams are created in response to a heavy rainstorm and continue only for a short period after rainfall ceases. 
    Forestry professional means a practicing forester with a degree in forestry from an accredited college or university. 
    Hazardous tree means a diseased, dead, structurally unsound, or otherwise unsafe tree that is likely to endanger the public, an adjoining property owner, and/or other trees. The term "hazardous tree" does not include trees which are otherwise healthy but which are made hazardous as a result of proposed construction or non-construction-related activities. Where a tree is questionable as to whether it is hazardous, a written determination shall be made by the town administrator or his designee in consultation with a certified arborist or forestry professional. 
    Intermittent stream means a stream which contains water within a well-defined channel that only flows temporarily following a major rainstorm or as long as the water table is elevated. 
    Invasive exotic pest tree means any tree which is included on the "Invasive Exotic Pest Plants in Tennessee" list which is maintained by the research committee of the state exotic pest council. 
    Land disturbance permit means a permit issued for a proposed activity which would lead to the removal or disturbance of existing tree cover, including clearing and grubbing operations, but would not involve the alteration of the prevailing topography. 
    Licensed landscape architect means a current state-licensed landscape architect, as defined by the state board of architecture and engineering examiners. 
    Natural regeneration means the natural establishment of trees and other vegetation with at least 400 woody, free-to-grow seedlings per acre, which are capable of reaching a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. 
    Non-construction activity means any alteration of the natural environment which would involve the removal or destruction of any tree protected in this chapter but which is not in association with a site plan and/or preliminary plat required to be reviewed by the town municipal planning commission. 
    Perennial stream means a stream which contains water within a well-defined channel the majority of the year. 
    Public tree means a tree growing on land owned by a unit of government (federal, state, county, town, or any agency thereof). 
    Replacement tree means any tree planted on a site to replace a protected tree which has been removed or destroyed as a result of construction and/or non-construction activities. 
    Specimen tree means a particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade, shape, age, or any other trait that, in the opinion of the professional responsible for preparing the tree preservation/removal plan, epitomizes the character of the species. 
(1)  The term "tree" includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.  Any nonhazardous tree which has a particularly uncommon or widely valued characteristic and which has a DBH of more than 24 inches; 
b.  Any nonhazardous tree which has been declared as rare or endangered by an agency of the state or federal government and which is protected by the laws of the state or the laws of the United States; and/or 
c.  Any tree which is associated with a historic event or historic structure or is otherwise commonly recognized within the community to have historical significance. 
(2)  Where a tree is questionable as to whether it is a specimen, a written determination shall be made by the town administrator or his designee in consultation with a certified arborist or forestry professional. 
    Streamside management zone (SMZ) means an undisturbed strip of land between a disturbed area and a body of water. The primary purpose of an SMZ is to protect stream banks and channels from disturbance by equipment and prevent eroded materials from entering water courses. The minimum width for an SMZ shall be 25 feet. However, a greater width may be required depending on the slope of the land between the proposed disturbed area and the stream. The state department of agriculture, division of forestry, best management practices shall be referenced to determine appropriate SMZ widths. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant which is capable of growing to a height of 15 feet or more and which usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. 
    Tree cover means the area directly beneath the crown and within the dripline of a tree. 
    Tree farming means and includes nursery stock trees for resale in commercial nurseries or garden centers and trees specifically grown to be harvested as Christmas trees. 
    Tree regeneration means the act of re-creating a stand or entire forest by replacing older trees with new trees. 
(Code 1985, § 4-602; Code 2007, § 14-102; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 01-14, 8-2001) 
Sec. 113-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  At a minimum, where any protected tree is removed without first obtaining the required permission, such tree shall be replaced with a tree approved by the town staff. The required minimum number of replacement trees shall be equal to, in caliper inches, the caliper inches of the tree or trees removed. 
(b)  In addition, any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(c)  The foregoing provisions relative to replacement trees and fines shall not in any way prevent the town from also issuing stop work orders, withholding inspections, cashing bonds or letters of credit, or seeking injunctive relief against a violator of this chapter. 
(Code 2007, § 14-116; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-3. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and public welfare of the inhabitants of the town and, consistent with forestry policy and practice as promulgated by the department of agriculture, division of forestry, of the state, to promote and encourage the protection of existing trees and root systems; to regulate the preservation, replacement, and indiscriminate removal of trees; and to establish procedures and practices and minimum design standards for fulfilling these purposes. 
(b)  The standards established herein are intended to: promote air quality; reduce noise, heat and glare; lessen soil erosion and minimize flooding; ensure that development activities in one area do not adversely affect activities within adjacent areas; minimize the unnecessary removal of trees during development; stress the importance of trees as a visual screen; promote the development of open space corridors for wildlife and recreational activities; beautify and enhance improved and unimproved land; promote the preservation of the town's historical "rural community" heritage; and, minimize the cost of construction and maintenance of drainage systems necessitated by increased flow and diversion of surface waters. 
(Code 1985, § 4-601; Code 2007, § 14-101; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-4. - Applicability. 
    The following activities shall be considered exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The construction of individual single-family detached and two-family dwelling units on individual lots; 
(2)  Provisions for utilities and vehicular and pedestrian ways within platted easements and rights-of-way; 
(3)  Removal of hazardous trees; 
(4)  Removal of invasive exotic pest trees; 
(5)  Activities conducted by an owner on his lot of residence (this does not, however, include the removal of more than one acre of tree cover within a consecutive three-year time period); and 
(6)  Tree farming. 
(Code 1985, § 4-603; Code 2007, § 14-103; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Secs. 113-5-113-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 113-27. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Grading permit. For purposes of compliance with this article, a grading permit, as provided for in chapter 111 shall be issued when a tree preservation/removal plan has been approved, all tree protective and erosion control measures are in place and have been inspected and approved by the town staff, and, unless waived by the town administrator or his designee, a pre-construction conference has been conducted. 
(b)  Land disturbance permit. For tree removal activities which do not involve grading, a land disturbance permit shall be issued once a tree preservation/removal plan has been approved, all tree protective and, if necessary, erosion control measures are in place and have been inspected and approved by the town staff, and a tree replacement bond or irrevocable letter of credit has been provided to ensure that any required replacement trees will be planted. The dollar amount for this bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be determined by the town administrator or his designee based on the approved tree replacement or regeneration plan. 
(Code 2007, § 14-114; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-28. - Authority to enforce provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the town administrator or his designee. 
(Code 2007, § 14-115; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Secs. 113-29-113-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 3. - TREE PRESERVATION/REMOVAL PLAN 

Sec. 113-60. - Trees protected. 
    The following protected tree groups, as identified from the inventory requirements of this article provided for in section 113-61, shall not be removed or otherwise destroyed without first obtaining approval of a tree preservation/removal plan from the town planning commission (FMPC) or, where applicable, the town administrator or his designee: 
(1)  Any hardwood tree which has a DBH of ten inches or greater, any evergreen tree which has a DBH of 15 inches or greater, and/or any dogwood ( Cornus florida ) or redbud ( Cercis canadensis ) which has a caliper of more than four inches, except as provided for elsewhere in this article; 
(2)  Any specimen tree; 
(3)  Any dogwood ( Cornus florida ) or redbud ( Cercis canadensis ) which has a caliper of more than four inches; 
(4)  Any public tree; 
(5)  Any grouping of trees which are significant by virtue of their size, species, location, appearance, or other distinguishing feature, characteristic, or function; and/or 
(6)  Any trees located within environmentally sensitive areas. 
(Code 1985, § 4-604; Code 2007, § 14-104; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 01-14, 8-2001; Ord. No. 07-23, § 1, 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 113-61. - Review process and application requirements. 
(a)  Tree preservation/removal. 
(1)  When an activity requires the submission of a preliminary plat or a site plan to be reviewed by the FMPC, a tree preservation/removal plan shall be provided and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
a.  The name and location of the project; 
b.  A north arrow and a written and graphic scale; 
c.  The name, address, telephone number, and seal or statement of professional qualifications of the professional responsible for the preparation of the plan; 
d.  An indication of proposed improvements and the proposed area of disturbance; 
e.  The general location and approximate square footage and acreage of all covered areas; 
f.  The approximate density, predominant species, general distribution of predominant species, and predominant level of maturity of trees within all tree covered areas. Maturity levels shall be classified as follows: 
1.  Young stands would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are less than six inches at DBH; 
2.  Intermediate stands would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are six to ten inches at DBH; and 
3.  Mature stands would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are greater than ten inches at DBH; 
g.  The species, exact location, as determined by a licensed surveyor, and size of any hardwood tree which has a DBH of ten inches or greater, any evergreen tree which has a DBH of 15 inches or greater, and/or any dogwood ( Cornus florida ) or redbud ( Cercis canadensis ) which has a caliper of more than four inches. Such trees shall be shown only if they are within and/or 25 feet beyond the proposed area of disturbance. 
1.  In association with a preliminary plat or a tract which is part of a site plan submittal and that is densely wooded with more than half of the non-buffer portion of the tract in tree cover, such trees, unless they are classified as specimen trees, shall not be required to be individually identified. In such cases, replacement trees shall still be provided as outlined in section 113-64. 
2.  The description of the affected tree cover areas, however, must be very detailed and accurate and include, at a minimum, the information noted in subsection (a)(1)f of this section. 
3.  The objective of the inventory is to identify the most and least desirable tree cover on the property to see if the site design can in some fashion capitalize on what the property has to offer. 
h.  The species, exact location, as determined by a licensed surveyor, and size of any specimen tree which is within and/or 25 feet beyond the proposed area of disturbance; 
i.  An indication of whether an identified tree is proposed to be saved or is proposed for removal; 
j.  An indication of those trees which are considered to be hazardous; 
k.  The location of any environmentally sensitive areas; 
l.  The location of any required buffer strips; 
m.  A detail and an indication of the location, height, and material used for tree protective fencing; 
n.  An indication, including, where applicable, a detail of any other tree protective measures, such as dry wells, retaining walls, mulched aisle ways, etc.; 
o.  Proposed location for temporary construction activities such as equipment or worker parking, materials storage, burn holes, and equipment wash down areas; and 
p.  A written indication of any treatments, pruning, or other measures which may be needed to promote the preservation of an existing tree. 
(2)  In all cases, the tree preservation/removal plan shall be consistent with other subdivision and site development elements, such as stormwater and erosion control measures, proposed grading, and utility provisions which are included as part of the preliminary plat or site plan. Where such consistency is in question, the applicant may be required to overlay these other site development elements onto the tree preservation/removal plan. 
(3)  The tree preservation/removal plan shall be prepared by either a licensed landscape architect, a certified arborist, a forestry professional, or any other person with proven equivalent qualifications based on the nature and scale of the proposed project. 
(b)  Landscaping. In addition, where a landscape plan is required per the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code), the number, species, size, and location of any replacement trees and/or existing trees to be saved must be included as part of the landscape plan. In all cases, in terms of the trees shown to be either removed or saved, the information shown on the landscape plan shall be consistent with the approved tree preservation/removal plan. A tree replacement/credit summary, as provided for in this article, shall be included on both plans. 
(c)  Administrative review. Where the removal of protected trees is not associated with a construction-related activity, such removal shall only be permitted if a tree preservation/removal plan is approved by the town administrator or his designee. If the scale of the proposed removal is deemed to be significant, the town administrator or his designee may require the plan to be reviewed by the FMPC. In all cases, the applicable information noted in this article shall be provided on the plan. 
(Code 1985, § 4-605; Code 2007, § 14-105; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 01-14, 8-2001; Ord. No. 07-23, § 2, 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 113-62. - Approval/denial of application. 
(a)  Approval. A tree preservation/removal plan may be approved if it can be determined that: 
(1)  The plan is consistent with stormwater, erosion, and sedimentation control measures which are in accordance with chapter 111. 
(2)  Where commercial logging and timber harvesting are involved, the plan is, at a minimum, in accordance with the state department of agriculture, division of forestry, best management practices (BMPs); 
(3)  The plan addresses the preservation of existing trees; 
(4)  The plan provides for sufficient and timely replanting of trees, where required, to compensate for the removal of trees and other vegetation; and 
(5)  The applicant intends to complete the proposed activity within a reasonable time frame, determined by the size of the development, and will take steps to prevent any negative impacts resulting from the work proposed. 
(b)  Denial. A tree preservation/removal plan may be denied where: 
(1)  In association with a site plan, less than 15 percent of the existing tree cover, not counting any buffer strips required per the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code), would remain; 
(2)  In association with a preliminary plat, tree removal is proposed beyond the area reasonably necessary for cut and fill associated with provisions for on-site public improvements and/or the installation of utilities; 
(3)  For non-construction related activities, the removal of over 50 percent of a site's protected trees, not counting any required buffer strips, is proposed; 
(4)  A specimen tree which could reasonably be saved is proposed for removal; 
(5)  Obvious problems related to storm water runoff, erosion, and siltation would result; 
(6)  Tree removal is proposed in environmentally sensitive areas; 
(7)  Where commercial logging and timber harvesting are involved, proposed tree removal is not in accordance with established state department of agriculture, division of forestry, best management practices (BMPs); 
(8)  The extent of clearing would result in obvious damage to the property of others; 
(9)  The proposed activity could be reasonably conducted in a manner which would better preserve existing trees and/or further promote the intent of this article; and/or 
(10)  Tree removal activities are otherwise inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this article. 
(c)  Period to grant, deny or approve. Upon initial presentation, the FMPC, town administrator and/or his designee shall have 45 days to grant, deny, approve, or approve with conditions, restrictions, limitations, or alterations such tree preservation/removal plans in conjunction with the preliminary plat, site plan, or landscape plan. In the event that an application is denied, the specific reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and a copy of same shall be forwarded to the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 4-606; Code 2007, § 14-106; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 01-14, 8-2001) 
Sec. 113-63. - Appeal. 
    Any applicant or aggrieved party with legal standing may appeal any decision or action of the FMPC or town administrator or his designee to the town board of mayor and aldermen (FBMA). Such appeal, however, must be submitted in writing to the town recorder within 30 days of the decision or action in question. Upon receipt of an appeal, the FBMA shall have 45 days to affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the FMPC, town administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 4-607; Code 2007, § 14-107; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-64. - Tree replacement provision. 
(a)  Where the FMPC or the town administrator or his designee has approved the removal of an existing healthy, nonhazardous hardwood tree with a DBH of ten inches or greater and/or an existing healthy, nonhazardous evergreen tree with a DBH of 15 inches or greater, a replacement tree shall be provided based on the following schedule: 
Tree Replacement Schedule 
Size of Tree Proposed for Removal Number of New Trees Required 10-inch to 15-inch DBH Two Between 16-inch and 20-inch DBH Three for a hardwood tree removed; 11/2 for an evergreen tree removed > 20-inch DBH Four for a hardwood tree removed; two for an 
evergreen tree removed  
(b)  Replacement trees shall also be required where the FMPC, town administrator or his designee has approved the removal of existing healthy, nonhazardous dogwoods ( Cornus florida ) or redbuds ( Cercis canadensis ) which are greater than four inches in caliper. If the dogwood or redbud to be removed is ten inches or more at DBH, the number of required replacement trees shall be based on the above tree replacement schedule. If the dogwood or redbud is less than ten inches at DBH, the caliper inches of such tree shall be added to the caliper inches of other dogwoods and redbuds to be removed and which are less than ten inches at DBH and a replacement tree shall be required for every ten cumulative inches of caliper to be removed. Where the resultant required number of replacement trees contains a fraction, any fraction less than one-half may be dropped and any fraction one-half or more shall be counted as one replacement tree. 
(c)  For preliminary plats and those site plan tracts where an inventory of individual non-specimen protected trees is not required, replacement trees shall be provided based on the tree cover identified using the parameters provided for in section 113-61(a)(1)f. Tree covered areas identified as young stands shall require one replacement tree for every 7,500 square feet identified. Tree covered areas identified as intermediate stands shall require one replacement tree for every 5,000 square feet identified. Tree covered areas identified as mature stands shall require one replacement tree for every 2,500 square feet identified. 
(d)  Where replacement trees cannot be reasonably accommodated on the subject property, the developer shall be required to dedicate the excess required replacement trees to a public property approved by the town administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 4-608; Code 2007, § 14-108; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 01-14, 8-2001; Ord. No. 07-23, § 3, 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 113-65. - Tree credit provision. 
(a)  An existing healthy, nonhazardous tree to be saved and which has a DBH of ten inches or greater and is located within an approved area of disturbance or an area on the same parcel adjacent to and up to 25 feet beyond the approved area of disturbance and which is not located within a required buffer strip may be credited toward fulfilling a portion of the non-buffer strip landscaping requirements specified in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). Tree credits shall be based on the following schedule: 
Tree Credit Schedule 
Size of Existing Tree to be Saved Credited Number of New Trees 10-inch to 15-inch DBH Four for a hardwood tree saved; two for an 
evergreen tree saved Between 16-inch and 20-inch DBH Six for a hardwood tree saved; three for an 
evergreen tree saved > 20-inch DBH Eight for a hardwood tree saved; four for an 
evergreen tree saved  
(b)  The preservation of clusters of healthy, nonhazardous hardwood trees, particularly dogwoods ( Cornus florida ) and redbuds ( Cercis canadensis ), which are less than ten inches at DBH but more than four inches in caliper and are located within an approved area of disturbance or an area on the same parcel adjacent to and up to 25 feet beyond the approved area of disturbance and which is not located within a required buffer strip may also be credited toward fulfilling a portion of the non-buffer strip landscaping requirements. For every five caliper inches preserved, a credit may be given toward the planting of one new tree. Where the resultant number of credited trees contains a fraction, any fraction less than one-half may be dropped and any fraction one-half or more shall be counted as one credited tree. 
(c)  In all cases, trees proposed for credit must comply with all applicable provisions specified in this article. In addition, the minimum required number of front yard shade trees and the number of trees needed to meet the minimum spacing requirement between shade trees and new parking spaces, as provided for in the landscaping requirements in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code), must be met independently. 
(Code 1985, § 4-609; Code 2007, § 14-109; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999; Ord. No. 07-23, § 4, 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 113-66. - Tree conservation and landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Should the number of required replacement trees exceed the number of credited trees, the difference shall be planted as an addition to the number required per the landscaping requirements specified in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). However, such replacement trees shall not be required in excess of 20 percent of the total number of non-buffer strip trees needed to fulfill the landscaping requirements. All required replacement trees shall meet the minimum size requirements for canopy trees, as specified in the landscaping requirements. Such species and their proposed location shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
(b)  Should the number of credited trees exceed the number of required replacement trees, such trees may count toward replacing up to one-half of the required number of non-buffer strip trees. 
(c)  Any tree which is to be saved and which does not survive the two-year time frame of the landscape maintenance bond required per the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) shall be replaced based on the requirements specified in this article. Should the health of a tree be in question, no landscape maintenance bond, letter of credit, or similar surety will be released until a letter is provided by a certified arborist or forestry professional which states that the tree is healthy and will likely survive. 
(Code 2007, § 14-110; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-67. - Tree replacement for non-construction activities. 
(a)  For nonconstruction activities, a plan for tree replacement shall be presented to the town administrator or his designee. Replacement trees shall be provided per the requirements specified in this article and shall meet the minimum size requirements for canopy trees specified in the landscape requirements of the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code). 
(b)  Where land is to be reused for commercial logging and timber harvesting, an alternate plan involving natural or other forms of tree regeneration may be considered if such a plan is prepared and recommended by a forestry professional. At a minimum, the plan shall clearly promote the purpose and intent of this article and shall be in accordance with the state department of agriculture, division of forestry, best management practices. 
(Code 2007, § 14-111; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-68. - Standards for crediting existing trees. 
    Existing trees will only be credited as fulfilling landscaping requirements where such trees meet the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  They are healthy, safe, and meet the size, location, and other applicable provisions of the landscaping requirements; 
(2)  They are comparable, in terms of species classification and general characteristics, to new trees that would be permitted in the proposed location per the landscaping requirements specified in the town zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code); and 
(3)  They do not and are not likely to interfere with existing or planned utilities or vision clearance standards. 
(Code 2007, § 14-112; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Sec. 113-69. - Tree protective measures. 
    Where any tree and/or grouping of trees are to be saved, the following minimum preservation measures shall apply: 
(1)  Protective fencing shall be located to correspond to the existing drip line of the individual tree or clusters of trees to be protected; 
(2)  Protective fencing shall be at least three feet high, upright and highly visible, and shall be constructed of a durable material that will last until construction is completed. Throughout the construction process, the tree fencing shall remain undisturbed and no activity or storage of any materials or vehicles shall be permitted within the fenced area; and 
(3)  Where trees are to be removed, such trees shall be flagged and shall be felled away from, rather than into areas with existing trees to be preserved. 
(Code 2007, § 14-113; Ord. No. 99-39, 10-1999) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this appendix is the town zoning ordinance, as adopted in February 2006, and subsequently amended. Amendments are indicated in parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning, T.C.A. § 13-7-201 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PURPOSE 
    Whereas, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Farragut desire to adopt this text and maps relating thereto as the zoning ordinance for the Town of Farragut; and 
    Whereas, in connection therewith the board desires to provide for the establishment of districts within the corporate limits of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee; to regulate within such districts the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and types of buildings and structures, the percent of lot occupancy, the required open space, the density of population, and the uses of land, buildings and structures; to provide for amendments, exceptions and variances; to provide methods of administration; and to prescribe penalties for violation thereof; 
    Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen that: 

Sec. I. - Authority. 
A.  The following text and maps relating thereto shall be and become the zoning ordinance, constituting the zoning element of the zoning plan, for the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, which text and maps were prepared by the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission and certified to this Board of Mayor and Aldermen, which text and maps this Board of Mayor and Aldermen does hereby adopt as the zoning ordinance for the Town of Farragut. 
B.  Any equally or less stringent provision of any previously adopted ordinance which provisions are the same as or are in conflict or at variance with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby amended by deleting the same, rendering the same of no further force and effect and Ordinances 80-10 and 80-10A are hereby repealed in their entirety. 
C.  Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated 13-4-201, 13-7-201, and 13-7-202 [T.C.A. § 13-4-201, 13-7-201 and 13-7-202], this ordinance shall be an element of the Farragut Zoning Plan, which plan shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the Farragut Zoning Ordinance and the Farragut Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. II. - General purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purposes of promoting the public health, prosperity, safety and general welfare of the community. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fires, floods, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to discourage the premature and unnecessary conversion of open-space land to urban uses, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things as to the character of each district and its uses, and with a view toward conserving open space and the value of buildings, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. III. - Illustrations. 















(Ord. No. 86-16, ch. 1, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 
    For the purpose of this ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel"; the word "structure" includes the word "building"; and the term "shall" is always mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or structure, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Any word or term not defined within this section of the Zoning Ordinance or within the definitions section of Sign Ordinance in the Farragut Municipal Code shall be construed to be used in this ordinance as defined by the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. Any word or term not defined in the Town's ordinance or the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
    Accessory building : A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building and located on the same lot with such building. A building that is connected to a principal building by a breezeway that is greater than 12 feet in length shall be considered accessory for purposes of size limitations. 
    Accessory structure: A structure or building detached from a principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
    Accessory use: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use. 
    Agricultural use: This includes all forms of agriculture, the growing of crops in the open, dairying, grazing, the raising and maintaining of poultry and other livestock, horticulture, viticulture, enclosed and open plant nursery, nursery sales and forestry uses. The feeding or disposal of community or collected garbage shall not be deemed an agricultural use, nor shall solid waste disposal sites, commercial feed lots, the raising of fur-bearing animals, fish or minnow hatcheries, riding academy, livery or boarding stables or dog kennels be so considered. 
    Agricultural use and structures, accessory: Those structures and use which are normally required in the operation of permitted agricultural uses. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine all questions regarding such uses and structures. 
    Alcoholic beverage: Those beverages regulated under provisions of state law administered by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission and all ordinances of the Town of Farragut regulating alcoholic beverages. 
    Alterations: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing height, or for public utility purposes. 
    Appeal: A request for a review by the Board of Zoning Appeals of any ruling, or denial by the Town Building Official pursuant to this ordinance, or interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a special exception, or a request for a variance. 
    Arbor: A freestanding latticework bower intertwined with climbing vines and flowers which defines or demarks an entry way. 
    Area, building: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the average ground elevation of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps. Such area shall be calculated to determine "maximum lot coverage." 
    Arterial streets or roads: Those streets or roads so designated on the Farragut Major Road Plan. 
    Assisted-Care Living Facility: A building, establishment, complex or distinct part thereof that accepts primarily aged persons for domiciliary care and services. Such facilities are licensed by the State of Tennessee. The parcel or tract of land and the units within the facility shall remain under single ownership so that individual units are not transferrable in fee simple. 
    Assisted-Care Living Facility Resident: Primarily an aged person who requires domiciliary care, and who upon admission to the facility, if not ambulatory, is capable of self-transfer from the bed to a wheelchair or similar device and is capable of propelling such wheelchair or similar device independently. Such a resident may require one or more of the following services: room and board, assistance with non-medical activities of daily living, administration of typically self-administered medications, and medical services subject to the limitations of these rules. 
    Automobile and recreational vehicles sales agency: A building used for the display, sales, storage, servicing, and repairing of new passenger motor vehicles, and of used passenger motor vehicles as an accessory use except that no part of the premises shall be used for a body or sheet metal repair shop, nor for the dismantling or storage of wrecked vehicles. For the purpose of this ordinance, boats are considered recreational vehicles. 
    Baby-sitting: The on-premises care of small children for which a charge is made. This service is limited to no more than four children at any one time and is custodial in nature; therefore, no special educational or outdoor recreational equipment is needed. 
    Billboard: See "Off-Premises Outdoor Advertising." 
    Board: Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Boarding house: A building containing two or more lodging units where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite but relatively short-term periods, meals are provided. Assisted-care living facility shall not be considered as a boarding house. Such uses are permitted only in those zones permitting hotels or motels. 
    Buffer strip: An area used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. Buffer strips shall be planted and maintained as specified in the "Landscaping Requirements" of this ordinance. 
    Buildable area of a lot: That portion of a lot bounded by the required rear and side yards and the building setback line. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
    Building, height of: The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. 
    Building setback line (front): A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and the front of a structure. The building setback line is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way. The area between the street right-of-way and the front of the structure is the front yard. 
    Building setback line (rear): A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the rear property line and rear of a structure. The building setback line is parallel or concentric with the rear property line. 
    Building setback line (side): A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the side property line and side of a structure. The building setback line is parallel to or concentric with the side property line. 
    Business services: Any activity conducted for gain which renders services primarily to other commercial enterprises, or which services and/or repairs appliances and machines used in a home or business. 
    Camping ground: A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
    Carport: A roofed building that is not enclosed on more than three sides and that is accessory to a residential use and that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof. 
    Child care: Refers to the various arrangements made by parents for the care outside their home, of children under 17 years of age, for less than 24 hour periods as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 71-3-501 through 71-3-533 [T.C.A. § 71-3-501 et seq.], as well as all pertinent rules, regulations, and standards of the Tennessee Department of Human Services. 
    Child care facility: A building or structure used for the care of children as defined herein. Such a facility normally includes one of the following types: 
1.  Family day care home. A home operated by any person who receives pay for providing less than 24-hour supervision and care, without transfer of custody, for five, six, or seven children under 17 years of age who are not residents of the household. A license is not required for a home providing for care for fewer than five children. 
2.  Group day care home. Any place operated by a person, social agency, corporation, institution, or any other group which receives eight or more children under 17 years of age less than 24 hours per day for care outside their own homes, without transfer of custody. A group day care home may care for no more than 12 children. 
3.  Day care center. A place operated by a person, social agency, corporation, institution, or other group that receives pay for the care of 13 or more children under 17 years of age for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of custody. 
    Clinic: See "Professional Services." 
    Club: A private organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes which are not conducted primarily for economic gain, providing that any vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities are conducted only as required generally for the membership of such club. 
    Clustered housing unit: Housing which may be permitted by the board to have reduced (potentially zero) side and rear yards within a single development. Such permission, if granted, shall be based on a development plan of a tract in single ownership at the time of development. 
    Collector streets or roads: Streets or roads so designated on the Farragut Major Road Plan. 
    Community facility: A building or structure owned and operated by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. 
    Condominium: A clustered or multi-family dwelling designed for individual ownership of dwelling units, but joint ownership and/or responsibility for maintenance and upkeep of building, grounds, and recreational facilities. 
    Coverage: The lot area covered by all buildings located therein, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
    Country club: A chartered, nonprofit membership club, with or without dining facilities and cocktail lounge, catering primarily to its membership, providing one or more of the following recreational and social amenities: Tennis, racquetball, golf, horseback riding, swimming, outdoor recreation, clubhouse, locker room, or pro shop. 
    Cultural activity: Any institution concerned with the appreciation of nature and the humanities, such as, but not limited to, museums, art galleries, historic sites and aquariums. 
    Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving excavation or drilling operations. 
    Dish antenna: An earth station antenna of parabolic or spherical design for the reception or transmission of satellite or terrestrial communication services. 
    District: Any section or sections of the Town of Farragut for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform. District is also referred to herein as "zone." 
    Dog kennel: See "Kennel." 
    Drive-in restaurant: A commercial restaurant which caters primarily to vehicular trade by providing the delivery of food to the person(s) within vehicles for consumption on site. 
    Dwelling: A building containing one or more dwelling units. A dwelling does not include hotels, motels, boarding houses, assisted-care living facility, nursing homes, mobile homes, or rooming houses. 
    Dwelling, attached: A dwelling with one or more party walls, or one party wall in the case of a dwelling at the end of a group of attached dwellings. 
    Dwelling, single-family, detached: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family which has no connection by a common wall to another building or structure similarly designed. 
    Dwelling unit: One or more rooms designed as an independent living facility for no more than one family. A dwelling unit shall have permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation. A dwelling unit shall be distinguished from an assisted-care living unit, lodging unit, and nursing home unit. 
    Family: One or more persons occupying the same dwelling unit. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants employed by said family. This definition shall not be deemed applicable to those persons occupying a boarding house, hotel, motel, club, rooming house, or nursing home. 
    Floor: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR): The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
    Garage, private residential: A building that is accessory to a residential use and that is used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, or any combination thereof owned and operated by the residents thereof. 
    Gasoline service station: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the retail sale of automotive accessories, gasoline or oil but not butane or propane fuels, and is used to provide incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand or automatic (one or two bays) washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles and other motor vehicles but not including painting or major repair of automobiles and other motor vehicles. 
    Governing body: Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
    Grade: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at a specific exterior wall. 
    Gross floor area: The sum of the areas of all stories of all buildings measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, including but not limited to, all stories usable for human habitation, attics, basements, porches, garages, breezeways, and accessory buildings. 
    Health department: Knox County Health Department. 
    Historical monuments and/or structures: Any antique structure or building existing contemporaneously with and commonly associated with an outstanding event or period of history, and any structure or building in which the relics and/or mementos of such event or period are housed and preserved. 
    Home occupation: A gainful occupation conducted by members of the family only within the dwelling, provided that the space used is incidental to residential use and that no article is sold or offered for sale except such as is incidental to such home occupation. 
    Hotel: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are more than 12 sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and which maintains an inner lobby for registration through which all tenants must pass to gain access. 
    House trailer: See "Mobile Home." 
    Housing, cluster: See "Clustered Housing Units." 
    Independent Living and Care Facility : A residential use that could be single-family detached or attached to house older persons who are frail but not infirmed that require a lower level assistance than residents in assisted-care living facilities. Independent living residents do not require assistance or acute nursing home care but rather receive limited services including, but not restricted to nursing care, meals, housekeeping, social programs, daily maintenance and other services. Such homes may be licensed by the State of Tennessee as homes for the aged and are intended to be residential in character and will generate lower levels of impact than traditional residential units. Independent care facilities may be part of a Senior Living Community. The parcel or tract of land and the units within the facility shall remain under single ownership so that individual units are not transferrable in fee simple. 
    Interior islands: A landscaped area located between parking spaces in a parking row within a parking lot as shown in Illustration 5 (see Chapter 1). 
    Interior parkways: A landscaped area located between parking rows within a parking lot as shown in Illustration 5 (see Chapter 1). 
    Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. Unregistered or inoperable vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, equipment parts, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, machinery parts, brush, wood, lumber, and other similar items shall constitute junk. 
    Junkyard: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, or structure, or part thereof, used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of junk. 
    Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, more than six months of age, are kept. 
    Lodging unit: A portion of a motel, hotel, boarding house or rooming house designed for transient occupancy on a daily, weekly, or similar short-term basis. Any structure or grouping or clustering of structures of which 25 percent or more of the lodging units contain cooking facilities shall not be identified as a motel, hotel, boarding house, or rooming house designed for transient occupancy on a daily, weekly, or similar short-term basis. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
    Lot area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
    Lot, corner: A lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two such sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage: That portion of the lot that is covered by any nonvegetative surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, decks, swimming pools, asphalt, concrete, and rock of all sizes. Any surface that is the opposite of a pervious surface. On single-family lots 15,000 square feet or larger, however, the water surface area of a permanent swimming pool or a pond is not counted toward lot coverage. 
    Lot depth: The average distance from the street right-of-way line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot which runs through a block from street to street or which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets. 
    Lot frontage: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein. 
    Lot line, exterior: For cluster housing, the lot lines defining the total development and separating the development from adjoining parcels which are not an integral part of the development. 
    Lot line, front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. 
    Lot line, rear: The lot boundary opposite and more distant from the front lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary line parallel to and the farthest from the front lot line, not less than ten feet long and wholly within the lot. 
    Lot line, side: A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot-of-record: A parcel existing at the time of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance which, as a result of the ordinance, may lack sufficient space for the designated use and/or may lack adequate access to a public street. 
    Lot width: The width of a lot at the building setback line measured by right angles to its depth. (See Illustration 1 (see Chapter 1).) 
    Manufactured building unit: A structure, transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditions, and electrical systems contained therein. (Sometimes this unit is called a double-wide when used for single-family occupancy.) 
    Marina: A facility providing a boat dock and launch ramp for which use is not limited to property owners. This may include retail sales related to aquatic activities, storage buildings, and repair work. 
    Medical spa: Establishments primarily engaged in non-surgical elective cosmetic medical treatments, massage treatment therapies, hair treatments, and nail applications with a minimum of one medical professional retained on staff. Such establishment shall be regulated and licensed by the State of Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance and the Tennessee Department of Health. 
    Mobile home: A movable, self-contained living unit designed for year-round occupancy, designed for transportation such as trailer with axles and wheels attached, whether or not such axles and wheels remain attached when in place, moved, or towed by another vehicle. Sometimes such a unit is referred to as a trailer home. 
    Modular building unit: A structural unit, or reassembled component unit including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and other service systems, manufactured off-site and transported to the point of use for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished building and not designed for removal to another site. 
    Mortuary establishments: A building used for the preparation of the deceased, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. Such establishments shall exclude crematorium facilities. 
    Motel: A building or group of buildings used for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers. 
    Nonconforming use: A legitimate use of land existing at the time of enactment or amendment to this ordinance and which does not conform to the present regulations of the district in which it is situated. See Chapter 4. 
    Nursing home: A facility licensed as such by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment or other appropriate state agency. 
    Nursing home unit: One or more rooms designed for occupancy by persons requiring skilled or intermediate nursing care located in a nursing home licensed by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment or other appropriate state agency. 
    Off-premises outdoor advertising: A sign that directs attention to or advertises a location, place, business, commodity, service, event, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the structure is located. Commonly referred to as a billboard. 
    Park: An open area set aside for leisure activities which is not used for the operation of a profit making venture, such as, but not limited to, walking trails, playgrounds, athletic or play fields and courts, and swimming and picnic facilities. 
    Parking lot: An off-street, ground-level open area designed for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
    Parking space: An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle. 
    Pergola: Horizontal trelliswork supported on columns or posts over which vines or other plants are trained. Pergolas may be freestanding or attached to a building. 
    Perimeter parkways: An area with continuous cover of live landscaping materials that is located adjacent to front, side, and rear property lines or access easements. 
    Personal services: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. Such activities include: barber, beautician, shoe repair, seamstress, tailor, laundry and dry cleaning and other similar activities as defined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Pervious surface: An area with a cover of live vegetation. 
    Planning commission: Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. 
    Plat: A map, plan, or layout indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties. 
    Premises: A lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land together with the buildings and structures thereon. 
    Primarily Aged Persons: A minimum of 51 percent of the population of the facility is at least 62 years of age. 
    Principal building: Building(s) in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is/they are located. 
    Principal use: The primary or predominant use of any lot, parcel, or tract. In the case of multiple use facilities, all uses shall be considered principal. In any residential district, the residence shall be considered the principal use. 
    Professional services: Services provided by a member of a recognized profession. Such activities include: medical, legal, dental, scientific consulting, insurance agent, architectural, engineering, land-planning, financial and business consulting services, accounting offices, and other similar activities as defined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Public market: A periodic or permanent market held in roofed outdoor areas and in an enclosed building, where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. A public market is inclusive of a flea market and generally recognized indoor retail sales. Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
    Public utility: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under state or municipal regulations, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, two-way communication, telegraph, transportation, water, sanitary sewer, or storm sewers. 
    Quarry: A lot or land or part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel, or top soil for sale and exclusive of the process of grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which application for a building permit has been made. 
    Reasonable space: The area on the lot or parcel of a nonconforming building or use which remains for building after all required open space and setbacks or yard areas of the existing zone are determined. Such space cannot include any floodway area. 
    Recreational areas: Country clubs, riding stables, golf courses, athletic fields and similar noncommercial recreational areas and facilities, or recreation centers including swimming pools. 
    Retail sales: The commercial transfer of merchandise which is subject to state and local sales taxation including: pharmaceuticals, gardening supplies, landscaping supplies, building supplies, hardware, housewares, clothing, cloth, appliances, furniture, sporting goods and grocery supplies. The board shall determine any questions of use. Alcoholic beverages as regulated by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission and Town of Farragut ordinances shall not be considered as "retail sales." 
    Required setback: A distance required to obtain the minimum front, side, and rear yards as required by this ordinance. 
    Riding academy: Any establishment where horses are kept for riding, driving, or stabling for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch, or similar establishment. 
    Roadside stand: A temporary farm structure used or intended to be solely used by the owner or tenant for the sale of only seasonal farm products of the farm on which it is located. 
    Rooming house: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 12 persons. A building which has accommodations for more than 12 persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this ordinance. 
    Sanitary sewer: A municipal or community sewage disposal system of a type approved by the State Department of Public Health. 
    School, private: An institution of learning, including a college and university, that is not tax supported. 
    School, public: A tax-supported institution of learning, including a college and a university. 
    Self-service laundry: An establishment providing home type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines, and/or customer operated type dry cleaning machines, to be used primarily by the customer on the premises. Such establishment may be coin operated, or may be operated by attendants. 
    Senior Living Community: A specified combination of residential uses that shall include a minimum combination of at least two of the following three uses: Independent Living and Care Facility, Assisted Care Living Facility, and Nursing Home Unit, where the average length of stay in these type facilities is more than 45 days. At least one of such facilities must be State-licensed. Other non-residential uses may be included in this type of development when integrally designed to be compatible and accessory to the primary uses and intent of the development as a whole. The parcel or tract of land and the units within the facility shall remain under single ownership so that individual units are not transferrable in fee simple. 
    Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in its location, size, and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
    Stormwater detention basin: A facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater retention basin: An area used for retaining or holding stormwater and that has at least three feet of standing water year round and a designed recirculating or aeration system. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface at the floor or roof next above. As applied to a story, height means the vertical distance from top to top of two successive finished floor surfaces. 
    Street: A public thoroughfare (street, avenue, boulevard, road, drive, parkway, lane) which may provide primary access to the fronts of buildings and is open to the public for transportation uses. 
    Street, intersecting: Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
    Street line: A lot line dividing a lot from a street. 
    Structure: A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. 
    Substantial improvement: For a structure built prior to the enactment of this ordinance, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of such structure the costs of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the total replacement cost of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alternation of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    Terminal islands: A landscaped area located at the end of each parking row within a parking lot as shown in Illustration 5 (see Chapter 1). 
    Total impervious surface: The sum of all impervious surface areas on a lot. 
    Tourist cabins: See Motel. 
    Tourist court: See Motel. 
    Trailer: See Mobile home. 
    Trailer, travel or camping: A portable or mobile land based living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residences of the occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants. 
    Tree pruning: The selective removal of certain limbs based on the structure, crown form, and growth of the tree. 
    Tree topping: The excessive and arbitrary removal of all parts of the tree above and beyond a certain height with no regard for the structure or growth of the tree. The vertical stem or main leader and the upper primary limbs on trees are cut back to stubs at a uniform height. 
    Use: The specific activity or purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
    Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the regulations of the ordinances where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, which situation(s) or condition(s) was not created or exacerbated by the applicant, the strict application of any regulation enacted under this ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exception or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. 
    Way: A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. 
    Windmill: A machine that is powered by the energy generated by a series of blades or vanes rotated by the wind. For purposes of this ordinance, windmills are to be used to operate machinery and are not to be used for ornamental purposes. This definition is not designed to alter typical applications of windmills for agricultural purposes; however, windmills used in commercial, office, neighborhood service or whole and light industrial zones must have such a functional purpose as pumping water or producing electrical energy. 
    Yard: An open space that lies between the principal building(s) and the nearest lot line. The minimum required yard as set forth in this ordinance is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    Yard, front: A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and the front lot line and measured parallel to the front lot line to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured parallel to the rear lot line to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building(s) and the side lot line and measured parallel to the side lot line to the building to the closest point of the side lot line. 
    Zone: See District. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 1, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-27, § 1, 7-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-29, § 1, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 6-26-2008; Ord. No. 09-10, § 1, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-24, § 1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 11-21, § 1, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 16-04, §§ 1-3, 3-24-2016; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
CHAPTER 3. - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. I. - Agricultural district (A). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for agricultural uses which comprise an important part of the economy and land use of the Town of Farragut. The intent is to permit lands best suited for agriculture to be used for agriculture purposes and also to prevent the encroachment of urban and other incompatible land uses on farm lands and thereby protect the physical and economic well-being of agricultural operations. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Agricultural uses. 
2.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
3.  Mobile homes. 
4.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Accessory uses and structures. 
6.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
7.  Cemeteries and historical monuments. 
8.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
9.  Utility uses. 
10.  Existing off-premises outdoor advertising as regulated in Chapter 4. 
C.  Uses permitted as special exceptions. The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with provisions in Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-207 [T.C.A. § 13-7-207]. With the exceptions of numbers 5 and 7, all specially permitted uses shall be adjacent and contiguous to the right-of-way of "Collector" or "Arterial" streets. Buffer strips may be required as a condition for granting a special exception. Please refer to "General Review Standards," Chapter 4, Administration and Enforcement, Special Exceptions, General Review Standards, for review criteria. 
1.  Athletic fields, tennis courts, country club and golf courses, parks, playgrounds, community swimming pools, and recreational areas operated by membership organizations for the benefit of their members. 
2.  Commercial livestock feed and sales yard. 
3.  Dog kennels, livery stable or riding academy, fish and minnow raising, and the raising of fur-bearing animals. 
4.  One temporary roadside stand, provided that it does not exceed an area of 200 square feet, and that it is located no closer than 35 feet to any street surface except major arterials where they shall be no closer than 50 feet, but in no case on a right-of-way. 
5.  Quarry and subsurface extraction of natural mineral resources. 
6.  Marina and boat docks. 
7.  Up to three detached single-family dwellings may be permitted provided that the owner has, with a written request for approval, submitted a scale plan of not less than 1" = 50' showing the lot lines and right-of-way lines showing existing buildings and the proposed dwelling(s). Each dwelling must have independently adequate yard and set back space between it and any other primary structure or lot and right-of-way lines as required in Part D of this section. 
8.  Windmills. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. All structures, excluding fences and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet. 
4.  Lot width. Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 100 feet. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 15 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 25 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
6.  Size regulations. No non-agricultural accessory building shall exceed 30 percent of the footprint of the principal building used as a residence or 600 square feet in size, whichever is greater. 
7.  Land area. Minimum lot size of five acres. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. II. - Buffer District (B-1). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for a higher intensity land use to occur adjacent to a lower intensity land use while at the same time protecting the lower intensity land use from the negative impacts of the higher intensity land use. The land zoned Buffer District is to serve as a cushion or shield between these conflicting land uses. These areas should be retained in their natural state and should be supplemented with additional landscaping so as to provide a visual and aesthetic separation between the conflicting land uses. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Signs per the Farragut Municipal Code. 
2.  Fences and decorative brick or rock walls, provided they are set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
3.  Utility structures, provided all landscaping requirements can be met. 
C.  Landscaping. Each 100 linear feet of area zoned Buffer District of width 50 feet or greater shall be landscaped per the 50-foot-wide buffer strip provisions established in this ordinance. Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. III. - Rural single-family residential district (R-1). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for low density residential use in designated areas of the town, and especially in areas where natural factors such as steep slopes, high erosion potential, etc., or public service considerations such as narrow and inadequate collector streets impose high public, dollar, and environmental costs on intense urban development. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Agricultural uses on lots larger than one acre. 
3.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; 
b.  Site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
4.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of one acre. 
6.  Accessory uses and structures. 
7.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
8.  Cemeteries and historical monuments. 
9.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
10.  Utility uses. 
11.  Existing off-premises outdoor advertising as regulated in Chapter 4. 
C.  Uses permitted as special exception. The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with provisions contained in Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-207 [T.C.A. § 13-7-207]. The board shall state, in writing, its determination and the reasons for either accepting (with or without modification) or rejecting the proposal. Please refer to Chapter 4, section II. Administration and Enforcement, E. Special Exceptions, 3. General Review Standards, for review criteria. 
1.  Country clubs with a nine or more hole golf course, but not miniature golf courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes, provided a site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
2.  Mobile homes, provided such shall not be placed within developed subdivisions with existing single-family dwellings. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front Yard. All structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, landscaping structures, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 35 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and landscaping structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be set back a total on two sides of at least 40 feet, but not less than 15 feet on any one side; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
4.  Buffer strip. 
a.  When a grouping or clustering of dwelling units is approved as a special exception and the Board of Zoning Appeals requires a buffer strip, such strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all front, side, and rear peripheral property lines of the entire tract. The buffer strip shall be planted and platted at the time of subdivision; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
c.  A landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strip. 
5.  Lot width. 
a.  Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 75 feet, except in special circumstances such as a cul-de-sac, in which case each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 60 feet; and 
b.  The lot length of each lot that is less than 150 feet in width shall not be greater than three times the lot width. 
6.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 25 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 35 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
7.  Size regulations. No non-agricultural accessory building shall exceed 30 percent of the footprint of the principal building that is used as a residence or 600 square feet in size, whichever is greater. 
8.  Land area. 
a.  Each lot and/or dwelling unit served by a sanitary sewer system: 20,000 square feet; or 
b.  Each lot and/or dwelling unit not served by a sanitary sewer system: One acre, or greater as may be required by the Health Department. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
3.  Accessory residential buildings constructed on a slope in excess of 4:1 (run/rise) may exceed 15 feet in height (up to a maximum of 20 feet in height), provided such building is situated on a lot of record that is at least one acre and the building is set back two additional feet from the standard accessory building setback for each foot the building is in excess of 15 feet in height. 
F.  Off-street parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 2, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-29, § 1, 7-19-2007; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 18-05 , § 1, 6-28-2018) 
Sec. IV. - Open space mixed residential overlay district (OSMR). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this overlay district to provide for greater flexibility and design freedom in order to encourage a better living environment and the conservation of environmentally sensitive areas. The increased flexibility that allows both detached and attached single-family dwellings will provide a variety of housing options and should generate a superior design that provides extensive common open space that capitalizes on the inherent physical characteristics of the property and its surrounding area. 
B.  Application of the district. The OSMR overlay district may be applied over the Rural Residential District (R-1). 
C.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Attached single-family dwellings. 
3.  Detached garages if there is not an attached garage to the dwelling. 
4.  Recreational facilities which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the development criteria established in the base zone are met. 
5.  Accessory uses and structures. 
6.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
7.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
8.  Utility uses. 
D.  General development requirements. 
1.  A Concept Plan, as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the development plan submission. The Concept Plan shall be of the entire development and is required whether the project is developed in multiple phases or not. 
2.  A preliminary plat and a final plat shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the plat submissions. 
3.  The approved plan shall be in compliance with the Farragut Land Use and Transportation Policy Plan, the Pedestrian Circulation Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut. 
4.  Common open space. 
a.  Common open space shall be created as an integral part of the overall design. The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, floodplains, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, streams, wet weather conveyances, endangered species habitat, steep slopes, rock formations and other unique topographic features, and historic features. 
b.  The common open space shall be pedestrian friendly. 
c.  Common open space may be improved for active or passive recreation uses, but open space containing natural features worthy of preservation must be left unimproved. 
d.  All land shown on the approved Concept Plan as common open space shall be conveyed to a property owners' association for ownership and maintenance. Such association shall have mandatory membership of all property owners and have mandatory dues paying responsibilities. The common open space must be conveyed subject to covenants. The town attorney shall approve those provisions of the covenants which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the approved Concept Plan and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which ensures its maintenance for its intended purpose in perpetuity. The property owners' association shall not dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise. 
e.  The land designated as common open space shall be included in the final plat of the first phase, if phasing is considered. 
5.  Roadways shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical while still meeting the town's minimum Subdivision Regulations for streets. 
6.  The development design shall provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units located within and adjacent to the development. 
7.  In the development of attached single-family dwellings, there shall be a maximum of eight units per building. There shall be no more than two adjacent units with the same front view building elevation, or there shall be no more than two adjacent units with the same front yard setback line. Building elevations shall be reviewed at time of building permit application. The minimum front yard setback difference between adjacent units shall be three feet. 
8.  All units and/or lots shall front on a public street. 
9.  Building envelopes established for attached dwellings shall be shown on the recorded final plat shall be the maximum building envelope for each unit. 
10.  All dwelling units shall be provided reasonable visual privacy. Each attached dwelling unit shall have exclusive enjoyment of a private yard area immediately adjacent or contiguous to the dwelling unit and shall contain not less than 400 square feet. Fences and/or landscaping shall be used in providing the protection and privacy of the private outdoor areas. 
E.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard setbacks. 
a.  If the street is classified as an arterial on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet; 
b.  If the street is classified as a major collector on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 40 feet; 
c.  If the street is classified as a local collector on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
d.  If the street is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. Front facing garages shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
e.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, retaining walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, retaining walls, and entrance pillars shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations or any other utility building or structure shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard setbacks-Attached dwellings. In order to eliminate the appearance of row housing with the attached dwellings, the distance between buildings when sides of buildings are adjacent shall be varied. The total minimum distance between buildings shall be based on the total number of buildings constructed in a row multiplied by 12 feet. The minimum distance between two adjacent buildings shall be ten feet. For example, if four buildings are located in a row, the total minimum separation between the four buildings shall be 48 feet. 
3.  Minimum distance between buildings-Detached dwellings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between all freestanding buildings. 
4.  Rear yard setbacks-Attached dwellings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between freestanding buildings. 
5.  Peripheral property line setbacks. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from peripheral side and rear property lines. 
6.  Density. The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the gross land area by the minimum lot size of the base zone. 
7.  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum building and lot coverages shall be based on the total tract size of the development, not the individual lots, as prescribed below: 
a.  Total building area for each dwelling unit equals 75 percent of the gross land area multiplied by the maximum building coverage established in the base zone divided by the total number of dwelling units in the development 
b.  Total lot coverage for each dwelling unit equals 75 percent of the gross land area multiplied by the maximum lot coverage established in the base zone divided by the total number of dwelling units in the development. 
8.  Land area. Minimum tract size for such a development shall be five acres. 
9.  Common open space. A minimum of 35 percent of the gross land area of the development shall be reserved as common open space. Such common open space is to include environmentally sensitive lands, historic features, buffer strips, stormwater detention facilities, recreational facilities associated with the development, and other natural features as may be beneficial to the development and the community. 
10.  Buffer strips. Buffer strips are not mandatory. The planning commission may require a buffer strip at various locations in a development, however, when it is determined that a buffer strip is necessary to promote compatibility with an abutting land use. When a buffer strip is required by the planning commission, the following criteria shall be followed: 
a.  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width, shall be included in the required peripheral building setback, shall be planted and platted at the time of final plat, and shall be owned and maintained by the property owners' organization; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip. The buffer strip shall be landscaped per the landscaping requirements of this ordinance or the planning commission may permit the required number of plantings to be clustered rather than distributed evenly throughout the buffer strip; and 
c.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
F.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structures shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
G.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, 3-23-2006; Ord. No. 12-03, § 2, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. V. - Rural single-family acre residential district (R-1-S-A). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for low density single-family residential use in designated areas of the town, and especially in areas where natural factors such as steep slopes, high erosion potential, etc., and public service considerations such as narrow and inadequate collector streets impose high public, dollar, and environmental costs on intense urban development. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Agricultural uses on lots larger than one acre. 
3.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
4.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of one acre. 
6.  Accessory uses and structures. 
7.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
8.  Cemeteries and historical monuments. 
9.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
10.  Utility uses. 
11.  Existing off-premises outdoor advertising as regulated in Chapter 4. 
C.  Uses permitted as special exception. The following uses may be permitted on review by the board in accordance with provisions contained in Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-207 [T.C.A. § 13-7-207]. All specially permitted uses shall be adjacent and contiguous to the right-of-way of collector or arterial streets. The board shall state, in writing, its determination and the reasons for either accepting, with or without modification, or rejecting the proposal. Please refer to "General Review Standards," Chapter 4, Administration and Enforcement, Special Exceptions, General Review Standards, for review criteria. 
1.  Parks, playgrounds and playfields, and neighborhood and municipal buildings. 
2.  Libraries. 
3.  Country clubs with a nine or more hole golf course, but not miniature golf courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front Yard. All structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 35 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, and entrance pillars shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be set back a total on two sides of at least 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet on any one side; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings used as a residence shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All non-agricultural accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
4.  Lot width. 
a.  Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 75 feet, except in special circumstances such as a cul-de-sac, in which case each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 60 feet; and 
b.  The lot length of each lot that is less than 150 feet in width shall not be greater than three times the lot width. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 25 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 35 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
6.  Size regulations. No non-agricultural accessory building shall exceed 30 percent of the footprint of the principal building that is used as a residence or 600 square feet in size, whichever is greater. 
7.  Land area. Minimum lot size of one acre, or greater as may be required by the Health Department if sanitary sewer is not available. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Off-street parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 12-03, § 3, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. VI. - General single-family residential district (R-2). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for the development of moderate density single-family uses in areas suited for such development. These areas should be free from severe natural environmental limitations and provide access to a street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum or ten feet from all property lines. 
3.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
4.  Public buildings provided all area and height regulations established in the C-1 General Commercial District are met and that a site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Public or private golf course provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the facility accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations; and 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
6.  Agricultural crops, but not nursery sales or the raising of farm animals or poultry, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
7.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
8.  Accessory uses and structures. 
9.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
10.  Cemeteries and historical monuments. 
11.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
12.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, historic features, and wetlands. 
2.  A survey of the natural features shall be completed where appropriate. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sink holes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Preservation Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
3.  Roadways shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical while still meeting the town's minimum Subdivision Regulations for streets. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. 
4.  All lots shall have access to a public street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
5.  Building envelopes established per these regulations and shown on the recorded final plat shall be the maximum building envelope for each lot. 
6.  If common recreational facilities and open spaces are developed as part of a subdivision, site plans must be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. These common areas which may include driveways, parking areas, walkways, and steps should be lighted for night use where appropriate. The means of preserving and maintaining the common open space and other common property shall be assured as part of the development. 
7.  Sidewalks shall be constructed per the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
8.  Subdivision plats shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements of this section shall be included as part of the plat submission. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. All structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, landscaping structures, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and landscaping structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a total on two sides of at least 30 feet, but not less than ten feet on any one side; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
4.  Lot width. 
a.  Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 75 feet. If a lot is located on a cul-de-sac, each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 60 feet; and 
b.  The lot length of each lot that is less than 150 feet in width shall not be greater than four times the lot width. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 30 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 40 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
6.  Size regulations. No accessory building shall exceed 30 percent of the principal building footprint or 600 square feet in size, whichever is greater. 
7.  Land area. 
a.  Each lot served by a sanitary sewer system: 15,000 square feet; or 
b.  Each lot not served by a sanitary sewer system: 25,000 square feet, or greater as may be required by the Health Department. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet, in height; and 
2.  No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 12-03, § 4, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. VII. - Open space residential overlay district (OSR). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this overlay district to provide for greater flexibility and design freedom in order to encourage a better living environment and the conservation of environmentally sensitive areas. The increased flexibility should generate a superior design that provides extensive common open space that capitalizes on the inherent physical characteristics of the property and its surrounding area. 
B.  Application of the district. The OSR overlay district may be applied over the Rural Residential District (R-1). 
C.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Detached garages if there is not an attached garage to the dwelling. 
3.  Recreational facilities which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the development criteria established in the base zone are met. 
4.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
6.  Utility uses. 
D.  General development requirements. 
1.  A Concept Plan, as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the development plan submission. The Concept Plan shall be of the entire development and is required whether the project is developed in multiple phases or not. 
2.  A preliminary plat and a final plat shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the plat submissions. 
3.  The approved plan shall be in compliance with the Farragut Land Use and Transportation Policy Plan, the Pedestrian Circulation Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut. 
4.  Common open space. 
a.  Common open space shall be created as an integral part of the overall design. The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, floodplains, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, streams, wet weather conveyances, endangered species habitat, steep slopes, rock formations and other unique topographic features, and historic features. 
b.  The common open space shall be pedestrian friendly. 
c.  Common open space may be improved for active or passive recreation uses, but open space containing natural features worthy of preservation must be left unimproved. 
d.  All land shown on the approved Concept Plan as common open space shall be conveyed to a property owners' association for ownership and maintenance. Such association shall have mandatory membership of all property owners and have mandatory dues paying responsibilities. The common open space must be conveyed subject to covenants. The town attorney shall approve those provisions of the covenants which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the approved Concept Plan and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which ensures its maintenance for its intended purpose in perpetuity. The property owners' association shall not dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise. 
e.  The land designated as common open space shall be included in the final plat of the first phase, if phasing is considered. 
5.  The development design shall provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units located within and adjacent to the development. 
E.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard setbacks. 
a.  If the street is classified as an arterial on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet; 
b.  If the street is classified as a major collector on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 40 feet; 
c.  If the street is classified as a local collector on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
d.  If the street is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. Front facing garages shall be set back from the nearest point of any such right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
e.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, and entrance pillars shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Peripheral property line setbacks. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from peripheral side and rear property lines. 
3.  Minimum distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between all freestanding buildings. 
4.  Density. The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the gross land area by the minimum lot size of the base zone. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum building and lot coverages shall be based on the total tract size of the development, not the individual lots, as prescribed below: 
a.  Total building area for each dwelling unit equals 75 percent of the gross land area multiplied by the maximum building coverage established in the base zone divided by the total number of dwelling units in the development. 
b.  Total lot coverage for each dwelling unit equals 75 percent of the gross land area multiplied by the maximum lot coverage established in the base zone divided by the total number of dwelling units in the development. 
6.  Land area. Minimum tract size for such a development shall be five acres. 
7.  Common open space. A minimum of 35 percent of the gross land area of the development shall be reserved as common open space. Such common open space is to include environmentally sensitive lands, historic features, buffer strips, stormwater detention facilities, recreational facilities associated with the development, and other natural features as may be beneficial to the development and the community. 
8.  Buffer strips. Buffer strips are not mandatory. The planning commission may require a buffer strip at various locations in a development, however, when it is determined that a buffer strip is necessary to promote compatibility with an abutting land use. When a buffer strip is required by the planning commission, the following criteria shall be followed: 
a.  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width, shall be included in the required peripheral building setback, shall be planted and platted at the time of final plat, and shall be owned and maintained by the property owners' organization; and 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip. The buffer strip shall be landscaped per the landscaping requirements of this ordinance or the planning commission may permit the required number of plantings to be clustered rather than distributed evenly throughout the buffer strip. 
F.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structures shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
G.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 12-03, § 5, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. VIII. - Small lot single-family residential district (R-3). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for the development of small lot single-family developments in areas suited for such development. The maximum area to be considered for a rezoning to this district shall not exceed 25 acres and it shall serve as a transition area between more intense land uses or major roads and less intense land uses. These areas should be free from severe natural environmental limitations and shall provide access to a street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations and which is not interior to an existing lower density residential subdivision. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
3.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
4.  Agricultural crops, but not nursery sales or the raising of farm animals or poultry, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
5.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
6.  Accessory uses and structures. 
7.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
8.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
9.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, historic features, and wetlands. 
2.  A survey of the natural features shall be completed where appropriate. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sink holes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Preservation Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
3.  Roadways shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical while still meeting the town's minimum Subdivision Regulations for streets. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. 
4.  All lots shall have access to a public street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
5.  Building envelopes established per these regulations and shown on the recorded final plat shall be the maximum building envelope for each lot. 
6.  If common recreational facilities and open spaces are developed as part of a subdivision, site plans must be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. These common areas which may include driveways, parking areas, walkways, and steps should be lighted for night use where appropriate. The means of preserving and maintaining the common open space and other common property shall be assured as part of the development. 
7.  Sidewalks shall be constructed per the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
8.  Subdivision plats shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements of this section shall be included as part of the plat submission. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. 
a.  If the street is classified as an arterial on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet; 
b.  If the street is classified as a major collector on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 40 feet; 
c.  If the street is classified as a minor collector on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
d.  If the street is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet; and 
e.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
f.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 25 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, and entrance pillars shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet; and 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet, except when the rear yard abuts a required buffer strip and then all principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
4.  Lot width. 
a.  Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 75 feet. If a lot is located on a cul-de-sac, it shall front on a public road for a minimum of 50 feet and shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide at the building setback line; and 
b.  The lot length shall not be greater than four times the lot width, except in the case of lots located on a cul-de-sac in which case the lot length shall not be greater than five times the lot width. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 30 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 40 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
6.  Land area. 
a.  Each lot served by a sanitary sewer system: 8,500 square feet; or 
b.  Each lot not served by a sanitary sewer system: 25,000 square feet or greater as may be required by the Health Department. 
7.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear peripheral property lines of the entire R-3 tract. The buffer strip shall be planted and platted at the time of subdivision and shall be owned and maintained by the property owners' organization; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
c.  A landscape plan is submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strip. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structures shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 5, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 12-03, § 6, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. IX. - Attached single-family residential district (R-4). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for the development of attached single-family developments in areas suited for such development. These areas should be free from severe natural environmental limitations and provide access to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the development accesses must also meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
    The town encourages the spacing and orientation of units to promote aesthetics, buffering and open spaces to enhance the quality of life for the community, and recreational and common facilities for the enjoyment of the residents of the development. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Attached single-family dwellings. 
2.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
3.  Agricultural crops, but not nursery sales or the raising of farm animals or poultry, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
4.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
5.  Accessory uses and structures. 
6.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
7.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
8.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  There shall be a maximum of eight units per building. There shall be no more than two adjacent units with the same front view building elevation, or there shall be no more than two adjacent units with the same front yard setback line. Building elevations shall be reviewed at time of building permit application. The minimum front yard setback difference between adjacent units shall be three feet. 
2.  The development should consider providing centralized mailbox facilities. 
3.  The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, historic features, and wetlands. 
4.  A survey of the natural features shall be completed where appropriate. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sink holes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Preservation Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
5.  Roadways shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical while still meeting the town's minimum Subdivision Regulations for streets. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. The maximum slope created as a result of a proposed development shall not be greater than 3:1 (run/rise). Terracing may be permitted per the Town Engineer's approval. 
6.  All units shall have access to a public street. 
7.  Development shall directly access a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the development accesses shall meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
8.  The means of preserving and maintaining the common open space and other common property shall be assured as part of the development. 
9.  Building envelopes established per these regulations and shown on the recorded final plat shall be the maximum building envelope for each unit. 
10.  Internal access and circulation shall provide for adequate ingress/egress of firefighting equipment, service deliveries, furniture moving vans, and refuse collection vehicles. 
11.  The development should consider providing street lighting. All street lights shall conform with approved town standards. Such street lighting located on private streets shall be owned and maintained by the same entity responsible for maintenance and ownership of the common open space. 
12.  Common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be provided, maintained, and lighted for night use where appropriate. 
13.  Sidewalks shall be constructed per the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
14.  Landscape plans shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
15.  Utility plans shall be submitted. 
16.  Subdivision plats shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements of this section shall be included as part of the plat submission. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Peripheral property lines. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from peripheral front, side, and rear property lines. The buffer strip shall be included in the required peripheral building setback. 
b.  Front yard. All buildings and/or dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all streets interior to the development when a dwelling unit's garage faces the street, when no garages are constructed for a dwelling unit, and/or when additional parking spaces are provided in front of a dwelling unit. 
    All buildings and/or dwelling units shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all streets interior to the development when garages are rear loaded and do not face the street and when no additional parking spaces are provided in front of the dwelling unit. Please refer to Illustration 14 (see Chapter 1). This illustration depicts the intent of the regulation. 
    In order to provide for an opportunity for a dwelling unit to more effectively engage the public street, a covered porch overhang may be extended so that the furthermost projection could be up to ten feet from the street. Such overhang shall not encroach into the public right-of-way, interfere with landscaping along the street edge, and/or conflict with any utilities or pedestrian facilities. Such overhangs shall be shown as part of the residential site plan and are only an option where garages are rear loaded and do not face the street and when no additional parking spaces are provided in front of the dwelling unit. 
c.  Side yard. In order to eliminate the appearance of row housing, the distance between buildings when sides of buildings are adjacent shall be varied. The total minimum distance between buildings shall be based on the total number of buildings constructed in a row multiplied by 12 feet. The minimum distance between two adjacent buildings shall be ten feet. For example, if four buildings are located in a row, the total minimum separation between the four buildings shall be 48 feet. Please refer to Illustration 14 (see Chapter 1). This illustration depicts the intent of the regulation. 
d.  Rear yard. The minimum distance between buildings when rears of buildings are adjacent shall be 40 feet. 
e.  Side/rear yard. The minimum distance between buildings when sides/rears of buildings are adjacent shall be 25 feet. 
f.  [Accessory structures.] All accessory structures, excluding fences, flatwork, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall meet the front yard building setback requirements and shall not extend any closer to the side property line than the principal building, Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the rear property line. 
Subdivision entrance walls and entrance pillars shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. Electrical substations utility offices, or any other utility buildings shall meet all building setback requirements. In all cases, the setbacks for accessory structures shall comply with the adopted building and fire codes and this must be demonstrated as part of the building permit application. 
2.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width on all front, side, and rear peripheral property lines. The buffer strip shall be included in the required peripheral building setback, shall be planted and platted at the time of subdivision, and shall be owned and maintained by the property owners' organization; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip. 
c.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 50 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
4.  Land area. Minimum lot size of five acres. 
5.  Density. 
a.  Maximum overall density shall not exceed six units per acre. This density of six units per acre is a maximum number only, and is permitted only if all requirements of the Town of Farragut have been met. 
b.  The maximum number of units per building shall not exceed eight. 
6.  Open space. A minimum of ten percent of the gross land area of the development shall be reserved as open space as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. Off-street parking shall generally be located in close proximity to the dwelling units intended to be served. All overflow off-street parking shall be centrally located or uniformly distributed throughout the development. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 2-2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 6, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 09-24, § 2, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 12-03, § 7, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 16-20, § 1, 8-11-2016; Ord. No. 16-23, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. X. - Two-family residential district (R-5). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this zone to provide for the development of two-family and single-family developments in areas suited for such development. The maximum area to be considered for a rezoning to this district shall not exceed 20 acres and it shall serve as a transition area between more intense land uses or major roads and less intense land uses. These areas should be free from severe natural environmental limitations and shall provide access to a street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Attached two-family dwellings. 
2.  Detached single-family dwellings. 
3.  Recreational facilities and open space which are developed as an integral part of the residential development provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent; and 
b.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
c.  That all non-building structures, except for arbors, are setback a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and ten feet from all side and rear property lines. Arbors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
4.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage area shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Agricultural crops, but not nursery sales or the raising of farm animals or poultry, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
6.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
7.  Accessory uses and structures. 
8.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
9.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
10.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, historic features, and wetlands. 
2.  A survey of the natural features shall be completed where appropriate. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sink holes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Preservation Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
3.  Roadways shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical while still meeting the town's minimum Subdivision Regulations for streets. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. 
4.  All lots shall have access to a public street which meets the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
5.  Building envelopes established per these regulations and shown on the recorded final plat shall be the maximum building envelope for each lot. 
6.  If common recreational facilities and open spaces are developed as part of a subdivision, site plans must be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. These common areas which may include driveways, parking areas, walkways, and steps should be lighted for night use where appropriate. The means of preserving and maintaining the common open space and other common property shall be assured as part of the development. 
7.  Sidewalks shall be constructed per the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
8.  Subdivision plats shall be submitted as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements of this section shall be included as part of the plat submission. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. 
a.  If the street is classified as an arterial on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet; 
b.  If the street is classified as a major collector on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 40 feet; 
c.  If the street is classified as a minor collector on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet; 
d.  If the street is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan, all principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet; 
e.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
f.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 25 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, and entrance pillars shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
a.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet, except when the rear yard abuts a required buffer strip and then all principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet; 
b.  All agricultural structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet; and 
c.  All accessory structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of five feet. 
4.  Lot width. 
a.  Each lot shall front on a public road for a minimum of 75 feet. If a lot is located on a cul-de-sac, it shall front on a public road for a minimum of 50 feet and shall be a minimum of 60 feet wide at the building setback line; and 
b.  The lot length shall not be greater than four times the lot width, except in the case of lots located on a cul-de-sac in which case the lot length shall not be greater than five times the lot width. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Total building area: 25 percent, except as provided elsewhere in this section; and 
b.  Total lot coverage: 35 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
6.  Land area. 
a.  Each lot served by a sanitary sewer system: 15,000 square feet; or 
b.  Each lot not served by a sanitary sewer system: 25,000 square feet or greater as may be required by the Health Department. 
7.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear peripheral property lines of the entire R-5 tract. The buffer strip shall be planted and platted at the time of subdivision and shall be owned and maintained by the property owners' organization; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
c.  A landscape plan is submitted as regulated in Chapter 4; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strip. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
2.  No accessory structures shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 7, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 12-03, § 8, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. XI. - Multi-family residential district (R-6). 
A.  General description. Consistent with adopted plans and policies of the Town, this district is intended primarily to provide for the development of multi-family developments, such as apartments and group housing facilities. This district shall serve as a transition area between more intense land uses or major roads and less intense land uses. These areas should be free from severe natural environmental limitations and provide access to a street having a designated classification of arterial, or a street which is not interior to a subdivision and which directly accesses a street having a designated classification of arterial. The street on which the development accesses must also meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Apartment buildings. 
2.  Recreational facilities and open spaces which are developed as an integral part of the development. 
3.  Day care facilities as regulated in Chapter 4. 
4.  Schools, public and private, and churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school or church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres. 
c.  There shall be a buffer strip which meets the following minimum development criteria: 
1)  The buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines; 
2)  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; 
3)  No grading shall occur in the buffer strip; and 
4)  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
d.  The following setback requirements are met: 
1)  Front yard. All buildings and structures, excluding signs, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way no less than 50 feet. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
2)  Side and rear yards. 
a)  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
b)  All accessory structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
e.  The maximum coverage for the total building area shall not exceed 35 percent and the total lot coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. 
f.  A site plan and landscape plan shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Agricultural crops, but not nursery sales or the raising of farm animals or poultry, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
6.  Agricultural accessory uses and structures, provided there is a minimum lot size of five acres. 
7.  Accessory uses and structures. 
8.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
9.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
10.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The development shall conserve, in so far as practical, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, historic features, and wetlands. 
2.  A survey of the natural features shall be completed where appropriate. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sink holes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Protection Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
3.  Access ways and parking areas shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. The maximum slope created as a result of a proposed development shall not be greater than 3:1 (run/rise). Terracing may be permitted per the Town Engineer's approval. 
4.  Developments shall directly access a street having a designated classification of arterial, or a street which is not interior to a subdivision and which directly accesses a street having a designated classification of arterial. The street on which the development accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
5.  Internal access and circulation shall provide for adequate ingress/egress of firefighting equipment, service deliveries, furniture moving vans, and refuse collection vehicles. 
6.  Internal pedestrian access and circulation shall be provided where deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
7.  Parking areas and sidewalks shall be lighted for night use where appropriate. All lighting shall comply with Town of Farragut lighting provisions. 
8.  A site plan of the development shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
9.  The approved plan shall be in compliance with the Farragut Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut. 
10.  If common recreational facilities and/or open spaces are developed as part of a development, details must be included in the site plan submittal. These common areas which may include driveways, parking areas, walkways, and steps should be lighted for night use where appropriate. The means of preserving and maintaining the common open space and other common property shall be assured as part of the development. 
11.  A landscape plan for the development shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. All buildings (principle and accessory) shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from front property lines. Parking shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from front property lines. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from front property lines. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the required 50-foot front yard setback. 
b.  Side/rear yard. All principle buildings that are positioned along a side or rear property line shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
    Where surface parking is arranged along a side or rear property line, all principle buildings and parking lots shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
c.  Accessory structures. Where the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, accessory structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any side or rear property line a minimum of 100 feet. 
    Where the adjacent property is zoned non-residential or non-agricultural, accessory structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any side or rear property line a minimum of 35 feet. 
2.  Buffer strips. 
a.  Front yard. A buffer strip is not required in a front yard but the development must provide for a landscape design that, at a minimum, would include plant material distributed within the area 20 feet from the front property line(s). The landscape design shall be approved by the Visual Resources Review Board. 
b.  Side/rear yard. Whenever a principle building is positioned along a side or rear property line and the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width. If the area within this buffer strip is not wooded, the area shall be planted to the requirements of a 50-foot buffer strip as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. 
    Whenever a surface parking lot is arranged along a side or rear property line and abuts property zoned residential or agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 50 feet in width as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. 
c.  Whenever a side or rear property line abuts property that is zoned non-residential or non-agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. 
d.  Other than an approved fence or masonry screen wall used for buffering purposes or a utility or pedestrian facility that bisects a buffer strip in a perpendicular manner, no structures are permitted within a required buffer strip. 
e.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strips. 
f.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 50 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
4.  Minimum distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between all freestanding buildings, as measured from the closest point between two buildings. 
5.  Land area. Minimum lot size of five acres. 
6.  Density. Maximum overall density shall not exceed 12 units per acre. This density of 12 units per acre is a maximum number only and is permitted only if all requirements of the Town of Farragut have been met. 
E.  Height regulations. 
1.  Whenever the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, no buildings to be constructed within 100 feet of a periphery property line shall exceed the maximum height permitted for principal dwelling units in the adjacent zoning district(s). 
    When abutting all other zoning districts or where buildings are greater than 100 feet from a periphery property line such buildings shall not exceed three stories, or 45 feet in height. 
2.  No accessory structures, other than a clubhouse or comparable amenities building, shall exceed 15 feet in height. A clubhouse or comparable amenities building shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
F.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. All overflow parking shall be centrally located or uniformly distributed throughout the development. 
G.  Building facade requirements. Building facade requirements shall be in accordance with Farragut Architectural Design Standards, as amended. 
H.  Low impact development requirements. The development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  25 percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bioswales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-34, § 7, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 12-03, § 9, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 16-05, § 2, 3-24-2016; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. XII. - General commercial district (C-1). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for commercial uses which provide services primarily to community residents of the Town of Farragut. The intent is to permit lands adjacent to major arterial highways as designated by the Farragut Major Road Plan to be used for the provision of general commercial and business services to the community. These commercial uses are intended to be designed to minimize disruption of traffic flows and negative impacts on adjacent residential uses. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures (Non-Mixed Use Town Center as identified in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan). Unless provided for elsewhere in this section, property and structures located in the General Commercial District (C-1) shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Generally recognized retail sales. This excludes flea markets and the sale of automobiles and the sale and/or rental of boats, trucks, trailers, construction equipment, mobile homes, and other similar uses as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    The outdoor sale and/or storage of merchandise and/or any other materials shall be permitted provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Such merchandise and/or materials are displayed or stored in a permanent area designed for such use; 
b.  Such merchandise and/or materials are not displayed or stored on any sidewalks, walkways, parking spaces, or other vehicle ways; 
c.  Required yard setbacks for buildings are met for the storage/display area; 
d.  Access to the display/storage area shall be restricted by means of a physical barrier such as a fence, a berm, landscaping, or other similar means; and 
e.  The total area reserved for outdoor display/storage shall not exceed 2,000 square feet if the net indoor retail floor area is greater than 25,000 square feet, and it shall not exceed 1,000 square feet if the net indoor retail floor area is less than 25,000 square feet. 
2.  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
3.  Retail outlets for the sale of general farm implements and lawn care equipment such as tractors (less than 10,000 pounds), riding lawn mowers, and related accessories. 
a.  The outdoor display and/or storage of such implements and equipments shall be permitted provided the following development criteria are met: 
(1)  The outdoor storage and/or display of the implements and/or equipment shall lie behind a straight line running from side lot line to side lot line that coincides with the rear wall of the principal building located on the property; 
(2)  The equipment and/or implements to be stored and/or displayed outdoors must be removed from the crate or cartons and displayed and/or stored in such a way as to allow for viewing and inspection, but so as not to prevent passage on sidewalks, walkways, or other vehicle ways; 
(3)  Such businesses necessarily involve the use of outdoor areas on the premises for the unloading, uncrating, positioning and repositioning of items that are often larger and more cumbersome than most retailers handle. The temporary use of outdoor areas of the premises for such purposes during hours of operation shall not be a violation of this ordinance; and 
(4)  Such businesses necessarily utilize packaging that is to be destroyed or reused. Such packaging materials shall be stored in areas on the premises to which access shall be restricted by means of a physical barrier such as an opaque fence or similar to a dumpster enclosure and shall comply with Chapter 4, Section I.B. of this ordinance. 
b.  The outdoor display of merchandise, except as provided for above, is permitted provided such merchandise is displayed in a permanent, covered porch. Such covered porch shall be attached to the principal building and shall meet all setback requirements of the principal building. 
4.  Financial and real estate services. 
5.  Professional, personal, and business services. 
6.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, coffee houses, or other similar establishments serving food or beverage that is primarily consumed within the principal building or in designated outdoor seating areas associated with the principal building. 
    Coffee houses with drive-through service lanes that serve as the principal means for service. The principal location for consumption is offsite. 
7.  Automotive services, provided such services are for automobiles and light trucks only. Such services may include fuel sales and repairs. Facilities designed to accommodate the refueling and/or servicing of trucks with more than three axles or more than ten wheels are prohibited. 
8.  Retail rental and leasing of automobiles provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Such business is located in a freestanding building; and 
b.  If the premises are fenced, such fencing shall be decorative, shall not exceed three feet in height, and shall be of such design so as not to prevent the ability to see through the fence. 
9.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
10.  Medical, dental, and veterinary facilities. 
11.  Medical spas. 
12.  Commercial kennels, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Any outdoor structures (e.g., fences) associated with the kennel shall not be visible from public streets; 
b.  Boarding of animals shall be confined to the interior of a structure designated for this purpose; 
c.  Outdoor fences are permitted solely to provide an area for exercise and waste elimination and shall be used only with on-site supervision. Outdoor fences shall adhere to the following specifications: 
1.  Opaque with no openings as viewed from the outside of the fence and a minimum of six feet in height; 
2.  Properly maintained and constructed of durable, low maintenance materials that are earth tone, black, or white in color and contain no signage. No chain link fencing shall be permitted; 
3.  Set back at least 50 feet from an adjacent property that is not zoned residential or agriculture. Such measurement shall be a straight line distance from the nearest portion of the fence to the nearest portion of the property that is not zoned residential or agriculture; 
4.  Set back at least 250 feet from an adjacent property that is zoned residential or agriculture. Such measurement shall be a straight line distance from the nearest portion of the fence to the nearest portion of the property that is zoned residential or agriculture; 
5.  Shall be reviewed as part of a site plan process through the planning commission and shall not interfere parking spaces, access ways, and/or pedestrian access; 
d.  The square footage of fenced areas shall not exceed one-fourth of the gross square footage of the interior space associated with the commercial kennel; 
e.  Fenced areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to be free from offensive odors or other nuisances and shall not adversely affect public health; 
f.  Fenced areas with a non-vegetated surface shall be designed and constructed to drain to the sanitary sewer. An alternative would be for the wash water to drain to an infiltration area (rain garden, bioswale, pervious concrete, etc.) adjacent to the impervious area to promote infiltration, reduce runoff, and provide treatment of the wash water before it reaches a stream or other waterway. Fenced areas, regardless of their size, that are associated with a commercial kennel shall be covered by the Town's Special Pollution Abatement Permit to ensure proper stormwater practices are maintained on the site; 
g.  The indoor space devoted to the kennel shall be sound proofed to prevent the noise of barking dogs from exceeding 80 decibels (dB) inside and yielding no more than 30 dB outside the facility. A certification from a registered engineer qualified to make such an assessment shall be provided to verify compliance with these decibel requirements; and 
h.  Such facility shall be subject to an unannounced annual inspection to assess compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
13.  Mortuary establishments. 
14.  Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and other similar uses as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  There shall be a minimum lot size of two acres; 
b.  Merchandise and/or any other material are displayed or stored in a permanent area designed for such use; 
c.  Merchandise and/or any other materials are not displayed or stored on any sidewalks, walkways, parking spaces, or other vehicle ways; 
d.  The outdoor storage and/or sale of mulch and other landscaping related materials is permitted as accessory to commercial greenhouses and nurseries, but not permitted as stand-alone businesses. 
e.  Required yard setbacks for buildings are met for the storage/display area and for all temporary structures; 
f.  Access to the display/storage area shall be restricted by means of a physical barrier such as a fence, a berm, landscaping, or other similar means; 
g.  Outdoor areas used for the growing of products must be set back a minimum of 30 feet in the front yard and 25 feet in the side and rear yards. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; 
h.  A minimum of a 25-foot buffer strip along rear and side property lines shall be developed and maintained per the buffer strip requirements of this ordinance; 
i.  Security fencing located in the front yard shall be screened with a minimum of one large evergreen shrub per five linear feet of fence. Such large shrubs shall be on the visual resources review board's recommended large shrubs list and shall be a minimum of three feet in height at the time of planting; and 
j.  A maximum of one wall sign shall be permitted. Such wall sign shall meet all other sign requirements of the district. 
15.  Day care facilities as regulated in Chapter 4. 
16.  Nursing homes as regulated in Chapter 4. 
17.  Elderly housing as regulated in Chapter 4. 
18.  Churches and other places of worship. 
19.  Schools, public and private, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations; 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of three acres; and 
c.  The lot on which the school is located is a free-standing parcel. 
20.  Theaters, indoor only. 
21.  Cultural activities. 
22.  Parks, playgrounds, play fields, neighborhood buildings, and community buildings. 
23.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
24.  Outdoor recreational facilities such as miniature golf courses, golf courses, driving ranges, batting cages, tennis courts, swimming pools, skating/skateboard facilities, paintball facilities, and other similar non-motorized recreational facilities as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Seasonal inflatable playground structures shall not be considered a similar non-motorized recreational facility. The following development criteria shall be met: 
a.  A minimum of a 40-foot front yard setback is maintained for any recreational facility that does not require the construction of a structure; 
b.  A minimum of a ten-foot rear and side yard setback is maintained for any recreational facility that does not require the construction of a structure; and 
c.  All structures developed as an integral part of a recreational facility/use are set back a minimum of 40 feet in the front yard and ten feet in the side and rear yards. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
25.  Utility uses. 
C.  Area regulations. The purpose of these setback regulations is to create a flexible building envelope that will enable the creative possibilities for development of a parcel to be maximized and to allow consideration of the natural features of a parcel as it is being developed. Please refer to Illustrations 6, 7 and 8 (see Chapter 1). These illustrations depict the intent of the following regulations. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line and all structures shall comply with the following setback requirements: 
1.  Front Yards. 
a.  Where a parking lot is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 80 feet; 
b.  Where only a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 60 feet; or 
c.  Where neither a parking lot nor a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. 
d.  All accessory structures, excluding signage (which would be subject to the provisions in the sign ordinance), detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), and/or non-roofed structures that provide for pedestrian engagement with the public street (such as outdoor patios, pedestrian facilities, sitting areas, public art), shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
    With the exception of linear pedestrian facilities that connect to similar facilities in the right-of-way, no structures shall encroach into the public right of way and/or platted utility easements. Detention basin structures that are not associated with a low impact development measure shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard building setback requirements. 
    Service areas and their associated structures (e.g., dumpsters, loading areas, utility building) shall be located to the side or rear of a building so as to minimize visual impacts from the street and foster a more pedestrian friendly streetscape. 
2.  Side yards. All buildings shall be set back a combined total of at least 60 feet on the two sides, but not less than 20 feet on any one side. 
3.  Side and rear yards. All accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
4.  Rear yards. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. 
5.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all front property lines when the street adjacent to that front property line is classified as a collector or local street on the Major Road Plan and the property on the opposite side of the street is zoned residential or agricultural; 
b.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agriculture; 
c.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
6.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 70 percent. 
7.  Land area. Minimum lot size of one acre. 
D.  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
E.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
    In order to minimize the visual impact of surface parking, where parking is situated between a building and a street or is parallel with a building along a street, a berm shall be constructed or landscaping shall be planted so as to limit the viewability of the parking lot from the street. A minimum of 60 percent of the total parking lot length adjacent to the front property line shall be screened from view with a berm or landscaping. 
F.  Mixed Use Town Center. 
1.  General Description and Purpose. 
    In the Town's adopted Comprehensive Land Use Plan (CLUP), Strategy 1 describes the community's desire to Bring About a Downtown. Also included in the CLUP are land use descriptions related to the intent, uses, and character of what is described as a Mixed Use Town Center (MUTC). The CLUP also includes a future land use map which identifies locations for a MUTC. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure that properties zoned C-1 that are within (i.e., at least half of the existing parcel) the area shown as Mixed Use Town Center are developed and redeveloped in a manner that is consistent with the CLUP. 
    Where a property is zoned C-1 and is shown to be within the area identified as MUTC on the Future Land Use Map, the following provisions shall apply. 
2.  Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures. (If a use is not listed below it shall not be permitted unless it is approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception and the proposed use is consistent with the CLUP as it relates to the MUTC.) 
a.  Generally recognized retail sales. This excludes all outdoor sales or storage (unless part of an approved Farmers Market or similar seasonal pedestrian oriented use) and any "big box" entities where the total gross square footage exceeds 25,000 square feet. 
b.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, coffee houses, bistros, or other similar establishments serving food or beverage that is primarily consumed within the principal building or in designated outdoor seating areas associated with the principal building. A drive-through lane may be permitted provided the following criteria are satisfied: 
1.  The property is a minimum of two acres and is a lot of record that has existing frontage on a street classified as a major arterial on the Major Road Plan; 
2.  The drive-through is limited to one lane; 
3.  The drive-through is located to the rear of the building or behind the building so that it is not visible from any abutting public rights-of-way; 
4.  The drive-through is limited to one menu board which shall be permitted provided all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
a)  The menu board and any associated apparatus shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building; 
b)  The menu board and any associated apparatus shall be screened with opaque materials (which may include evergreen plant material) so that, throughout the year, they are not visible from adjacent properties and/or rights of ways; 
c)  The screening plan for such menu board and associated apparatus shall be reviewed as part of the site and landscape plan review with the applicable standards in the Architectural Design Standards (ADS) also being applied; and 
d)  The menu board shall not exceed 36 square feet in size and 6 feet in overall height. 
5.  The entrance and exit to the drive-through leads to a parking area or service drive. The drive-through lane shall not be directly connected to a public street; and 
6.  The design shall minimize vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. The drive-through lane shall not separate parking lots from rear building pedestrian access doors or other pedestrian access ways. 
c.  Financial and real estate services. This excludes drive-through service lanes and windows. 
d.  Professional, personal, and business services. 
e.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
f.  Medical, dental, and veterinary facilities (indoors only). 
g.  Medical spas. 
h.  Adult education and training facilities, indoors only. 
i.  Cultural activities. 
j.  Theaters. 
k.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
l.  Parks and community facilities. 
m.  Residential, provided located in upper stories. 
n.  Bed and breakfasts/inns. 
o.  Hotels, provided the gross square footage does not exceed 25,000 square feet. 
p.  Churches and other places of worship, provided they are not located in freestanding buildings. 
q.  Day care facilities, provided they are not located in freestanding buildings. 
r.  Schools, public and private, provided they are not located in freestanding buildings. 
s.  Utility uses. This excludes substations and telecommunication towers. These utility uses shall not be permitted. 
t.  Other uses similar to any of the above, as approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception. Any use approved as a Special Exception in this section shall be compatible with the CLUP as it relates to the Mixed Use Town Center. 
3.  Building Facade Requirements. 
    New construction shall comply with Title 14, Chapter 3, Section 14-305 and Section 14-306(1) and (2) [see now §§ 107-26 and 107-27] of the Farragut Municipal Code. The street facing building facade that does not have the storefront must provide windows or some other type architectural feature so the wall is not blank. 
    Where re-development involves improvements (interior and/or exterior) to an existing building(s) which exceed 50 percent of the current value (as determined by a certified appraisal) of such building(s), the building(s) facade(s) shall be modified to use high-quality, durable, materials that are architecturally compatible and include a significant masonry element. Such building facades shall not use fabricated metal panels or vinyl siding and shall include only very limited use of synthetic stucco (EIFS) or panelized brick. 
4.  Low Impact Development Requirements. Any new development or redevelopment where at least half of the existing site improvements are being modified (e.g., half of the existing parking lot is being altered from its current configuration), shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
a.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
b.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
c.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
d.  Stormwater draining to bioswales/bioretention facilities; or 
e.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
5.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Front yards. 
1.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines and access easements. 
2.  All accessory structures, such as parking garages, dumpsters, HVAC units and generators, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines and access easements. This excludes signage, detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), or structures typically associated with a store front or furnishing zone as described in the TCD Zoning District. 
    Where abutting an arterial street, no portion of a parking lot shall be closer to such street than the principal building(s). The minimum setback for a parking lot shall be 20 feet from all property lines and access easements. 
b.  Side and rear yards. 
1.  All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of zero feet if part of a larger plan to join a building on an adjoining property. Where a building is planned to be joined with another building to form a series of buildings the design requirements provided for in Title 14, Chapter 3 [see now chapter 107, article 2] of the Farragut Municipal Code shall apply. 
    Where the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, principal buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any side or rear property line a minimum of 35 feet. 
2.  All accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet, unless a greater setback is otherwise required in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
6.  Buffer Strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agricultural. 
7.  Maximum Lot Coverage. Total lot coverage: 80 percent. 
8.  Land Area. Minimum lot size of one acre. 
9.  Height Regulations. 
a.  Unless provided for otherwise, buildings shall be a minimum of two stories in height or have the appearance, as viewed from all building elevations, of a building that is at least two stories in height. Buildings shall not exceed four stories in height. The minimum height requirement shall apply only to new buildings. 
b.  For existing lots of record that are not part of a larger development and that are less than three acres, the planning commission may consider allowing a building height that is less than two stories. This shall only be permitted if the proposed building is in compliance with all other building facade requirements that apply to the Mixed Use Town Center and the applicable provisions of the Architectural Design Standards. An applicant shall also clearly demonstrate that the building(s) will advance and be consistent with the building design objectives of the Town Center District. 
c.  Whenever the adjacent property is zoned residential (other than multi-family), or agricultural, no buildings to be constructed within 100 feet of a periphery property line shall exceed the maximum height permitted for principal dwelling units in the adjacent zoning district(s). 
d.  No accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height. Parking garages shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet in height. Parking garages may not access streets classified as arterial. 
10.  Parking spaces required. 
1.  Number of parking spaces required. Unless the building is mixed use, the number of parking spaces required shall be as regulated by Chapter 4, Section XX of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Mixed use buildings shall be governed by the following parking space provisions: 
    One parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for the first [ground] floor; 
    One parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area for the second floor; and 
    One parking space per 750 square feet of gross floor area for the third and fourth floors. 
2.  Required bicycle parking. One bicycle space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. Bicycle racks shall be provided in desirable locations and shall be conveniently located at each building. The rack placement should not impede pedestrian movement and should not cause conflicts between bicycles and pedestrians. 
3.  Shared parking. Shared parking within the area identified as MUTC shall be encouraged. The parking and access easements must be identified as part of the site plan review and a plat prepared and recorded which memorializes such easements prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
11.  Streetscape and Outdoor Open Space. An active and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces shall be provided and specifically addressed in the site plan submittal. Some specific design objectives are as follows: 
a.  Provide for pedestrian and bicycle connections between properties and connections to existing pedestrian and bicycle facilities. Provide for a development that creates a pleasant and functional pedestrian experience. 
b.  Encourage vehicular connections between adjoining properties. 
c.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
d.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
12.  Outdoor Site Lighting. As regulated in Chapter 4, Section XIII of the Zoning Ordinance with the following additional provisions in the MUTC: 
a.  New exterior lighting associated with new development or re-development within the MUTC shall have a consistency. 
b.  Street lighting shall follow the requirements in Chapter 3, Section XXVII.K.2. of the Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Parking lot lights shall have decorative posts and brackets and a decorative fixture, such as a bell shaped style fixture. The bulbs shall be contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
d.  Building mounted lights shall be decorative, such as the acorn, lantern, or bell shaped styles. The bulbs shall be contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
e.  Bollard lighting shall be permitted provided the bulbs are contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
13.  Signage. As regulated in the Farragut Sign Ordinance, with the following additional provisions which shall specifically govern all wall signage: 
a)  Box or cabinet style signs on new buildings shall not be permitted; 
b)  Each tenant shall be permitted a primary wall sign facing an abutting major arterial street not to exceed a ratio of 1:1 (sign area to lease space frontage on which the sign is to be mounted); 
c)  Each tenant shall be permitted a secondary wall provided the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  The property shall directly front along a major arterial street; 
b.  There is no surface parking in the front yard area(s) between the building and the major arterial street; 
c.  The secondary wall sign shall not exceed a ratio of 0.75:1 (sign area to lease space frontage on which the sign is to be mounted) 
d.  The secondary sign shall only be placed on the wall where the primary entrance is located and shall face the primary parking lot area; 
d)  Lighting for all new wall signs shall be consistent and shall be limited to external or back lit illumination; and 
e)  Signage shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of the Town's Architectural Design Standards. 
F-1.  Streetscape and outdoor open space. As part of a site plan review, a context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces is encouraged. Some specific design objectives would be as follows: 
1.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
2.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
G.  Connectivity. Development shall provide for context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties, pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
H.  Low Impact Development. Development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bios wales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-20, §§ 1-4, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 07-39, § 1, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-01, § 1, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 11-21, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 12-02, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 12-13, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 14-21, § 2, 1-22-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-02, §§ 1, 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 16-13, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-19, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-25, § 1, 12-22-2016; Ord. No. 17-11 , § 1, 8-10-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-13, § 2 added subsections F-H to ch. 3, § XII. As a subsection F already existed, the added subsection F has been editorially designated as subsection F-1. 
Sec. XIII. - Neighborhood/Convenience Commercial District (NCC) 
A.  General description. This district is intended for small to medium commercial sites and areas located near existing or developing residential neighborhoods. The emphasis of the district is on uses which provide goods and services to nearby residential areas. Uses are intentionally limited in size and intensity to promote a local market orientation and to limit adverse impacts on nearby residential areas. Development is expected to be predominantly auto accommodating, except where the site is well connected to surrounding residential areas by pedestrian and bicycle facilities. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Unless provided for elsewhere in this section, property and structures located in the Neighborhood/Convenience Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes and in accordance with all applicable requirements: 
1.  Generally recognized retail sales. This excludes all outdoor sales or storage (unless part of an approved Farmers Market or similar seasonal retail pedestrian-oriented use), petroleum product fuel centers, and any "big box" entities where the total gross square footage exceeds 25,000 square feet. 
2.  Personal and professional services. 
3.  Financial and real estate services. 
4.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, coffee houses, bistros, or other similar establishments serving food or beverage that is primarily consumed within the principal building or in designated outdoor seating areas associated with the principal building. 
5.  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
6.  Bed and breakfasts/inns. 
7.  Day care facilities. 
8.  Veterinary facilities (indoor facilities only). 
9.  Schools, public and private. 
10.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
11.  Cultural activities. 
12.  Parks and community facilities. 
13.  Churches and other places of worship 
14.  Utility uses. This excludes substations and telecommunication towers. These utility uses shall not be permitted. 
15.  Residential uses, including both detached and attached single family dwellings, and apartment buildings not to exceed eight-units per acre provided they are developed as part of a transition area in this district; and/or residential units in mixed-use buildings provided they are not located on the ground floor. 
16.  Permitted uses that may include drive-through facilities. A drive-through may be permitted for any of the uses permitted in this zoning district provided the following criteria are satisfied: 
a.  The drive-through is oriented so that stacking lanes do not extend across the front of the building; 
b.  Stacking lanes shall be separated from parking lots by landscaped raised islands or landscaped bioretention areas; 
c.  If a menu board is used, the following criteria shall be satisfied: 
1)  The menu board and any associated apparatus shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building; 
2)  The area around the menu board and any associated apparatus shall be landscaped and screened so that, throughout the year, they are not visible from adjacent properties that are zoned residential and/or public rights-of-ways; 
3)  The screening plan for such menu board and associated apparatus shall be reviewed as part of the site and landscape plan review with the applicable standards in the Architectural Design Standards (ADS) also being applied. 
4)  Menu board signage shall comply with the requirements in the Farragut Sign Ordinance. 
d.  The entrance and exit to the drive-through leads to a parking area or service drive. The drive-through lane shall not be directly connected to a public street; and 
e.  The design shall minimize vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. The drive-through lane shall not separate parking lots from rear building pedestrian access doors or other pedestrian access ways. Pedestrian routes shall be well delineated and provide direct access from public streets and sidewalks and parking lots to building entrances. 
C.  Maximum Building Size and Height : These maximum building size and height standards are intended to limit the size and intensity of development and to promote a local market orientation. The district is intended to provide for a range of small and medium sized businesses as a convenience to surrounding residential districts in the immediate area. 
1.  The maximum footprint area for a single-use freestanding building shall be 25,000 square feet. 
2.  The maximum footprint area for a single multi-use/shopping center building shall be 50,000 square feet with no individual use exceeding 50 percent of the total footprint area of the entire multi-use/shopping center building. 
3.  Where an abutting property is zoned for detached single family residential development the maximum footprint area for any non-residential building proposed within 75 feet of a peripheral side or rear property line shall be limited to 5,000 square feet. This maximum footprint area may be increased to 7,500 square feet where the abutting property is zoned for attached single family or two family residential development. 
4.  Where the property located on the opposite side of an abutting public street is zoned residential, the maximum footprint area for any non-residential building proposed within 75 feet of a peripheral front property line shall be 5,000 square feet where said street is classified as a local street on the Town's Major Road Plan; and 7,500 square feet where said street is classified as a collector. 
5.  No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this section. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. All structures, including parking lots, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the nearest point of any public right-of-way. This excludes signage (which would be subject to the provisions in the sign ordinance), detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), and/or non-roofed structures that provide for pedestrian engagement with the public street (such as outdoor patios, pedestrian facilities, sitting areas, public art). With the exception of linear pedestrian facilities that connect to similar facilities in the right-of-way, no structures shall encroach into the public right-of-way and/or platted utility easements. Service areas and their associated structures (e.g., dumpsters, loading areas, utility buildings) shall be located to the side or rear of a building to minimize visual impacts from the street and foster a more pedestrian friendly streetscape. 
b.  Side and rear yards. Unless provided for otherwise in this section, where an adjacent property is zoned residential, all principal buildings that are positioned along a side or rear property line shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). Where an adjacent property is zoned non-residential, all structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
c.  Accessory structures. Unless specified otherwise in this section, where an adjacent property is zoned residential, all accessory structures, excluding fences, pedestrian facilities, signage, and structures associated with low impact development stormwater measures, shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest side or rear property line. 
Mechanical units five tons or greater, dumpsters, and other service areas, and drive-thru lanes, as measured from the outer edge of the outermost vehicle stacking lane, shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all side or rear property lines where the abutting property is zoned residential. 
In all cases, site related components that could create a potential nuisance to adjoining existing residential developments shall be arranged on the site and buffered to prevent such nuisance from occurring. 
2.  Transition areas. 
The intent of this zoning district is to provide smaller scale and less intense development that, in comparison with other commercial zoning districts, will transition more appropriately to nearby residential development. 
a.  Unless specified otherwise in this section, where an abutting property is zoned residential, a transition area of at least 25 feet in width shall be provided. The intent of a transition area is to provide for a visually appealing interface to an abutting residential area that will serve to establish protection for but also context appropriate integration with the surrounding area and plan of development. Transition areas shall accommodate the connectivity requirements of this district. This will result in some modest breaks in the transition element. As provided for in this district, transition areas shall include, at a minimum, any one of the following or a combination thereof: 
1)  A landscaped low impact development stormwater management area, such as a rain garden(s), bioswale(s), or naturalized areas with existing and/or new tree plantings that, in total, consume the full depth of the transition area. At a minimum, such an area shall include a plant unit count that equals the count required for a 25-foot buffer strip, as provided for in chapter 4 of this section. Under this option, the arrangement of plant material may include more flexibility than a traditional buffer strip planting, provided this arrangement best promotes the intended stormwater function of the low impact development measure(s); 
2)  A heavily landscaped pocket park area designed for passive use and that is approved as part of a site and landscape plan as an equivalent to other natural transition measures provided for in this subsection. Such area could serve as a shared amenity between a use in this district and an abutting residential neighborhood; 
3)  A traditional planted buffer strip area that complies with the 25-foot buffer strip plantings provided for in chapter 4 of this section; 
4)  An existing tree covered area that consumes largely the full depth of the transition area and where the existing tree count within such area clearly exceeds the plant unit count and minimum tree sizes for a 25-foot buffer strip per 100 linear feet; 
5)  Integrated planned residential development. Residential development may be proposed as a transitional element within a larger overall development plan. The type, placement, scale, and general arrangement of residential building(s) shall be evaluated as provided for in the Transition Area Plan required for this zoning district. The planning commission shall consider both the context of the surrounding area and the plan proposed by the applicant during the evaluation process. Proposed residential building envelopes shall be shown on all concept and final site plans, and platted as part of any final subdivision plat. Appropriate legal documentation shall also be provided for review, and recorded to assure that all present and future owners are appropriately bound to the approved development plan. 
Where a development combines different transition elements, they shall be reflected on the site and landscape plans. Such an approach must clearly fulfill the intent of the transition area provision. Existing tree covered areas within transitions shall be protected. Exceptions would apply for the removal of invasive exotic plant material and context appropriate pedestrian and/or vehicular connections and utilities adjacent to such improvements that bisect the transition area in a generally perpendicular manner. 
b.  A transition area plan shall be provided as part of any site plan submittal where a proposed development abuts residentially zoned property. This plan shall specifically demonstrate how the selected transition element(s) and overall development will be compatible with an adjacent residential district. Some key considerations would include an assessment of the surrounding plan of development, how buildings are arranged on the applicant's site, the size of buildings on different portions of the applicant's site, and the placement of structures or other design elements that may create a nuisance in terms of noise, light, smell, or other negative conditions. The planning commission shall refer to the Neighborhood Building Design Transitions section of the Farragut Architectural Design Standards for guidance on evaluating an applicant's proposed transition area plan. Where an applicant does not demonstrate compatibility, the planning commission shall have the authority to deny the site plan. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 60 percent 
4.  Land area. The minimum lot size for a Neighborhood/Convenience Commercial district zone shall be one acre. 
E.  Streetscape and outdoor open space. As part of a site plan review, a context appropriate active and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces is encouraged. Some specific design objectives would be as follows: 
1.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
2.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
F.  Connectivity. Development shall provide for context appropriate pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties, pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
G.  Low Impact Development. In terms of stormwater management for new developments, at least 25 percent of the development's total area shall be designed so that its runoff will be accommodated through Low Impact Development (LID) measures which would rely on infiltration, evapotranspiration, or capture/reuse of stormwater runoff. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, permeable pavers, rain gardens, bioswales, vegetated roofs, rainwater capture systems and/or a combination thereof. The use of LID measures to meet this requirement shall be demonstrated on the drainage plan and in the drainage calculations for the development and the applicable LID measures specified as part of the site and landscape plan submittals. 
H.  Parking. Parking, as regulated in chapter 4. 
I.  Lighting. Lighting, as regulated in chapter 4; except that the maximum number of footcandles permitted at the property line shall be reduced to 0.0 where a use/development is located adjacent to property that is zoned residential. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 6-28-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-07 , § 1, adopted June 28, 2018, repealed the former Sec. III, and enacted a new Sec. III as set out herein. The former Sec. III pertained to General Commercial Storage District (CS-1) and derived from Ord. No. 07-22, § 1, 6-28-2007. 
Sec. XIV. - General commercial district, three stories (C-1-3). 
A.  Description. This district provides identical use and area requirements as the General Commercial District (C-1), except that no building shall exceed three stories, or 42 feet, in height and that any three-story building constructed in a C-1-3 zone which abuts a residential district or B-1 zone have a minimum building setback of 70 feet. In all such cases, this 70-foot setback is from the C-1-3 zoning line, regardless of property ownership. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XV. - Regional commercial district (C-2). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for commercial uses which provide services to regions including and surrounding the Town of Farragut. The intent is to permit lands adjacent to interstate highway interchanges to be used for the provision of general commercial and business services to both interstate travelers and residents of the region. These commercial uses are intended to be designed to minimize disruption of traffic flows and negative impacts on adjacent residential uses. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Property and structures located in the regional commercial district (C-2) shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Generally recognized retail sales. This excludes flea markets and other similar uses as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    The outdoor sale and/or storage of merchandise and/or any other materials shall be permitted provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Such merchandise and/or materials are displayed or stored in a permanent area designed for such use; 
b.  Such merchandise and/or materials are not displayed or stored on any sidewalks, walkways, parking spaces, or other vehicle ways; 
c.  Required yard setbacks for buildings are met for the storage/display area; and 
d.  Access to the display/storage area shall be restricted by means of a physical barrier such as a fence, a berm, landscaping, or other similar means. 
2.  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
3.  The retail sale of alcoholic beverages, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
4.  Financial and real estate services. 
5.  Professional, personal, and business services. 
6.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, or other similar places serving food and beverage. 
    Outdoor seating shall be permitted provided the total number of outdoor seats does not exceed 40 percent of the total number of indoor seats, excluding banquet seating. 
    Outdoor bar areas shall be permitted provided the parcel, tract, or lot on which the restaurant is located is a minimum of 800 feet from any residentially zoned land. The planning commission may require the outdoor bar area to be fenced or that some other type of physical barrier be installed to restrict free access to the outdoor bar area. 
7.  Hotels and motels. 
8.  Automotive services, provided such services are for automobiles and light trucks only. Such services may include fuel sales and repairs. Facilities designed to accommodate the refueling and/or servicing of trucks with more than three axles or more than ten wheels as well as heavy equipment are prohibited. 
9.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
10.  Medical spas. 
11.  Medical, dental, and veterinary facilities. 
12.  Indoor kennel facilities, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The building shall be sound proofed to prevent the noise of barking dogs being heard outside the building. A certification verifying the sound proofing capabilities must be submitted with the site plan; and 
b.  No outdoor fencing shall be located on the premises. 
13.  Mortuary establishments. 
14.  Commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and other similar uses as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  There shall be a minimum lot size of two acres; 
b.  Merchandise and/or any other material are displayed or stored in a permanent area designed for such use; 
c.  Merchandise and/or any other material are not displayed or stored on any sidewalks, walkways, parking spaces, or other vehicle ways; 
d.  The outdoor storage and/or sale of mulch and other landscaping related materials is permitted as accessory to commercial greenhouses and nurseries, but not permitted as stand-alone businesses. 
e.  Required yard setbacks for buildings are met for the storage/display area and for all temporary structures; 
f.  Access to the display/storage area shall be restricted by means of a physical barrier such as a fence, a berm, landscaping, or other similar means; 
g.  Outdoor areas used for the growing of products must be setback a minimum of 30 feet in the front yard and 20 feet in the side and rear yards. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line; and 
h.  A maximum of one wall sign shall be permitted. Such wall sign shall meet all other sign requirements of the district. 
15.  Reserved. 
16.  Day care facilities as regulated in Chapter 4. 
17.  Nursing homes as regulated in Chapter 4. 
18.  Group housing as regulated in Chapter 4. 
19.  Churches and other places of worship. 
20.  Theaters, indoor only. 
21.  Cultural activities. 
22.  Parks, playgrounds, play fields, neighborhood buildings, and community buildings. 
23.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
24.  Motorized wakeboard cable system provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The system is installed per the manufacturer's specifications and inspected by the town; 
b.  The motor is electric powered; 
c.  The stanchions are fenced or barricaded so as to prevent open access; 
d.  The stanchions and cables are removed during the off season; and 
e.  The stanchions are set back from all structures and property lines a minimum of one foot for each one foot of stanchion height. 
25.  Outdoor recreational facilities such as miniature golf courses, golf courses, driving ranges, batting cages, tennis courts, swimming pools, skating/skateboard facilities, paintball facilities, and other similar non-motorized recreational facilities as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Seasonal inflatable playground structures shall not be considered a similar non-motorized recreational facility. The following development criteria shall be met: 
a.  A minimum of a 40-foot front yard setback is maintained for any recreational facility that does not require the construction of a structure; 
b.  A minimum of a ten-foot rear and side yard setback is maintained for any recreational facility that does not require the construction of a structure; and 
c.  All structures developed as an integral part of a recreational facility/use are setback a minimum of 40-feet in the front yard and ten feet in the side and rear yards. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
26.  Parking lots. 
27.  Utility uses. 
C.  Area regulations. The purpose of these setback regulations is to create a flexible building envelope that will enable the creative possibilities for development of a parcel to be maximized and to allow consideration of the natural features of a parcel as it is being developed. Please refer to Illustrations 11, 12 and 13 (see Chapter 1). These illustrations depict the intent of the following regulations. 
    Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line and all structures shall comply with the following setback requirements. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
1.  Front yards. 
a.  Where a parking lot is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 75 feet; 
b.  Where only a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 55 feet; or 
c.  Where neither a parking lot nor a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. 
d.  All accessory structures, excluding signage (which would be subject to the provisions in the sign ordinance), detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), and/or non-roofed structures that provide for pedestrian engagement with the public street (such as outdoor patios, pedestrian facilities, sitting areas, public art), shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
    With the exception of linear pedestrian facilities that connect to similar facilities in the right of way, no structures shall encroach into the public right of way and/or platted utility easements. Detention basin structures that are not associated with a low impact development measure shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard building setback requirements. 
    Service areas and their associated structures (e.g., dumpsters, loading areas, utility building) shall be located to the side or rear of a building so as to minimize visual impacts from the street and foster a more pedestrian friendly streetscape. 
2.  Side yards. All buildings shall be set back a combined total of at least 80 feet on the two sides, but not less than 35 feet on any one side. 
3.  Side and rear yards. All accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
4.  Rear yards. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet. 
5.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all front property lines when the street adjacent to that front property line is classified as a collector or local street on the Major Road Plan and the property on the opposite side of the street is zoned residential or agricultural; 
b.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 50 feet in width on all side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agriculture; 
c.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
6.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 70 percent. 
7.  Land area. Minimum lot size of one acre. 
D.  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
    Buildings may be increased to 50 feet in height, provided that for each one foot in height over 35 feet, the building shall be set back one additional foot. 
    Buildings may be increased to 70 feet in height, provided that for each one foot in height over 35 feet, the building shall be set back one additional foot and the building is located a minimum of 200 feet from any buffer zoned land or residentially zoned land. 
E.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
    In order to minimize the visual impact of surface parking, where parking is situated between a building and a street or is parallel with a building along a street, a berm shall be constructed or landscaping shall be planted so as to limit the viewability of the parking lot from the street. A minimum of 60 percent of the total parking lot length adjacent to the front property line shall be screened from view with a berm or landscaping. 
F.  Streetscape and outdoor open space. As part of a site plan review, a context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) active and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces is encouraged. Some specific design objectives would be as follows: 
1.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
2.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
G.  Connectivity. Development shall provide for context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties, pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
H.  Low Impact Development. Development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bios wales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 07-09, §§ 3, 4, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-20, §§ 5-8, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 07-30, § 1, 9-27-2007; Ord. No. 07-39, § 2, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-21, § 3, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 12-02, §§ 3, 4, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 16-14, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 18-08 , § 1, 6-28-2018) 
Sec. XVI. - Business district, four stories (BD-4). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for general office and limited commercial uses. The office uses will provide regional employment opportunities and the commercial uses will primarily serve the residents of the Town of Farragut and immediate surrounds. These office and commercial uses are intended to be designed to minimize negative impacts on nearby residential uses and to strengthen our sense of community. 
B.  Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures. 
1.  Generally recognized retail sales. This excludes all outdoor sales or storage. 
2.  Retail sale of alcoholic beverages, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
3.  Financial and real estate services. 
4.  Professional, personal, and business services. 
5.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, coffee houses, or other similar establishments serving food or beverage that is primarily consumed within the principal building or in designated outdoor seating areas associated with the principal building. This excludes drive-through service lanes and windows. 
6.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
7.  Medical, dental, and veterinary facilities. 
8.  Medical spas. 
9.  Adult education and training facilities, indoors only. 
10.  Theaters, indoors only. 
11.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
12.  Cultural activities. 
C.  Building Facade Requirements. Building construction shall comply with Title 14, Chapter 3, Section 14-305 and Section 14-306(1) and (2), [see now §§ 107-26 and 107-27] of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
D.  Low Impact Development Requirements. The development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  The building being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bioswales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
E.  Area Regulations. 
1.  Front yards. 
a.  Building setbacks shall be determined based on the building height and the location of the street edge of pavement. Anticipated roadway improvements such as additional travel lanes, turn lanes, and bikes lanes shall be taken into consideration in determining the location of the street edge of pavement. The building setback shall be calculated as follows: 
    Building setback = (equals) total building height/(divided by) 1.618 
    The setback shall be measured from the street edge of pavement. At a minimum, all buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all front property lines and access easements. 
b.  All accessory structures, excluding detention basin structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 40 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Detention basins, measured from the exterior toe-of-slope, and all associated structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. 
2.  Side and rear yards. 
a.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet. When the abutting property is zoned residential or agricultural, buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet. When the abutting property is zoned buffer district and the property immediately adjacent to such buffer district is zoned residential or agricultural, buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the residentially or agriculturally zoned land. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all access easements. 
b.  All accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
3.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all front property lines when the street adjacent to that front property line is classified as a collector or local street on the Major Road Plan and the property on the opposite side of the street is zoned residential or agricultural; 
b.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agricultural; 
c.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from the exterior toe-of-slope, and all associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 60 percent. 
5.  Land area. Minimum lot size of one acre. 
6.  Height regulations. No building shall exceed four stories, or 70 feet in height. All buildings shall be a minimum of two stories. Except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code, no accessory structure shall exceed ten feet in height. 
7.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
    When a parking lot is constructed adjacent to a front property line, a berm shall be constructed or landscaping shall be planted so as to limit the viewability of the parking lot from the street. A minimum of 60 percent of the total parking lot length adjacent to the front property line shall be screened from view with a berm or landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. XVII. - Office district (O-1). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for office and community uses which provide services primarily to residents of the Town of Farragut. The intent is to permit lands adjacent to arterial roads to be used for the provision of office related and community services to the neighborhood. These uses are intended to be designed to minimize disruption of traffic flows and negative impacts on adjacent residential uses. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Property and structures in the Office District (O-1) shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Financial and real estate offices. 
2.  Professional services. 
3.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
4.  Medical, dental, and veterinary facilities. An indoor kennel may accompany a veterinary facility provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  The building shall be sound proofed to prevent the noise of barking dogs being heard outside the building. A certification verifying the sound proofing capabilities must be submitted with the site plan; and 
b.  No outdoor fencing shall be located on the premises. 
5.  Medical spas, provided the building space and/or tenant space shall not exceed 1,500 gross square feet. 
6.  Mortuary establishments. 
7.  Cultural activities. 
8.  Day care facilities as regulated in Chapter 4. 
9.  Churches and other places of worship provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the church accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations; 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of five acres; and 
c.  The lot on which the church is located is a free-standing parcel. 
10.  Schools, public and private, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Access shall be directly to a street having a designated classification of local collector or greater, or a local street which is not interior to a subdivision. The street on which the school accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations; 
b.  There shall be a minimum lot size of three acres; and 
c.  The lot on which the school is located is a free-standing parcel. 
11.  Parks, playgrounds, play fields, neighborhood buildings, and community buildings. 
12.  Utility uses. 
C.  Area regulations. The purpose of these setback regulations is to create a flexible building envelope that will enable the creative possibilities for development of a parcel to be maximized and to allow consideration of the natural features of a parcel as it is being developed. Please refer to Illustrations 15, 16 and 17 (see Chapter 1). These illustrations depict the intent of the following regulations. 
    Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line and all structures shall comply with the following yard requirements. For the purposes of this ordinance, the interstate highway right-of-way shall be considered a side or rear lot line. 
1.  Front yards. 
a.  Where a parking lot is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 70 feet; 
b.  Where only a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 55 feet; or 
c.  Where neither a parking lot nor a driveway aisle is situated in the front yard between a building and an abutting street, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. 
d.  All accessory structures, excluding signage (which would be subject to the provisions in the sign ordinance), detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), and/or non-roofed structures that provide for pedestrian engagement with the public street (such as outdoor patios, pedestrian facilities, sitting areas, public art), shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
    With the exception of linear pedestrian facilities that connect to similar facilities in the right of way, no structures shall encroach into the public right of way and/or platted utility easements. Detention basin structures that are not associated with a low impact development measure shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard building setback requirements. 
    Service areas and their associated structures (e.g., dumpsters, loading areas, utility building) shall be located to the side or rear of a building so as to minimize visual impacts from the street and foster a more pedestrian friendly streetscape. 
2.  Side yards. All buildings shall be set back a combined total of at least 50 feet on the two sides, but not less than 20 feet on any one side. 
3.  Side and rear yards. All accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
4.  Rear yards. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet. 
5.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 25 feet in width on all side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agriculture; 
b.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; and 
c.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
6.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 70 percent. 
7.  Land area. Minimum lot size of one acre. 
D.  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 21/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
E.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
    In order to minimize the visual impact of surface parking, where parking is situated between a building and a street or is parallel with a building along a street, a berm shall be constructed or landscaping shall be planted so as to limit the viewability of the parking lot from the street. A minimum of 60 percent of the total parking lot length adjacent to the front property line shall be screened from view with a berm or landscaping. 
F.  Streetscape and outdoor open space. As part of a site plan review, a context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) active and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces is encouraged. Some specific design objectives would be as follows: 
1.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
2.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
G.  Connectivity. Development shall provide for context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties, pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
H.  Low Impact Development. Development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bios wales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 07-20, §§ 9-12, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 11-21, § 4, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 16-15, §§ 1, 2, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. XVIII. - Office district, three stories (O-1-3). 
A.  Description. This district provides identical use and area requirements as the Office District (O-1), except that no building shall exceed three stories, or 42 feet, in height and that any three-story building constructed in an O-1-3 zone which abuts a residential district or B-1 zone have a minimum building setback of 70 feet. In all such cases, this 70-foot setback is from the O-1-3 zoning line, regardless of property ownership. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XIX. - Open space/park district (OS-P). 
A.  General description. This district provides for publicly and not-for-profit owned open spaces and recreational areas. It is the intent of this zone to identify areas that have been designated for open space, greenways, and parks in the community. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Parks. 
2.  Nature trails, park trails, and greenways. 
3.  Historic monuments and structures. 
4.  Cemeteries. 
5.  Community facilities. 
6.  Accessory uses and structures. 
7.  Signs per the Farragut Municipal Code. 
8.  Utility uses. 
C.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. All structures, excluding detention basin structures, fences, grave sites, and certain utility structures, shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 25 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
    Detention basin structures and grave sites shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the front yard setback requirements. 
2.  Side and rear yards. All structures, excluding fences, shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Setbacks shall be measured from the nearest point of any property line. 
3.  Buffer strips. Buffer strips may be required by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Such buffer strips shall be determined on the basis of the proposed uses and shall meet the minimum planting requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 40 percent. 
D.  Height Regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
E.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XX. - Community service district (S-1). 
A.  General description. Consistent with adopted plans and policies of the Town, this district is intended primarily to provide for the development of community and public types uses. This district is also intended as a transitional district to lower density residential by providing for low impact quasi institutional/residential uses that have minimal traffic demands. Key to this district is continuity in general building and site development form. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Property and buildings in the Community Service District (S-1) shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Assisted-care living facilities. 
2.  Cemeteries and historical monuments. 
3.  Churches and other places of worship. 
4.  Community facilities. 
5.  Cultural activities. 
6.  Independent living and care facility. 
7.  Nursing homes. 
8.  Parks. 
9.  Schools, public and private. 
10.  Senior living community. 
11.  Utility uses. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The property must directly access a street that is classified on the Major Road Plan as a collector or arterial. 
2.  A site plan and landscape plan for the development shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
3.  The approved plan shall be in compliance with the Farragut Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, the Architectural Design Standards, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut, as amended. 
4.  Prior to site plan submittal, the applicant shall conduct a site inventory of the natural features on the property so as to determine those areas that should be preserved and those that may be most appropriate for development. This inventory should be discussed with the Town staff prior to finalizing plans for review. The inventory should demonstrate that the Town's adopted land use related documents, such as the Tree Protection Ordinance, the Sinkhole Ordinance, the Stormwater Ordinance, and other adopted documents that may be applicable to the proposed development have been referenced. 
    From the site inventory, a sketch plan is required in consultation with the Town staff with the first step in the preparation of such plan being the establishment of potential building locations that would minimize site grading and preserve to the greatest extent possible the natural topography, especially where tree covered areas exist. The road and trail systems would then be connected through the development and to abutting properties. The maximum slope created as a result of a proposed development shall not be greater than 2.5:1 (run/rise). 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. All structures, including parking lots, shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the nearest point of any right-of-way. This excludes signage (which would be subject to the provisions in the sign ordinance), detention basin structures (if associated with a low impact development measure), and/or non-roofed structures that provide for pedestrian engagement with the public street (such as outdoor patios, pedestrian facilities, sitting areas, public art). With the exception of linear pedestrian facilities that connect to similar facilities in the right of way, no structures shall encroach into the public right of way and/or platted utility easements. 
    Service areas and their associated structures (e.g., dumpsters, loading areas, utility buildings) shall be located to the side or rear of a building so as to minimize visual impacts from the street and foster a more pedestrian friendly streetscape. 
b.  Side and rear yards. Unless provided for otherwise in this ordinance, where an adjacent property is zoned residential and/or agriculture, all principal buildings that are positioned along a side or rear property line shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
    Where an adjacent property is zoned non-residential and/or non-agriculture, all structures shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
c.  Accessory structures. Unless specified otherwise in this ordinance, where an adjacent property is zoned residential and/or agriculture, all accessory structures, excluding fences, pedestrian facilities, signage, and structures associated with low impact development stormwater measures, shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest side or rear property line. Mechanical units five tons or greater, dumpsters, and other service areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all side or rear property lines where the abutting property is zoned residential and/or agriculture. 
2.  Transition areas. 
a.  Unless specified otherwise in this ordinance, where an abutting property is zoned residential and/or agriculture, a transition area of at least 50 feet in width shall be provided. The intent of a transition area is to provide for a visually appealing interface to an abutting residential area that will serve to establish protection for but also context appropriate integration with the surrounding plan of development. Transition areas shall accommodate the connectivity requirements of this district. This will result in some modest breaks in the transition element. As provided for in this district, transition areas shall include, at a minimum, any one of the following or a combination thereof: 
1.  A landscaped low impact development stormwater management area, such as a rain garden(s), bioswale(s), or naturalized areas with existing and/or new tree plantings that, in total, consume the full depth of the transition area. At a minimum, such an area shall include a plant unit count that equals the count required for a 35-foot buffer strip, as provided for in Chapter 4 of this ordinance. Under this option, the arrangement of plant material may include more flexibility than a traditional buffer strip planting, provided this arrangement best promotes the intended stormwater function of the low impact development measure(s); 
2.  A heavily landscaped pocket park area designed for passive use and that is approved as part of a site and landscape plan as an equivalent to other natural transition measures provided for in this subsection. Such area could serve as a shared amenity between a use in this district and an abutting residential neighborhood; 
3.  A traditional planted buffer strip area that complies with the 35-foot buffer strip plantings provided for in Chapter 4 of this ordinance; 
4.  An existing tree covered area that consumes largely the full depth of the transition area and where the existing tree count within such area clearly exceeds the plant unit count and minimum tree sizes for a 35-foot buffer strip per 100 linear feet; 
5.  Where freestanding attached and detached independent and catered living residential buildings are proposed around the periphery of a senior living community that abuts property zoned residential and/or agriculture, such buildings may be proposed as the transitional element. In order to qualify as such, buildings shall be generally consistent with the predominant size, scale, height, and arrangement of residential structures that abut that portion of the senior living community. Where the abutting property is undeveloped and zoned residential and/or agriculture and transitional buildings are proposed along this interface in the senior living community, the size, scale, height, and arrangement of residential structures shall be reviewed as part of the concept plan that is required for the senior living community. 
    As part of the analysis of appropriateness of the transitional buildings along the undeveloped properties, the planning commission shall consider the surrounding context and the overall concept plan proposed by the applicant. Buildings proposed for transitional elements shall comply with the setbacks, platted building envelopes, and landscape planting required in association with a senior living community. These specific provisions are addressed in Chapter 4 of this ordinance. 
    Where a development combines different transition elements these shall be considered as part of the sketch plan or, as applicable, concept plan and then reflected on the site and landscape plans. Such an approach must clearly fulfill the intent of the transition area provision. Existing tree covered areas within transitions shall be protected. Exceptions would apply for the removal of invasive exotic plant material and context appropriate pedestrian and/or vehicular connections and utilities adjacent to such improvements that bisect the transition area in a generally perpendicular manner. 
    Transition areas shall not be required for developments that abut properties that are not zoned residential and/or agriculture. 
E.  Streetscape and outdoor open space. As part of a site plan review, a context appropriate active and interconnected streetscape with visually appealing and functional public spaces is encouraged. Some specific design objectives would be as follows: 
1.  Locate and orient outdoor open space (e.g., plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide a focal point to be actively used. 
2.  Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
F.  Connectivity. Development shall provide for context appropriate pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties, pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
G.  Low Impact Development. Development shall incorporate a minimum of one of the following Low Impact Development (LID) practices into the design: 
1.  Twenty-five percent of the parking lot being constructed with permeable pavers; 
2.  Stormwater runoff draining to rain gardens; 
3.  A building(s) being constructed with a vegetated roof, commonly referred to as a green roof; 
4.  Stormwater draining to bios wales/bioretention facilities; or 
5.  Rainwater being harvested for irrigation or gray water uses. 
H.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage: 60 percent, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
I.  Land area. Minimum lot size of three acres, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
J.  Height. No principal building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
K.  [Parking.] Parking, as regulated in Chapter 4. 
L.  [Lighting.] Lighting, as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. XXI. - Flood plain district (FPD). 
A.  General description. The flood plain district is established as an overlay district of flood damage prevention regulations, the intent of which is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens by requiring that development within this district be governed by regulations found in Chapter 4, Section VIII of this ordinance. These regulations are in accordance with the National Flood Disaster Act of 1973 and all subsequent amendments. 
    The appearance of the Flood Plain District on the Farragut Zoning Map is intended only to provide a general location of flood hazard within the community. The flood plain consists of the 100-year regulatory "Floodway" and the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) Subject to Inundation by The 1% Annual Chance Flood [commonly known as the 100-year flood] and the Other Flood Areas (Zone X), areas of 0.2% annual change flood [commonly known as the 500-year flood], as defined in Chapter 4, Section VIII. and depicted on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Knox County, Tennessee and Incorporated Areas. Elevations Maps. The flood elevation maps discussed in Chapter 4, Section VIII shall be used to establish individual project requirements as determined by the Town Administrator or his/her designee. 
B.  Uses permitted. The regulations of any zoning district underlying the Flood Plain District shall prevail; except that, no building, development, or improvement project shall be commenced within the Flood Plain District unless a permit has been obtained from the town administrator, or his/her designee, stating such project plans meet the requirements of Chapter 4, section VIII of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 07-16, § 1, 5-10-2007) 
Sec. XXII. - Historic overlay zone (HOZ). 
A.  General description. The historic overlay zone is established for the purpose of preserving and protecting the history and cultural heritage of the Town of Farragut, Knox County, the State of Tennessee and the United States of America, as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-401 et seq. [T.C.A. § 13-7-401 et seq.], and which includes buildings, structures, objects, sites and areas. This zone is also established to assist in stabilizing and improving property values in historic areas, by encouraging rehabilitation or new construction that is harmonious with a historic area. Additionally, the use of this zone promotes the education, pleasure and welfare of the present and future generations of Farragut and Knox County. Through this zone, historic buildings, structures, objects, sites and areas of historic or architectural significance are designated for public protection. It is the intent of this zone to regulate the construction, repair, alteration, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any building or other structure or object which is located or proposed to be located in a historic overlay zone. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. It is not the intent of this zone to regulate the use of land, buildings or structures. Property and buildings shall be used for purposes permitted by the base zone or subsequent base zoning districts legislatively approved for the site. It is the intent of the historic overlay to harmonize with any town open space, recreation or park facilities which may be within or adjacent to such zoning district, and not to limit their construction or improvement. 
C.  Area and height regulations. The base zone requirements, or subsequent amendments, and the adopted design review guidelines for the historic overlay zone shall prevail. 
D.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
E.  Criteria of selection for a historic overlay zone. A historic overlay zone shall be a geographically definable area which possesses a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects. The property(ies) in a zone should illustrate a common theme of history or development and meet one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  It is associated with an event which has made a significant contribution to local, state or national history; 
2.  It includes structures associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state or national history; 
3.  It contains structures or groups of structures which embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components lack individual distinction; 
4.  It has yielded or may be likely to yield archeological information important to history or prehistory; and/or 
5.  It is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
F.  Applications for building permits and issuance of certificates of appropriateness. All applications for permits to allow construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any building, structure, object or other improvement to real estate located within a historic overlay zone shall be referred to the historic zoning commission. No building permit for a new building or improvements within a historic overlay zone shall be issued without being thoroughly reviewed by the historic zoning commission and without a recorded Certificate of Appropriateness being issued by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XXIII. - Telecommunication tower overlay zone (T). 
A.  General description. The telecommunication tower overlay zone is established for the purpose of regulating the location of commercial telecommunication towers and related equipment within the Town of Farragut. The intent is to permit lands that are visually screened from nearby residential developments to be used for telecommunication towers. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Property, buildings, and structures located in the Telecommunication Tower Overlay Zone (T) shall be used for the purposes permitted by the base zone or subsequent base zoning districts legislatively approved for the site. In addition to such uses and structures, the following uses and structures are permitted: 
1.  Monopole commercial telecommunication tower(s). 
2.  Antennae, equipment shelters, cabinets, fencing, and all other structures accessory to monopole commercial cellular towers. 
C.  Minimum development requirements. 
1.  The overlay zone shall not be permitted in residentially zoned property or within the Mixed Use Town Center area as identified on the future land use map in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
2.  When the base use of a lot is non-residential, the tower and accessory structures may be the sole use of such lot or a secondary use to the uses and structures permitted within that base zone. 
3.  A tower shall have a minimum of one user immediately after construction of the tower is completed. 
4.  New communication towers shall be constructed to accommodate a minimum of three primary cellular/personal communication systems/antenna and must be made available for co-location to more than one commercial communications company. In addition, the site size must be suitable to accommodate additional telecommunication equipment shelters, cabinets, or additions to existing structures. If a tower is less than 50 in height, such co-location requirements may be waived. 
5.  To further encourage co-location, additional users and associated equipment, which do not add to the tower height, may be added without additional planning commission approval. However, building code regulations shall apply and all setback requirements shall be met. 
6.  Each applicant shall show that no suitable existing towers within the coverage area are available to the applicant and that no additional towers could be constructed on sites already zoned for towers. Adequate documentation shall include maps, letters from adjacent tower owners, or calculations. 
7.  A site plan, per the requirements of Chapter 4 of this ordinance, shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a grading permit or building permit for a tower. 
8.  Towers shall not be lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (F.A.A.). Documentation from the F.A.A. which requires lighting shall be submitted with the site plan application. 
9.  A landscape plan, per the requirements of Chapter 4 of this ordinance, shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a grading permit or building permit for a tower. The responsibility for long term maintenance of the required landscaping shall be specified on the landscape plan. In lieu of the landscaping requirements specified in Chapter 4 of this ordinance, the following landscaping requirements shall apply to towers: 
a.  Fences and/or other related equipment located at the base of the tower shall be screened by shrubs. Such shrubs shall be fast growing, shall be a minimum of 41/2 feet high at time of planting, and shall be capable of reaching a height of at least eight feet at maturity; 
b.  One shade tree, as defined in Chapter 4 of this ordinance, shall be planted for each 15 feet of tower height. Such trees shall be planted within the radius of the tower height from the base of the tower; and 
c.  Existing shade trees may be counted toward the tree planting requirement. 
10.  A certified survey shall be submitted which shall verify tower and antennae heights and setbacks for the tower, antennae, and all accessory structures. 
11.  All telecommunication towers and related equipment shall be removed when the facility has not been in service for more than six months. The legal responsibility of such removal shall be specified on the site plan. 
D.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front, side, and rear yard. 
a.  Town of Farragut owned land. All towers and antennae shall be set back a minimum of ten feet plus an additional one-third of a foot for each one foot of tower and antenna height. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the tower and antenna to the nearest point of any property line; 
b.  All other land. All towers and antennae shall be set back a minimum of one-half of a foot for each one foot of tower and antenna height or 50 feet, whichever is greater. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the tower and antenna to the nearest point of any property line; 
c.  All equipment shelters, cabinets, fencing, and all other structures accessory to monopole commercial telecommunication towers shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the structure to the nearest point of any property line; and 
d.  All access ways leading to a tower and/or its accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all side and rear property lines. 
2.  Maximum lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage of the base zone. 
3.  Land area. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size of the base zone. 
4.  Height regulations. 
a.  Towers and attached antennae shall be less than 200 feet in height; and 
b.  No accessory building or structure shall exceed 15 feet in height. 
5.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 14-24, § 2, 1-22-2015 ) 
Sec. XXIV. - Regional commercial district, retail/warehousing (C-2-R/W). 
A.  Description. This district provides identical requirements as the Regional Commercial District (C-2) except as provided for below. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. Property and structures located in the Regional Commercial District, Retail/Warehousing (C-2-R/W) shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Uses and structures permitted within the Regional Commercial District (C-2). 
2.  Warehousing and wholesaling associated with on-site retail establishments, provided the warehousing and wholesaling constitutes less than 80 percent of the gross square footage of the building(s). 
3.  Public markets, provided the outdoor sales meet the following development criteria: 
a.  The outdoor sales areas shall be in permanent areas designed for such use. Such areas shall be roofed. The roofs shall be permanent, shall abut the principal building, and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building; 
b.  The outdoor sales areas shall not be located on any parking spaces or other vehicles ways; 
c.  Goods shall not be displayed on any sidewalks, walkways, parking spaces, or other vehicles ways; 
d.  Produce may be displayed on truck beds provided the trucks are two-axle and parked in designated parking areas located immediately adjacent to the outdoor display areas. Such parking areas shall be designated on the approved site plan. In order to accommodate clean-up, overnight parking in these spaces is prohibited; 
e.  Required yard setbacks for buildings are met for the display areas; 
f.  Display areas shall be restricted to areas that do not abut a driveway; 
g.  The outdoor sales areas shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the public market principal building; and 
h.  All walkways within the outdoor sales area shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Such walkways shall be free and clear of all goods and shall be marked as walkways on the pavement and on the approved site plan. 
4.  Mini-warehouse facilities, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  There shall be a minimum lot size of three acres; 
b.  A minimum of a 25-foot buffer strip along rear and side property lines shall be developed and maintained per the buffer strip requirements of this article; 
c.  Security fencing located in the front yard shall be screened with a minimum of one large evergreen shrub per five linear feet of fence. Such large shrubs shall be on the Visual Resources Review Board's recommended Large Shrubs List and shall be a minimum of three feet in height at the time of planting; 
d.  The requirement of having a minimum landscaped area between buildings and parking lots shall be waived for mini-warehouse facilities. All other landscaping requirements shall be met; 
e.  With the exception of building identification signs, no wall mounted signs shall be permitted. Building identification signs shall not exceed six square feet per sign with a maximum of two signs per building. 
C.  Area regulations. Identical requirements as the Regional Commercial District (C-2), with the exception that the maximum total lot coverage shall not exceed 75 percent. 
D.  Height regulations. Identical requirements as the Regional Commercial District (C-2). 
E.  Stormwater accommodations. Sites shall comply with the Town of Farragut Stormwater Ordinance, except that stormwater shall be allowed to sheet flow through curb breaks directly into detention ponds. 
F.  Parking. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 18-08 , § 3, 6-28-2018) 
Sec. XXV. - Office district, five stories (O-1-5). 
A.  General description. This district provides space for offices which provide regional services. The intent of this district is to permit lands adjacent to the interstate and/or Parkside Drive to have taller buildings. 
B.  Permitted principal and accessory uses and structure. This district provides identical use requirements as the Office District (O-1). 
C.  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard, side yard, rear yard, buffer strips, and land area. This district provides identical area requirements as the Office District (O-1), except that any building taller than 35 feet which abuts a residential district or B-1 Buffer Zone shall have a minimum building setback of 70 feet. In all such cases, this 70-foot setback is from the O-1-5 zoning line, regardless of property ownership. 
2.  Maximum lot coverage. The total lot coverage shall be 60 percent. If a parking garage which accommodates a minimum of 20 percent of the required parking spaces is constructed as part of the development, the total lot coverage may be increased to 70 percent. 
D.  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 75 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XXVI. - Planned commercial development district (PCD). 
A.  General description. The planned commercial development district (PCD) is established to encourage creative and resourceful projects for interrelated commercial, office and residential uses unified by a Development Plan. The PCD district is intended to provide for variety and flexibility in design necessary to implement integrated planned development projects. It is intended that the PCD district be established along streets having a designated classification of arterial on the Farragut Major Road Plan or a street which directly accesses a street having a designated classification of arterial on the Farragut Major Road Plan. 
B.  Objectives. The Planned Commercial Development District (PCD) shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Open space. Encourage ingenuity, creativity, and resourcefulness in land planning techniques by developing functional common open spaces. Locate and orient outdoor open spaces (e.g. plazas, courtyards, patios, outdoor seating and benches, small park spaces or landscaped features) to provide focal points to be actively used. Provide landscape enhancements (e.g., bioswales, rain gardens, planters, flower gardens) to add visual interest, screen parking areas, and complement outdoor open spaces. 
2.  Sense of place. Allow the design of commercial, office and residential developments that are architecturally and environmentally innovative and that achieve more efficient use of land than is possible through the application of conventional zoning and subdivision standards. 
3.  Protection of natural resources. Ensure the conservation of the natural environment including trees, floodplains, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, streams, wet weather conveyances, endangered species habitat, steep slopes, rock formations, other unique topographic features, and historic features per federal, state, and the Town of Farragut's laws and/or ordinances. Protect geological resources such as groundwater, soils, and drainage areas. 
4.  Efficient and innovative land use practices. Encourage efficient and innovative use of land, street networks, utility locations, and parking. In terms of stormwater management for new developments, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the development's total area shall be designed so that its runoff will be accommodated through Low Impact Development (LID) measures which would rely on infiltration, evapotranspiration, or capture/reuse of stormwater runoff. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, permeable pavers, rain gardens, bioswales, vegetated roofs, rainwater capture systems and/or a combination thereof. The use of LID measures to meet this requirement shall be demonstrated on the drainage plan and in the drainage calculations for the development and the applicable LID measures specified as part of the site and landscape plan submittals. 
5.  Connectivity. Provide for context appropriate (i.e., appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. This shall include providing connections within the property and to abutting properties pedestrian connections into the development from the public street(s), and the construction of pedestrian facilities along the public street(s) frontages. 
6.  Compatibility and consistency. Maintain compatibility with nearby development and consistency with the Farragut Comprehensive Land Use Plan Update, Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut and any subsequent amendments. 
C.  Minimum standards. 
1.  Land uses. 
a.  Unless otherwise prohibited through the approved Development Plan, any use permitted within the general commercial and office districts shall be allowed within the PCD district. Residential and mixed use may also be permitted as part of the Development Plan. Where a property is zoned PCD and is shown to be within the area identified as Mixed Use Town Center (MUTC) on the Future Land Use Map, the use shall be permitted and comply as established in Chapter 3, Section XII.F.; 
b.  Uses within a PCD that are automobile oriented, such as fuel centers, drive-throughs, automobile services, retail rental and leasing of automobiles, etc., shall be arranged so that they are situated internal to the development; 
c.  The total land area of the PCD shall be designed as a planned development and, for the purposes of building and parking lot setbacks and landscaping requirements, shall be treated as a single parcel/lot; 
d.  The development shall be designed in a manner that ensures compatibility with adjacent land uses; and 
e.  Traffic circulation shall not route traffic through adjacent residential areas. 
2.  General conditions. By acceptance of approval of the PCD zoning, the applicant agrees to the conditions set forth in this section as part of such approval. As part of the approval of the PCD district, the town may require the following: 
a.  Rearrangement of structures, open space, driveways, and parking areas; 
b.  Modification of density, setbacks, and buffering; and 
c.  Limitation of specific commercial uses. 
3.  Area regulations. 
a.  Front yard. 
1)  Unless provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code, all structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet; 
2)  If the street is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan and is constructed as part of the approved Development Plan, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest point of any right-of-way a minimum of ten feet; 
3)  Driveway aisles, access ways, parking lots, and other vehicular ways shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all public rights-of-way and a perimeter parkway shall be maintained; 
4)  In order to minimize the visual impact of surface parking, where parking is situated between a building and a street or is parallel with a building along a street, a berm shall be constructed or landscaping shall be planted so as to limit the viewability of the parking lot from the street. A minimum of 60 percent of the total parking lot length adjacent to the front property line shall be screened from view with a berm or landscaping. 
b.  Peripheral side and rear property lines. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from all peripheral side and rear property lines, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. Any required buffer strip shall be included in the required peripheral structure setback. 
c.  Transition areas. Unless specified otherwise in this ordinance, where an abutting property is zoned residential and/or agriculture, a transition area of at least 50 feet in width shall be provided. The intent of a transition area is to provide for a visually appealing interface to an abutting residential area that will serve to establish protection for but also context appropriate integration with the surrounding plan of development. Transition areas shall accommodate the connectivity requirements of this district. This will result in some modest breaks in the transition element. As provided for in this district, transition areas shall include, at a minimum, any one of the following or a combination thereof: 
1)  An existing tree covered area that consumes largely the full depth of the transition area and where the existing tree count within such area clearly exceeds the plant unit count and minimum tree sizes for a 35-foot buffer strip per 100 linear feet; 
2)  A landscaped low impact development stormwater management area, such as a rain garden(s), bioswale(s), or naturalized areas with existing and/or new tree plantings that, in total, consume the full depth of the transition area. At a minimum, such an area shall include a plant unit count that equals the count required for a 35-foot buffer strip, as provided for in Chapter 4 of this ordinance. Under this option, the arrangement of plant material may include more flexibility than an traditional buffer strip planting, provided this arrangement best promotes the intended stormwater function of the low impact development measure(s); 
3)  A heavily landscaped pocket park area designed for passive use and that is approved as part of a site and landscape plan as an equivalent to other natural transition measures provided for in this subsection. Such area could serve as a shared amenity between a use in this district and an abutting residential neighborhood; 
4)  A traditional planted buffer strip area that complies with the 35-foot buffer strip plantings provided for in Chapter 4 of this ordinance; 
Where a development combines different transition elements, these shall be considered as part of the concept plan and then reflected on the site and landscape plans. Such an approach must clearly fulfill the intent of the transition area provision. Existing tree covered areas within transitions shall be protected. Exceptions would apply for the removal of invasive exotic plant material and context appropriate (i.e. appropriate in relation to the proposed development and its physical surroundings) pedestrian and/or vehicular connections and utilities adjacent to such improvements that bisect the transition area in a generally perpendicular manner. Transition areas shall not be required for developments that abut properties that are not zoned residential and/or agriculture. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage for the entire development: 70 percent. 
e.  Land area. Minimum development size of five acres. 
f.  Minimum common open space. A minimum of ten percent of the gross land area of the development shall be reserved as common open space. 
4.  Common open space ownership regulations. Provision for the permanent ownership, operation, and maintenance of the common open space shall be provided by covenant, deed restriction, and/or easement. Ownership shall be a property owners association, land trust, or other legal authority. 
5.  Height regulations. 
a.  In order to provide for an appropriate transition in terms of building scale and height within the PCD development, whenever the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, buildings proposed within 100 feet of a periphery property line shall generally not exceed the maximum height permitted for principal dwelling units in the adjacent zoning district(s). The planning commission may consider alternatives to this due to site specific considerations such as, but not necessarily limited to, topography or the existing built environment abutting the property. 
When abutting all other zoning districts or where buildings are greater than 100 feet from a periphery property line, such buildings shall not exceed three stories, or 45 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance of the [Farragut] Municipal Code; and 
b.  No accessory structure, other than a clubhouse or comparable amenities building, shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance or the [Farragut] Municipal Code. A clubhouse or comparable amenities building shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
6.  Street frontage. All lots created as part of the development shall have a minimum of 25 feet street frontage. Access to individual properties and establishments shall be restricted to shared access easements. 
7.  Parking. Parking requirements as defined in Chapter 4 shall serve as a guide only. All parking areas shall be shared parking easements for the total PCD development. 
8.  Landscaping. As regulated in Chapter 4, requirements shall apply to the total PCD development. 
9.  Outdoor site lighting. As regulated in Chapter 4. 
10.  Signs. As regulated in the Farragut Municipal Code, requirements shall apply to the total PCD development. 
11.  Development controls. As regulated in this ordinance, the Farragut Municipal Code, and the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
D.  Application for rezoning to Planned Commercial Development District (PCD). The application for rezoning to PCD shall include a Development Plan, which shall consist of [the following] three primary components: 
1.  A survey of the total land area for consideration of rezoning. 
2.  A written narrative statement describing the planned development shall include the following information: 
a.  A general statement of objectives to be achieved by the Planned Commercial Development District. This statement shall indicate the responsible person/entity for the development, indicate a description of the character of the proposed development, the market for which the development is oriented, and how the PCD district would be consistent with the Farragut Comprehensive Land Use Plan Update, Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut and any subsequent amendments; 
b.  A statement describing the project phasing, including: 
1)  A development schedule indicating the phases in which the project will be built and the dates when construction of each phase can be expected to begin; 
2)  A statement of the intended schedule for the selling or leasing of each phase of the project; and 
3)  A description of how each phase shall be self-contained and self-sustaining with regard to access, traffic circulation, parking, utilities, common open spaces, and landscaping, as well as capable of substantial occupancy, operation, and maintenance upon completion of construction and development of each phase; 
c.  A schedule by which the developer will complete all open space and landscaping features; 
d.  Quantitative data for site development standards, including, but not limited to, density, setbacks, maximum heights, proposed lot coverage of buildings, parking lots and other structures, parcel sizes, gross densities per acre, and total amount of common open space; 
e.  An explanation and construction schedule for the utility and infrastructure requirements of the Planned Commercial Development, including all utilities serving the site, surface water runoff, and other pertinent information; 
f.  A statement pertaining to any architectural and community design guidelines to provide information on building designs, orientations, styles, lighting plans, landscape plans, signs, etc.; and 
g.  Specific provisions, including appropriate legal forms, to assure the permanent ownership, operation, and maintenance of common open space, parking lots, access ways, etc. This can be achieved through covenant, deed restriction, easement, or ownership by a property owners association, land trust, or other legal authority. 
3.  Concept master plan. The concept master plan shall demonstrate compliance with the objectives of this district and shall be prepared by a professional team that includes a Tennessee licensed engineer, a Tennessee licensed landscape architect, and/or a physical planner with a comparable background and experience. At a minimum, the plan shall require the seal of at least one of the above listed professionals. The concept master plan shall be of sufficient clarity and scale to accurately identify the location, nature, and character of the proposed total development. At a minimum, the concept master plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Site location map; 
b.  GIS topography of the site; 
c.  The approximate density, predominant species, general distribution of predominant species, and predominant level of maturity of trees within all tree covered area. Maturity levels shall be classified per the Tree Protection Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]; 
d.  All environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to, floodplains, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, streams, wet weather conveyances, endangered species habitat, steep slopes, rock formations, other unique topographic features, and historic features; 
e.  Sufficient information on the existing development within 150 feet from the boundaries of the subject property to indicate their relationships with the proposed development related to land uses, lot lines, open space corridors, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, environmentally sensitive areas, and other unique natural features of the landscape; 
f.  General location of proposed buildings, including building uses; 
g.  Boundaries of the total development, including all proposed interior property lines and boundaries for the proposed development phases; 
h.  Location of existing and proposed public streets and access easements; 
i.  Existing and proposed general vehicular circulation system including all points of access to the proposed development and existing driveways and intersections within the vicinity of the proposed points of access; 
j.  Location of proposed off-street parking and loading facilities; 
k.  Location of proposed internal and external alignments of existing and proposed sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and greenways/walking trails; 
l.  Location of existing utilities; 
m.  Proposed treatment of surface water runoff flow from and through the site; 
n.  Specific locations and sizes of all areas to be reserved as common open space; 
o.  Proposed landscaping plan; 
p.  Proposed signage plan; 
q.  Calculations of lot coverage for the total development; and 
r.  Certification that all requirements of the Tree Protection, Sinkhole, Aquatic Buffer, and the Stormwater Ordinances can be met. 
E.  Future modifications. 
1.  Revisions of plans after final approval. 
a.  If it becomes necessary for an approved concept plan or site plan to be changed, then the changes shall be defined as "minor" or "major" by the Town staff. If a proposed change, in the opinion of the Town staff, will not substantially affect the terms of the original approval, then the change will be defined as "minor." Minor changes may be reviewed and approved by Town staff. If a proposed change, in the opinion of the Town staff, will substantially affect the terms of the original approval, then the change shall be defined as "major." Major changes require review and approval by the planning commission and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. In both cases, full sets of revised site plans in accordance with the Town site plan submittal requirements along with a narrative describing the need for the changes shall be submitted. 
(1)  Minor Changes Defined. Minor modifications are changes that do not substantially affect the character or intensity of the development, vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public services, or the vulnerability to hazards. Town staff shall report any request defined as minor to the planning commission and Board of Mayor and Alderman. Examples of minor modifications include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Adding or deleting parking spaces. 
(b)  Constructing additional stories that do not substantially affect other ordinance requirements of the development. 
(c)  An increase or decrease in floor space by no more that 25 percent in the overall development that does not dramatically affect the other ordinance requirements, intent, and nature of the overall development. 
(d)  Re-occupancy of a building by a similar use permitted by the ordinance. 
(e)  Changes to building height/facade that do not add an additional floor. 
(f)  Additions or alterations to the landscape plan or landscape materials. 
(g)  Relocation or resizing of utility supply lines or service connections. 
(h)  Relocation or screening of utilities, HVAC equipment, transformers, or trash receptacles. 
(i)  Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street lot in which the total available spaces are unchanged. 
(2)  Major Modifications Defined. Major modifications are changes that substantially affect the character or intensity of the use, vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public services, or the vulnerability to hazards or natural terrain features. Examples of major modifications include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Request for a variance. 
(b)  Construction of a new building or structure which will substantially affect the ordinance requirements of the development. 
(c)  Increase in the overall density of the development. 
(d)  Introduction or deletion of curb cuts into a public roadway. 
2.  [Additional area to PCD.] Additional area may be added to an established Planned Commercial Development District if it adjoins and forms a logical addition to the approved development. 
a.  The procedure for the addition of land to the PCD district shall be the same as if an original application was filed. 
b.  All requirements of the PCD district shall apply except for minimum lot area requirement. 
F.  Annual review. To ensure continued progress toward completion, the approved Development Plan shall be submitted to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission for annual review. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. 07-21, § 1, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 14-25, § 2, 1-22-2015 ; Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. XXVII. - Town center district (TCD). 
A.  General description, purpose, and intent. The purpose of this zoning district is to create a downtown that is a pedestrian oriented mixed use district. Farragut has developed as a suburban community with no centralized core. The intent is to create a district that mandates the design for people, rather than the automobile. This district shall be located in areas that are surrounded by higher density residential developments and be free from severe natural environmental limitations. Development within this district is not to be a shopping mall, a big box, nor a commercial strip center, it is to develop as a downtown main street(s). In addition to the requirements spelled out in this zoning district, Title 14, Chapter 3 of the Farragut Municipal Code also includes additional criteria aimed at achieving the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
B.  Objectives. The Town Center District (TCD) shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Sense of place. Develop a sense of place that is unique to Farragut. Create a downtown for Farragut with the understanding that appearance is important to a healthy downtown area. The streetscape is not to look homogenized, contrived, or sterile. Diversity is the key to long term success and sustainability. 
2.  Public spaces. Public spaces shall be designed to accommodate crowds, but function on normal days. Structures constructed within the public spaces shall have a functional purpose and shade trees shall be planted to promote outdoor activities. 
3.  Open space. Environmentally sensitive areas shall be preserved as undisturbed open space. 
4.  Pedestrian connections. Pedestrian connections shall be developed between the main street(s), adjacent developments and land uses, parking lots, and across streets. 
5.  Pedestrian friendly streets. Streets shall be designed to not only accommodate automobiles, but pedestrians and bicyclists as well. 
6.  Consistency. Maintain consistency with the Farragut Land Use and Transportation Policy Plan, the Pedestrian Circulation Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut. 
C.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Generally recognized retail sales. The outdoor sale and/or storage of merchandise and/or any other materials shall be prohibited. 
2.  Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, bistros, and other similar places serving food or beverage. Outdoor seating and walk-up windows are permitted provided design criteria established elsewhere in the town ordinances are met. 
3.  Professional, personal, and business services. 
4.  Medical and dental facilities. 
5.  Medical spas. 
6.  Financial and real estate services. 
7.  Public, governmental, and general offices. 
8.  Cultural activities. 
9.  Theaters, indoor only. 
10.  Bed and breakfasts/inns. Such facilities are distinguished from hotels/motels because they are smaller and have a more personal atmosphere. 
11.  Residential, provided located in upper stories. 
12.  Indoor recreational facilities, provided not located in freestanding buildings. 
13.  Parking lots. 
14.  Parking garages, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  If located on a primary or secondary street, the parking can only be located in the upper stories or the below ground stories; or 
b.  If not located on a primary or secondary street, the facades shall be architecturally compatible with nearby buildings, but parking can be located on all stories. 
15.  Parks and community facility. 
16.  Churches and other places of worship, provided they are not located in freestanding buildings. 
17.  Schools, public and private, provided they are not located in freestanding buildings. 
18.  Drive-through windows/lanes, provided the following development criteria are met: 
a.  Serve a bank or pharmacy; 
b.  Are a maximum of two lanes; 
c.  Any associated canopy shall be architecturally compatible with the building to which it is attached or which it is adjacent/nearby; 
d.  Be located to the rear of the building or behind the building; 
e.  Lanes are separated from adjacent parking areas with a minimum of an eight-foot-wide landscaped area that is landscaped with grass, shrubs, and trees; 
f.  The exits and entrances to the drive-through lead to a parking area or service drive. These lanes shall not be directly connected to a public street; and 
g.  The design minimizes vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. The drive-through lanes shall not separate parking lots from rear building pedestrian access doors or other pedestrian access ways. 
19.  Accessory uses and structures. 
D.  Streets. 
1.  Right-of-way widths. As part of the Concept Plan that is submitted with the rezoning, all streets within a TCD shall be classified as primary or secondary. Primary streets shall include all streets, or portions thereof, on which buildings front. Secondary streets, or portions thereof, shall include all streets that have parking lots or open space fronting, but no buildings. The right-of-way width for streets classified as primary shall accommodate the travel lanes, on-street parking (both sides), and 20-foot-wide sidewalks (both sides). Secondary streets shall accommodate the travel lanes, eight-foot-wide grass strips (both sides), eight-foot-wide sidewalks/asphalt trails (both sides), and two-foot-wide maintenance strips for the walking surfaces adjacent to the property lines. 
2.  Safety. In order to facilitate the safe co-use of streets by vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians, the maximum design speed of all streets within a TCD shall be 25 miles per hour. There shall be no boulevards or other design features that are not pedestrian friendly. Non-pedestrian friendly designs include such designs that increase walking distance between two destination points and/or that increases vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. Pedestrian crossings shall be provided at regular intervals and be clearly defined. 
3.  Street tree planting. Trees planted adjacent to streets provide shade for pedestrians and parked cars. One tree shall be required for every 50 linear feet of street frontage. The intent is that there shall be no more than 50 feet between trees. The tree placement can be averaged, however, to accommodate sight distance at intersections. The minimum distance between two trees shall be 35 feet. A variety of tree species shall be planted and should be chosen with thought to mature size and tree canopy. Adequate soil area shall be provided for each tree. 
4.  Access/curb cut spacing. To improve walkability and decrease vehicle/pedestrian conflict, curb cuts across sidewalks and/or asphalt trails shall be limited. The number of curb cuts permitted shall be based on a ratio of one curb cut per 400 linear feet of street frontage. The minimum distance between curb cuts shall be 300 feet. 
E.  Pedestrian circulation. 
1.  Overall connectivity. All buildings, parking lots, adjacent developments, and adjacent vacant properties shall be connected by sidewalks or asphalt trails. Sidewalks or asphalt trails shall also front on all streets. Regularly spaced pedestrian connections shall be maintained from parking lots to the primary streets within the development. This shall be accomplished with pedestrian pass-throughs or building separations with sidewalk connections from the back to the front of buildings. These pedestrian connections shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. 
2.  Sidewalks on primary streets. On streets classified as primary within the TCD, the minimum sidewalk width adjacent to building fronts shall be 20 feet. This 20 feet shall consist of a five-foot furnishing zone, a ten-foot walking zone, and a five-foot store front zone (Diagram TCD-1). 
a.  Furnishing zone. 

    The five-foot furnishing zone shall accommodate street trees and street furniture. Street furniture shall include public elements such as street lights, benches, trash containers, tree guards, bike racks, above-ground planters, and sculptural pieces and private elements such as news stands, mailboxes, and express delivery service drop-offs. Such furniture should be functional and durable. Functionalism in placement is essential. Pedestrian access to the parking spaces shall not be obstructed. Benches and other street furnishings shall be placed in ways that facilitate use. For example, good seating arrangements include angled configurations that encourage conversation. Seating placed in a manner to create a visual pattern of repetition in the sidewalk will not achieve their functional potential. Public elements of street furniture shall have design coordination and require low maintenance. 
b.  Walking zone. The ten-foot walking zone shall remain free of any obstructions so as to maintain a clear passage for pedestrians. 
c.  Store front zone. The five-foot store front zone of the sidewalk is the area where private and public spaces meet. Building canopies, awnings, balconies, tables, chairs, window planting boxes, hanging baskets, and other similar type features associated with the adjacent business entities are allowed to encroach into the store front zone. Adjacent restaurants are also allowed to place ornamental railings/fencing within the store front area for enclosing outdoor seating area. 
3.  Sidewalks/asphalt trails on secondary streets. On streets classified as secondary within the TCD, the minimum sidewalk or asphalt trail width adjacent to a roadway shall be eight feet. In order to accommodate street trees and to provide a separation between the vehicle travel way and pedestrians, an eight-foot-wide grass strip shall be provided between the sidewalk/asphalt walking trail and the street. 
4.  Crosswalks. Curb ramps shall connect directly to all crosswalks. A diagonal ramp should not be built to give access to two perpendicular crosswalks. Where possible, sidewalks should be extended into the intersection to create shorter crosswalks. Mid-block crosswalks shall also be provided where deemed necessary. 
F.  Parking space requirements. 
1.  Minimum number of parking spaces required: 
One parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for the first floor; 
One parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area for the second floor for space not designed, constructed, and used for residential occupancy; and 
One parking space per 750 square feet of gross floor area for the third and fourth floors for space not designed, constructed, and used for residential occupancy; 
One and a half parking spaces per unit designed, constructed, and used for residential occupancy; 
    Shared parking throughout the Town Center District shall be encouraged. Required parking spaces may be reduced when two or more establishments share the same parking area, whether on the same lot or on abutting lots, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  That some portion of the shared off-street parking area lies within 500 feet of an entrance, regularly used by patrons, into the buildings served by the shared parking facilities. 
b.  That access and parking easements must be identified as part of the site plan review and a plat prepared and recorded which memorializes such easements prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
    Off-street and on-street parking shall count toward meeting minimum parking requirements within the TCD development. Basement parking and parking garages are encouraged and such spaces shall also count toward meeting minimum parking requirements. 
2.  Required bicycle parking. One bicycle space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Bicycle racks shall be provided in desirable locations and shall be conveniently located at each building. The rack placement should not impede pedestrian movement and should not cause conflicts between bicycles and pedestrians. 
G.  Parking lots. Parking lots should be well lit, landscaped, and attractive destinations. 
1.  Location. Parking lots shall be located to the rear of buildings. Parking lots may only front on streets classified as secondary within the development and shall not front on streets classified as primary within the development. 
2.  Site design. Parking lots shall comply with minimum site design requirements established in Chapter 4, Section XX of the Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  Landscaping requirements. In addition to complying with all landscaping requirements established in Chapter 4, Section XII of the Zoning Ordinance, parking lots shall be lined with shade trees when adjacent to a public street or sidewalk/asphalt trail. The trees shall be planted at 35 feet on center adjacent to the street or sidewalk/asphalt trail. This tree planting requirement shall be in addition to the standard tree planting requirement for a parking lot. 
4.  Construction and maintenance. Parking lots shall comply with off-street parking lot construction and maintenance requirements established in Chapter 4, Section XX of the Zoning Ordinance. 
5.  Pedestrian accommodations. Parking lots shall be designed to accommodate pedestrians. If the parking lot is designed so that the interior parkways run perpendicular to the rear of buildings, a five-foot-wide sidewalk must be added to each interior parkway. If the interior parkways run parallel to the rear of buildings, a five-foot-wide sidewalk must be added to interior landscape islands or at some other points within a parking row. These sidewalks must be a continuous connection from the farthest parking space areas to the buildings. 
H.  Parking garages. Parking garages may not access streets classified as primary within the TCD development. 
I.  Service areas. In addition to complying with Chapter 4, Section I of the Zoning Ordinance, garbage dumpster and recycling containers shall be located in the rear of buildings, centrally located, and shared by tenants. Off-street loading areas and other service areas shall also be located in the rear of buildings and shall be designed to accommodate the anticipated service vehicles. All ground HVAC units shall comply with Chapter 4, Section I of the Zoning Ordinance and all rooftop HVAC shall be placed in penthouses. 
J.  Landscaping. As regulated in Chapter 4, Section XII of the Zoning Ordinance, requirements shall apply to the total TCD development. 
K.  Lighting. 
1.  Outdoor site lighting. As regulated in Chapter 4, Section XIII of the Zoning Ordinance, requirements shall apply to the total TCD development. 
2.  Street lighting. Streetlight fixtures shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Have a maximum pole height of 16 feet; 
b.  Be dark sky compliant; 
c.  Designed so that light does not shine into upper stories; 
d.  Use milky/frosted/white acrylic globes; 
e.  Have a maximum of 78 watts per fixture. If the bulb is recessed into the fixture/housing/box and the globe is flush with the fixture/housing/box, the wattage may be increased to 156 watts per fixture; and 
f.  Use a white light (vs. yellow/high pressure sodium). 
    Streets shall not be over-illuminated to the point that building interiors are negatively affected. Pedestrian walks should be provided with pools of lights at a higher level of illumination than the road surface. Bollard lighting that complies with the outdoor site lighting requirements may supplement pedestrian walks. Lighting from storefront displays should be used as an adjunct to pedestrian-scale pole lighting to provide pedestrian illumination. 
L.  Signs. Signs shall be defined, maintained, removed, administered, enforced, and measured as regulated in Title 9, Chapter 4 of the Farragut Municipal Code. The approval and application process shall also comply with Title 9, Chapter 4, of the Farragut Municipal Code. Signs shall be permitted per Title 14, Chapter 3 of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
M.  Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. Utility locations shall not conflict with required tree plantings. 
    On site stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be shared and may be constructed above or below ground. An above ground stormwater detention/retention facility may be incorporated into the open space amenity, but the detention area cannot count toward meeting minimum open space reservation requirements. If green roofs are incorporated into the development, a credit for stormwater detention/retention will be given on a 1:1 ratio. 
N.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Peripheral property lines. All structures, excluding signs and fences, shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from all peripheral property lines. Any required buffer strips shall be included in the required peripheral structure setback. 
b.  Front yard. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of zero (0) feet and a maximum of ten feet from street rights-of-ways internal to the TCD development. 
c.  Side and rear yard. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of zero (0) feet. 
2.  Building facade widths. The width of building facades shall vary and there shall be varying facade widths adjacent to each other. The goal is to create a randomness in front facades that resembles traditional main streets. The maximum facade width shall be 75 feet. Large footprints shall consist of numerous buildings rather than a single large building. 
    Facade and building construction shall comply with Title 14, Chapter 3 of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
3.  Height regulations. Buildings shall be a minimum of two stories in height and a maximum of four stories in height. Buildings located within 100 feet of existing developed residential subdivisions at the time of rezoning the land to TCD shall not exceed two stories in height. 
    Accessory structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
4.  Street frontage. All lots created as part of the development shall have a minimum of 25 feet street frontage. Vehicular access to individual properties and establishments shall be restricted to shared access easements. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. Total lot coverage for the entire development: 80 percent. 
6.  Land area. Minimum development size of one acre. 
7.  Buffer strips. 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all front property lines when the street adjacent to that front property line is classified as a local street on the Major Road Plan, is not constructed as part of the TCD development, the property on the opposite side of the street is not part of the TCD development, and the property on the opposite side of the street is zoned residential or agricultural; 
b.  There shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width on all peripheral side and rear property lines when the abutting property is zoned residential or agriculture; 
c.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strip; and 
d.  Detention basins, measured from toe-of-slope to toe-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
8.  Open space. A minimum of ten percent of the gross land area of the total TCD development shall be reserved as open space. 
    Open space shall be created as an integral part of the overall design. In addition to conserving environmentally sensitive areas, public open spaces that are useable, functional, and accessible shall be created as part of the development and per an approved site plan. A minimum of 70 percent of the gross open space shall serve as potential public gathering areas. These open spaces shall provide for flexibility of use and shall be public spaces improved by the developer and owned by the town. The conveyance of the public spaces to the town shall occur at the time of final plat. 
    A maximum of 30 percent of the open space may serve as a visual focal point. Stormwater detention/retention facilities, unless designed as an amenity feature, do not count toward meeting the minimum open space requirement. These open space areas shall be created as part of the development, per an approved site plan, and be owned and maintained by the property owners association. 
O.  Application for rezoning to town center district (TCD). The application for rezoning to TCD shall include a Concept Plan, which shall be of the entire development. Such plan shall be prepared by a professional team that includes a minimum of three of the following: a Tennessee licensed engineer, a Tennessee registered land surveyor, a Tennessee licensed landscape architect, or a land planner. 
    The Concept Plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size and shall include the following: 
1.  A boundary survey of the total land area for consideration of rezoning: 
2.  A site location map, property identification information, acreage, property ownership information, and developer information; 
3.  GIS topography of the site; 
4.  The approximate density, predominant species, general distribution of predominant species, and predominant level of maturity of trees within all tree covered area. Maturity levels shall be classified per the Tree Protection Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]; 
5.  The location of all environmentally sensitive areas; 
6.  Sufficient information on the existing development within 150 feet from the boundaries of the subject property to indicate their relationships with the proposed development related to land uses, lot lines, open space corridors, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, environmentally sensitive areas, and other unique natural features of the landscape; 
7.  A vehicular circulation plan, which includes location of existing and proposed streets, access easements, intersections within the vicinity of the proposed points of access, and all other pertinent connections; 
8.  A pedestrian circulation plan, which includes locations of proposed walking trails, sidewalks, connections from buildings to parking lots, connections to adjacent properties, connections to nearby walking trails and sidewalks, and all other pertinent connections; 
9.  The designation of all proposed streets as primary or secondary; 
10.  Footprint locations of proposed buildings; 
11.  Location of all proposed parking; 
12.  Location of proposed stormwater detention/retention facilities; 
13.  Locations and sizes of all areas to be reserved as open space; and 
14.  Calculations of lot coverage for the total development. 
P.  Future modifications and annual review. To ensure continued progress toward completion, the approved Concept Plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for annual review. If changes are proposed from the approved Concept Plan, this shall be considered an amendment to the TCD zoning and shall be approved by the planning commission and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, § 1, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. 11-21, § 5, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 14-23, § 2, 1-22-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-09, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-2015) 
Sec. XXVIII. - Open space multi-family residential overlay (OSMFR). 
A.  General description. It is the intent of this overlay district to provide for greater flexibility and design freedom in order to encourage a better living environment and the conservation of environmentally sensitive areas. The increased flexibility associated with this overlay district allows for additional height and increased density along with lessened setbacks and buffer strips. In exchange, the multi-family development shall generate a superior design that provides extensive common open space that capitalizes on the inherent physical characteristics of the property and its surrounding area. 
B.  Application of the district. The Open Space Multi-Family Residential Overlay District may be applied over the Multi-Family Residential District (R-6). 
C.  Permitted uses and structures. 
1.  Apartment buildings. 
2.  Recreational facilities and open spaces which are developed as an integral part of the development. 
3.  Elderly and group housing as regulated in Chapter 4. 
4.  Nursing homes as regulated in Chapter 4. 
5.  Accessory uses and structures. 
6.  Customary Home Occupations as regulated in Chapter 4. 
7.  Signs as regulated in the [Farragut] Municipal Code. 
8.  Utility uses. 
D.  General minimum development requirements. 
1.  A site plan, as regulated in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the development plan submission. The site plan shall be of the entire development and is required whether the project is developed in multiple phases or not. 
2.  The approved site plan shall be in compliance with the Farragut Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut. 
3.  Common open space. 
a.  Common open space shall be created as an integral part of the overall design. Within the designated open space, the development shall conserve, natural and manmade features on the site, including, but not limited to, trees, floodplains, sinkholes, wetlands, springs, streams, wet weather conveyances, endangered species habitat, steep slopes, rock formations and other unique topographic features, and historic features. 
b.  In order to identify the areas to be designated as common open space, a survey of the natural features shall be completed. Natural features shall include, but are not limited to, wetlands, rock formations, trees, sinkholes, streams, topographic features, and endangered species habitats. Development shall comply with the Tree Protection Ordinance [now chapter 113 of the Farragut Municipal Code]. 
c.  Common open space may be improved for certain passive recreation uses, but open space containing natural features worthy of preservation (e.g., wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes, streams, springs, sinkholes, etc.) must be left unimproved and undisturbed. Areas within approved common open space that are not considered environmentally sensitive, such as historic features, buffer strips, stormwater detention facilities, and approved passive recreational facilities (such as walking or hiking trails) may be maintained as approved by the Town staff or the planning commission. 
d.  Common open space shall be designated as permanent on the approved site plan and referenced as an exhibit in a covenant that runs with the land and that is recorded at the Register of Deeds. 
4.  Access ways and parking areas shall be designed to reduce the grading of the site and preserve the natural topography as much as practical. Site design should preserve large, existing trees when possible and reduce the clearing necessary for building sites. The maximum slope created as a result of a proposed development shall not be greater than 21/2:1 (run/rise). Terracing may be permitted per the Town Engineer's approval. 
5.  Developments shall directly access a street having a designated classification of arterial, or a street which is not interior to a subdivision and which directly accesses a street having a designated classification of arterial. The street on which the development accesses must meet the minimum design standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
6.  Internal access and circulation shall provide for adequate ingress/egress of firefighting equipment, service deliveries, furniture moving vans, and refuse collection vehicles. 
7.  Internal pedestrian access and circulation shall be provided where deemed appropriate by the planning commission. 
8.  Parking areas and sidewalks shall be lighted for night use where appropriate. All lighting shall comply with Town of Farragut lighting provisions. 
9.  A landscape plan for the development shall be submitted as regulated in Chapter 4. 
E.  Area regulations. 
1.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Front yard. All buildings (principle and accessory) shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from front property lines. Parking shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from front property lines. Detention basin structures, subdivision walls, entrance pillars, and certain utility structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from front property lines. Electrical substations, utility offices, or any other utility building shall meet the required 35-foot front yard setback. 
b.  Side/rear yard. All principle buildings that are positioned along a side or rear property line that is adjacent to property that is zoned residential or agricultural shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
    Where surface parking is arranged along a side or rear property line and the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, all principle buildings and parking lots shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
    Whenever a side or rear property line abuts a non-residential or non-agricultural zone, all principle buildings and parking lots shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the nearest side or rear property line(s). 
c.  Accessory structures. Where the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, accessory structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any side or rear property line a minimum of 100 feet. 
    Where the adjacent property is zoned non-residential or non-agricultural, accessory structures shall be set back from the nearest point of any side or rear property line a minimum of 35 feet. 
2.  Minimum distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between all freestanding buildings, as measured from the closest point between two buildings. 
3.  Density. Maximum overall density shall not exceed 12 units per acre. This density of 12 units per acre is a maximum number only, and is permitted only if all requirements of the Town of Farragut have been met. 
4.  Land area. Minimum tract size for such a development shall be five acres. 
5.  Common open space. A minimum of 50 percent of the gross land area of the development shall be preserved as common open space. Such open space is to include environmentally sensitive lands, historic features, buffer strips, stormwater detention facilities, passive recreational facilities (such as walking or hiking trails) and other natural features as may be beneficial to the development and the community. 
6.  Buffer strips. 
a.  Front yard. A buffer strip is not required in a front yard but the development must provide for a landscape design that, at a minimum, would include plant material distributed within the area 20 feet from the front property line(s). The landscape design shall be approved by the Visual Resources Review Board. 
b.  Side/rear yard. Whenever a principle building is positioned along a side or rear property line and the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 35 feet in width as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. If the area within this buffer strip is not wooded the area shall be planted to the requirements of a 50-foot buffer strip as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. 
    Whenever a surface parking lot is arranged along a side or rear property line and abuts property zoned residential or agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of 50 feet in width as provided for in the landscaping requirements of Chapter 4. 
c.  Whenever a side or rear property line abuts property that is zoned non-residential or non-agricultural, there shall be a buffer strip a minimum of ten feet in width. 
d.  Other than an approved fence or masonry screen wall used for buffering purposes or a utility or pedestrian facility that bisects a buffer strip in a perpendicular manner, no structures are permitted within a required buffer strip. 
e.  Existing, mature vegetation shall be preserved and incorporated into the buffer strips. 
f.  Detention basins, measured from top-of-slope to top-of-slope, and associated structures shall not be located within any buffer strips. 
F.  Height regulations. 
1.  Whenever the adjacent property is zoned residential or agricultural, no buildings to be constructed within 100 feet of a periphery property line shall exceed three stories, or 45 feet in height. 
2.  When abutting all other zoning districts or where buildings are greater than 100 feet from a periphery property line, such buildings shall not exceed four stories, or 55 feet in height. 
3.  No accessory structures, other than a clubhouse or comparable amenities building, shall exceed 15 feet in height. A clubhouse or comparable amenities building shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
G.  Parking. Parking shall be provided as regulated in Chapter 4. All overflow parking shall be centrally located or uniformly distributed throughout the development. 
H.  Building facade requirements. Building facade requirements shall be in accordance with Farragut Architectural Design Standards, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 1, 10-9-2014; Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- It is the intent of this chapter to provide explanations and qualifications of requirements outlined in other sections of the ordinance. 

Sec. I. - Accessory structures and uses. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the development requirements specific to accessory structures and uses. 
A.  General provisions. No accessory structure, excluding fences, detention basin structures, and retaining walls, shall be placed within any utility, drainage, or construction easement. 
B.  Requirements on specified accessory structures for non-single-family and non-two-family residential uses. 
1.  Garbage dumpsters, compactors, and recycling containers. 
a.  Garbage dumpsters and recycling containers shall be screened with opaque walls and gates. Such gates and walls shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building located on the same lot; and 
b.  Garbage dumpsters and recycling containers shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the nearest point of any right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from all side and rear property lines. 
2.  Heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and mechanical units. Such units shall be screened with opaque materials and shall not be visible from adjacent properties or rights-of-way. Such screening shall be architecturally compatible with the building the units are serving. 
3.  Retaining walls. 
a.  Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed per the adopted building code. Plans must be submitted to and approved by the Town Engineer; 
b.  Retaining walls shall not be constructed within any required buffer strip; and 
c.  Retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the nearest point of any right-of-way and all side and rear property lines. 
C.  Requirements for retaining walls for single-family and two-family residential uses. 
1.  Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed per the adopted building code. Plans must be submitted to and approved by the Town Engineer; 
2.  Retaining walls shall not be constructed within any required buffer strip; and 
3.  Retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the nearest point of any right-of-way and a minimum of five feet from all side and rear property lines. A retaining wall, including the footer, may be constructed at the side or rear property line if a signed agreement from the adjoining property owner is submitted to the town stating the retaining wall may be constructed at their property line. If a retaining wall is removed or damaged as a result of work conducted within the utility, drainage, or construction easement, the property owner shall be responsible for repairs to the retaining wall. When a retaining wall is constructed at a property line, if appropriate a swale shall be constructed behind the retaining wall to ensure stormwater runoff is properly directed. 
D.  Requirements for retaining walls for attached single-family developments. 
1.  Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed per the adopted building code. Plans must be submitted to and approved by the Town Engineer; 
2.  Retaining walls shall not be constructed within any required buffer strip; 
3.  Retaining walls shall be constructed per the original design of the development and approved as part of the preliminary plat. The retaining walls shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners association. Retaining walls may be placed within utility, drainage, or construction easements, but it shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association to reconstruct such walls if they are damaged or removed as a result of work within the easement(s). No portion of a retaining wall, including footer, may be placed within the right-of-way. When a retaining wall is constructed at a property line, if appropriate, a swale shall be constructed behind the retaining wall to ensure stormwater runoff is properly directed; and 
4.  If an individual property owner within an attached single-family development chooses to construct a retaining wall after the development is complete and the dwelling unit is constructed, the retaining wall shall comply with all requirements of subsection C. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 12-21, §§ 1-4, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. II. - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  Administrative officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Town Building Official who shall be the town administrator or his designated representative who shall additionally: 
1.  Issue all building permits and make and maintain records thereof. 
2.  Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof. 
3.  Maintain and keep current zoning maps, and records of amendments thereto. 
4.  Conduct inspections as prescribed by this ordinance, and such other inspections as are necessary to insure compliance with the various provisions of this ordinance generally. 
B.  Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. The Farragut Municipal Planning Commission, for the purposes of this ordinance shall be referred to as the planning commission. The planning commission shall: 
1.  Establish such rules of procedure as are necessary to the performance of its functions hereunder. 
2.  Study and report on all proposed amendments to this ordinance; further, review annually this ordinance and on the basis of such review, suggest amendments thereto. 
C.  Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be hereby appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and shall include five members. The term of each member shall be of such length and so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers: 
1.  It shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official in carrying out any provision of this or other zoning ordinances enacted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the Town of Farragut. 
2.  To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any such ordinance, request for interpretation of the zoning map. 
3.  Where there is practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship in carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power in passing upon appeals to authorize such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest as defined under variances of this section. 
4.  To compel attendance of witnesses at hearings and to administer oaths. 
5.  To hold at least one scheduled meeting per month and give notice of such meeting as required by law. 
D.  Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power and authority to grant variances from terms of this ordinance according to the procedure and under the restrictions set out in this section. 
    The purpose of the variance is to modify the strict application of the specific requirements of this ordinance in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow, or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship which would deprive an owner of the reasonable use of his land. The variance shall be used only where necessary to overcome some obstacle which is preventing an owner from using his property as the zoning ordinance intended. Procedure for the consideration for a variance by the board is as follows: 
1.  Application. Prior to the board considering any application for a variance, the applicant shall submit a nonrefundable sum of money in accordance with the schedule of fees available in the office of the town recorder in the Farragut Town Hall. 
2.  Public hearing. Upon receipt of an application, the board shall hold a public hearing, having first given not less than seven days' notice. Such notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the Town of Farragut. The board shall consider and decide all applications for the variances within 30 days of such public hearing and in accordance with the standards provided below. 
3.  Standards for variances. In granting a variance, the board shall ascertain that the following criteria are met: 
a.  Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or conditions exist (such as exceptional narrowness, topography, or siting) fully described in the findings of the board, do not apply generally in the district. 
b.  Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded from the particular district in which requested. 
c.  For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the board, the aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any reasonable use of his land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance; there must be a deprivation of beneficial use of land. 
d.  Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
e.  The granting of any variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, or in conflict with the comprehensive plan for development. 
f.  If size or shape are to be the grounds for the variance, the property must be a "lot of record" and have totally separate ownership from the adjoining parcels. 
4.  Requirements for granting a variance. Before the board shall have the authority to grant a variance, the person claiming the variance has the burden of showing: 
a.  That the granting of the permit will not be contrary to the public interest. 
b.  That the literal enforcement of the ordinance would deprive the applicant any reasonable use of his land. 
c.  That by granting the permit contrary to the provisions of the ordinance the spirit of the ordinance will be observed. 
d.  That by granting the permit, substantial justice will be done. 
5.  Effective date of approval; issuance of permit. 
a.  Board approval shall become effective 60 days from the date of the board meeting at which approval is granted. 
b.  No building permit shall be issued prior to the date of approval unless upon request by the applicant and at the applicant's own risk. 
c.  The building permit shall be issued subject to all conditions and requirements stipulated by the board. 
E.  Special exceptions. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted as special exceptions with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed by the board and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
1.  Application. Prior to the board considering any application for a special exception, the applicant shall submit a nonrefundable sum of money in accordance with the schedule of fees available in the office of the town recorder in the Farragut Town Hall. 
2.  Public hearing. Upon application, the board shall give not less than seven days' notification of a public hearing. Such notice giving time and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the Town of Farragut. 
3.  General review standards. In the review of a special exception request, the Board of Zoning Appeals, in the exercise of its administrative judgment, shall be guided by adopted plans and policies, including, but not limited to, the Farragut Land Use Plan, Farragut Zoning Ordinance, Farragut 2000 Plan, Farragut Municipal Code, and the following general standards: 
a.  The use is consistent with adopted plans and policies, as set forth above; 
b.  The use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning regulations; 
c.  The use is compatible with the character of the neighborhood where it is proposed and with the size and location of buildings in the vicinity; 
d.  The use will not negatively impact adjacent property by noise, lights, fumes, odors, vibration, traffic, congestion or be incompatible with other development in the surrounding area. 
e.  The use is not of a nature or so located as to draw substantial additional traffic through residential streets; 
f.  The specially permitted use meets all town requirements with regard to approval of the hydrology, engineering, building codes, landscaping/buffering, signage, etc.; 
g.  The specially permitted use meets all requirements set out in the particular zoning classification in which the use is to be located; and 
h.  Approval or denial. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a development plan, when applicable, or a special exception where it can be shown that the proposed plan or use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance, the Farragut Land Use Plan and such adopted plans as the Farragut 2000 Plan, and is reasonably necessary for the convenience and welfare of the community. The Board of Zoning Appeals may deny a development plan, when applicable, or a special exception where the above cannot be shown or where it can be shown that approval would have an adverse impact on the character of the neighborhood in which the site is located. Whereas a use may be appropriate in one location and inappropriate in another location in the same zoning district, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be guided by the policies of the Farragut Land Use Plan and such adopted plans as the Farragut 2000 Plan in the exercise of its administrative judgment about the location and appropriateness of special exception uses. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall state conditions of approval or denial, including substantive, factual statements of necessity and appropriateness or of adverse impact, with such information being included in the minutes of the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting where decisions are made. 
4.  Restrictions. In the exercise of its approval, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, or other features of the proposed use of buildings as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this ordinance. 
5.  Effective date of approval; issuance of permit. 
a.  Board approval shall become effective 60 days from the date of the board meeting at which approval is granted. 
b.  No building permit shall be issued prior to the date of approval unless upon request by the applicant and at the applicant's own risk. 
c.  The building permit shall be issued subject to all conditions and requirements stipulated by the board. 
6.  Validity of plans. All plans, conditions, restrictions, and rules made a part of the approval of the board shall constitute certification on the part of the applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such regulations at all times. 
7.  Time limit and notification. All applications for special exception shall be decided within 45 days of the date of application, and the applicant shall be provided with a written notice of approval or denial. 
8.  [Validity of special exception.] A special exception that has been approved by the board shall become invalid one year after the date of approval unless: 
a.  A certificate of occupancy has been obtained from the town administrator or his designee in compliance with the Town of Farragut building code; or 
b.  A certification has been obtained from the town administrator or his designee that the applicant has satisfactorily completed all of the town requirements that were stipulated as part of the approval of the special exception; or 
c.  An extension of time, not to exceed six months, has been granted by the town administrator. 
    The town administrator may grant or deny a request by an applicant for an extension of time not to exceed six months in order to complete requirements that were stipulated as a part of the special exception. An application for an extension shall be submitted, by the applicant, in writing to the town administrator, prior to the date of expiration of the special exception. The town administrator may deny a request for an extension of time if he finds that there has not been a diligent effort made by the applicant to meet the requirements that were stipulated when the special exception was approved. In granting a request for an extension of time, the town administrator shall not change the requirements that were stipulated when the special exception was approved. 
    The town administrator shall, in writing, notify the applicant requesting extension of time of his/her decision to either grant or deny the request and his reasons therefore, within seven days of the receipt of the request for an extension. 
    A special exception shall become null and void upon: 
(1)  The expiration of one year; or 
(2)  The denial of a request for an extension of time by the town administrator; or 
(3)  The expiration of an extension of additional time, not to exceed six months, granted by the town administrator. 
F.  Building permit. An application for a building permit shall be obtained from the town administrator or his designee and shall be regulated by the building code of the Town of Farragut. 
G.  Penalties. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure, or to use any land in violation of any regulation in this ordinance. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 together with the cost of the action; and every day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Compliance therewith may also be enforced by injunctive process at the suit of the town or the owner or owners of real estate within the same zoning classification in the town or the owner, owners or occupant of real property that is contiguous to a particular property affected by the regulation of this ordinance. 
1.  The owner, and/or current party in lawful possession if other than the owner, of any real property located within the Town of Farragut, except as provided for in subsection [G.]2 below, upon which real property is located and displayed vehicles, boats, or other types of equipment for sale, is/are deemed to have permitted such items to be located and displayed for sale on said real property. As a result of allowing such real property to be improperly used, such owner's and/or lawful possessor's of real property are in violation of the Farragut Zoning Ordinance and are subject to citation. 
2.  If an owner and/or lawful possessor of real property within the Town of Farragut is cited for violation of the Zoning Ordinance for there being located and displayed for sale upon such real property one or more vehicles, boats, and/or other equipment, the owner or lawful possessor may within two normal working days of having been served with a citation for violation of the Zoning Ordinance relating to the presence and display for sale of one or more vehicles, boats, and/or other equipment on said property, execute and deliver to the Office of Codes Administration and Enforcement, Town of Farragut, a statement in form and substance satisfactory to the Farragut Town Administrator or his designee stating: 
a.  That said owner and/or lawful possessor did not grant permission or otherwise authorize the display of the subject vehicle, boat, and/or other equipment upon the owner's and/or lawful possessor's property; and 
b.  That the owner and/or lawful possessor grants to the Town of Farragut and its designated officers, agents, employees, or independent contractors authority to come upon the subject property of said owner and/or lawful possessor and tow away or otherwise remove the subject vehicle boat and/or other equipment in violation from the subject property; and 
c.  That such authorization to remove such offending vehicles, boats, and other equipment shall remain in full force and effect until revoked by written notice executed by the owner and/or lawful possessor and delivered to the office of codes administration and enforcement, Town of Farragut. Any person claiming any vehicle, boat, and/or other equipment so removed from private property by the Town of Farragut pursuant to such authorization from the owner or lawful possessor shall be responsible for all towing and storage charges. 
H.  Validity. No validity or invalidity of any part of this ordinance shall affect the validity of any remaining part, it being declared that all such remaining parts would have been passed irrespective of the validity or invalidity of any part found to be invalid. 
I.  Amendment. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the planning commission, any citizen of Farragut or any person who owns property in Farragut may present an application to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission requesting an amendment or amendments to this ordinance. 
1.  Application. An application shall be filed with the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for review. Before any action is taken upon an application for an amendment as provided for under said heading, the applicant shall deposit with the Town of Farragut a nonrefundable sum of money in accordance with the schedule of fees available along with application forms in the office of the town recorder in the Farragut Town Hall. 
2.  Restrictions. After the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has taken final action upon an application for an amendment to this ordinance, a petition requesting the same or a similar amendment shall not be accepted for a period of one year from the date of such final action. This provision in no way restricts the right of the planning commission or the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to initiate an amendment to this ordinance. 
3.  Planning commission certification. No amendment shall be enacted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen unless such amendment is first submitted to the planning commission for certification. 
a.  If approval is recommended by the planning commission, the amendment may be approved by a majority of a quorum of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
b.  If disapproval is recommended by the planning commission, the amendment may be approved by the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
4.  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be conducted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen before adoption of any proposed amendment, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community. 
J.  Farragut Historic Zoning Commission. The Farragut Historic Zoning Commission shall be hereby appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and shall consist of five persons appointed from the following backgrounds: a historian or representative of a Farragut patriotic or historical organization; an architect, if available; a planning commissioner; and representatives of the general community. For purposes of this ordinance, the representative of a Farragut patriotic or historical organization can be a member of the Farragut Folklife Museum Committee. Appointments shall be made with the terms of members to be five years. Members appointed initially shall be appointed for staggered terms so that the term of one member expires each year. The term of the appointed representative of the Planning Commission shall run concurrently with said person's remaining term on that body. At the time of expiration of a planning commissioner's term, another person, who is a member of the Planning Commission at the time of his/her appointment, shall be appointed to fulfill the remainder of that term. All members shall serve without compensation. The Farragut Historic Zoning Commission may adopt rules and regulations consistent with the state law. 
    The Historic Zoning Commission shall have the following powers: 
1.  To develop by-laws and guidelines for conducting business; 
2.  To review proposals for historic zones, alterations, demolitions and new construction; and, 
3.  To survey and identify the historic properties within the Town of Farragut. 
a.  Creation of historic overlay zone: Upon application submitted to the town administrator of the Town of Farragut, the historic zoning commission shall review requests made by individuals, organizations or other governmental bodies, including themselves, and shall submit a written recommendation regarding the creation of a historic overlay zone in accordance with the criteria for selection contained in this zoning ordinance, to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission, who shall forward the written recommendation of both the historic zoning commission and planning commission, and the implications of historic overlay designation on future planning decisions, to the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
    The Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen may initiate applications for historic overlay zone designation and make a final determination of designation after reviewing the recommendations of the historic zoning commission and the planning commission. 
b.  Notice of public hearings: Prior to making a recommendation as to the establishment of a historic overlay zone, the historic zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and shall adopt a set of design review guidelines which shall guide any granting or denial of Certificates of Appropriateness within the zone so established. Such design review guidelines shall be consistent with the purposes enumerated in this ordinance and with the regulations and standards adopted by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, applicable to the construction, alteration, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any building, structure or other improvement. Opportunity for public comment shall be required before the adoption of any such design review guidelines. The design review guidelines shall be made a part of the recommendations forwarded by the Historic Zoning Commission to the Planning Commission and Board of Mayor and Aldermen for adoption. Notice of the public hearing shall appear in a local news publication. Recommendations made by the Historic Zoning Commission shall be forwarded to the planning commission and Board of Mayor and Aldermen within 45 days of said public hearing. 
c.  Applications for building permits and issuance of certificates of appropriateness. All applications for permits to allow construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any building, structure, object or other improvement to real estate located within a Historic Overlay Zone shall be referred to the Historic Zoning Commission. No building permit for a new building or improvements within a Historic Overlay Zone shall be issued without being thoroughly reviewed by the Historic Zoning Commission and without a recorded certificate of appropriateness being issued by the commission. 
d.  Issuance or denial of Certificates of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness, with or without attached conditions, in writing, or the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, with reasons for such denial in writing, must be issued within 30 days following the availability of sufficient data. In the review of any work to be undertaken in a historic overlay zone, the Historic Zoning Commission shall apply the applicable review guidelines, with primary consideration to: 
(1)  Historical or architectural value of the present structure; 
(2)  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such structure to the rest of the structures, to the surrounding area, and to the character of the district; 
(3)  The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used; and 
(4)  Any other factor, including aesthetic, which is justified by the historic character of the proposed zone or is reasonably related to the purpose of this ordinance. 
e.  Appeal of decisions of Farragut Historic Zoning Commission regarding decisions on issuance of Certificates of Appropriateness. Anyone aggrieved by a final order or judgment of the Historic Zoning Commission may appeal such decision by taking the issue to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. III. - Antennas and towers. 
    The following requirements shall apply to dish antennas, amateur radio towers (excluding towers, as defined in this ordinance), towers, non-tower wireless communication facilities, and small cell support structures: 
A.  The following conditions shall apply to dish antenna placements in all zones: 
1.  No text, pictures, logos, or advertising shall be displayed on any surface of the dish antenna. 
2.  Installation of the required screening shall be done concurrently with the construction of the base mount for any dish antenna. 
3.  Where screening is required, the dish antenna shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way and from adjacent property by any combination or single treatment of vegetative or structural barriers. The screening shall provide 80 percent opacity at a height of seven feet within two years of its installation. Defective or dead screening shall be replaced to maintain the screening of the dish antenna while the dish antenna remains in its permitted location. 
4.  The dish antenna or any required screening shall not penetrate any recorded easement. 
B.  The following conditions shall apply to dish antenna placements in residential and agricultural zoning districts: 
1.  Only one dish antenna shall be permitted per lot, parcel, or tract. 
2.  No freestanding dish antenna shall exceed 11 feet in height, as measured at its highest point above the surrounding grade. 
3.  No dish antenna with a dish size greater than 24 inches shall be placed on any roof or attached to any principal or accessory structure. Dish antennas with a dish size of 24 inches or less may be placed on a roof or wall of a principal or accessory structure provided it does not project above the roof line, it is not visible from any public rights-of-way, and it does violate any required setback. 
4.  Freestanding dish antennas shall be set back from the side and/or rear property lines a minimum distance equal to at least two times the height of the mounted dish antenna or the minimum distance for accessory structures, whichever is greater. 
5.  Screening shall be required for all dish antenna with a dish size greater than 24 inches. 
C.  The following conditions shall apply to dish antenna placements in Community Service, Commercial, and Office Zoning Districts: 
1.  Only one dish antenna shall be permitted per business. 
2.  A ground-mounted dish antenna shall not exceed 11 feet in height, as measured at its highest point above the surrounding grade. A roof-mounted dish antenna shall not exceed 11 feet above the attachment of the base mount to the roof. 
3.  The maximum building height shall apply, relative to the particular zoning district in which the dish antenna is to be located. 
4.  Dish antennas may be permitted to be located in the rear yard or on the roof. A dish antenna with a dish size of 24 inches or less may be permitted to be attached to a wall provided it does not project above the roof line, it is not visible from any public rights-of-way, and it does not violate any required setback. 
5.  Rear yard placements of the dish antennas may not be located in any other required buffer zone or screening required for other purposes. 
6.  Screening shall be required for all rear yard placements of dish antennas. 
7.  Roof-mounted dish antennas shall be screened on three sides. The open side shall correspond with the directional requirements of the dish antenna. 
D.  The following conditions shall apply to amateur radio towers and other antenna placements, excluding towers, as defined in this Section: 
1.  All amateur radio towers and antennas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all rear and side property lines, plus an additional one-third ( 1/3 ) of a foot for each one foot of tower/antenna height over 35 feet tall. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the tower and its appurtenances. 
2.  All guy wires shall be set back from the side and/or rear property lines a minimum of ten feet. 
3.  No amateur radio tower shall exceed 70 feet in height and the combined total height of an amateur radio tower and its antenna shall not exceed 100 feet in height. 
4.  A certified survey shall be submitted at the discretion of the building official which shall verify amateur radio tower and antenna heights, and setbacks for the tower, its appurtenances, and the guy wires. 
5.  No amateur radio tower, antenna, or guy wires shall be located within a front yard or on any recorded easement. 
6.  No amateur radio tower shall be placed on a roof. 
7.  A maximum of one amateur radio tower greater than 35 feet in height shall be permitted per lot, parcel, or tract that is less than five acres. If a lot, parcel, or tract is greater than five acres, a maximum of one amateur radio tower per five acres shall be permitted. 
8.  A amateur radio tower shall be fenced, walled, or protected in some manner so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties. Said wall, fence, or protection shall be maintained in good condition. 
9.  All amateur radio towers shall be removed when no longer in service. 
E.  The following terms shall apply to commercial cellular towers and small cell support structures, as provided for in the remainder of this Section. For terms not defined herein, the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") definition shall apply. 
    Antennas or related equipment : Any transmitting, receiving or other equipment used in conjunction with a wireless communications facility. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or similar equipment. This definition does not include towers. 
    Applicant: An applicant is a person or entity who is authorized by the provisions of this ordinance to file for approval under these regulations. 
    Application: An application is the completed site plan application form and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by the Town of Farragut as part of a submission for review. 
    Base station : Equipment at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") licensed or authorized wireless communication between user equipment and a communication network. 
    Cellular telecommunications services : A retail telecommunications service that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and switching stations. 
    Co-location : Locating more than one transmission antenna or related equipment on the same small cell support structure or tower. 
    Monopole : A structure that consists of a single vertical pole without guy wires, designed and erected on the ground to support communications antennas and connected appurtenances. A monopole could be either a tower or a small cell support structure but would not include non-tower wireless communications facilities since those are not originally designed to support communications antennas and connected appurtenances. 
    Non-tower wireless communications facilities : Wireless communications facilities other than tower-based wireless communications. This would include facilities mounted to existing structures that were not originally intended to accommodate wireless communications facilities, such as buildings, utility poles, water towers, steeples, billboards, flags, etc. 
    Ordinance : Shall refer to this and any other applicable sections of the Farragut Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Planning commission : The term "planning commission" shall mean the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission in Farragut, Tennessee. 
    Planning jurisdiction : The planning jurisdiction includes those areas of Knox County, Tennessee, which fall under the jurisdictional authority of the planning commission. 
    Right-of-way : The surface of and space above and below any real property in the municipality in which the federal government, state government, municipality, or municipal authority has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, bridges, or any other public place, area, or property under the control of the federal government, state, municipality, or municipal authority. private rights-of-way and other government-owned lands not listed above shall not be considered a right-of-way. the phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means, in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way. 
    Small cell system/distributed antenna system ("DAS") : A network of remote antenna nodes that distribute radio frequency signals from a central hub through a high capacity signal transport medium to a specific area. 
    Small cell support structure : For purposes of this ordinance, a small cell support structure could include a monopole or a non-tower wireless communications facility that is erected within the public right of way or on private property and that does not exceed the lesser of either the maximum building height permitted in the associated zoning district or no more than three feet above the predominant height of the shortest existing utility poles in the immediate area. any other monopole shall be considered a tower, as defined herein, and subject to the regulations that would apply to towers. 
    Small cell support structures are constructed for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any federal communications commission-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
    Staff: Those employees of the Town of Farragut assigned to support and/or administer the powers and duties prescribed to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. 
    Stealth technology : Design techniques applied to telecommunication structures that will help conceal them or make them less visible to the casual observer. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, facilities constructed to resemble light poles, trees, flag poles, steeples, or other streetscape elements. Stealth technology may also include concealment wrap and similar technologies and placing applicable structures underground. 
    Tower : A support structure and all appurtenances constructed for, or an existing facility that has been adapted for, the location of transmission or related equipment to be used in the provision of any telecommunications services or personal communication services. This would include traditional monopole commercial cell towers and transport poles. For purposes of this ordinance, a tower is differentiated from a small cell support structure in that a tower is a monopole that may exceed the permitted building height of the associated zoning district and is not permitted within the public right-of-way. 
    Transport poles : A type of tower that includes microwave backhaul. transport poles are subject to all requirements associated with a tower. 
    Transmission equipment : Equipment that facilitates transmission for any Federal Communications Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wirelesses services such as microwave backhaul. 
    Utility : Has the meaning as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated. 
    Utility, overhead : Utility infrastructure that is located primarily above ground as determined by staff. For purposes of this ordinance, overhead utilities include but are not limited to power lines and communications lines. 
    Utility pole : A structure used for the support of electrical, telephone, cable television or other video services, street lighting, or other similar cables and located within the public right-of-way or utility easements. a small cell support structure may be incorporated onto a utility pole provided such pole does not extend, with the application of small cell support structures, to a height greater than three feet above the predominant height of the shortest utility poles within 500 feet. 
    Utility, underground : Utility infrastructure that is located primarily underground as determined by Staff. For purposes of this ordinance, underground utilities include but are not limited to water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, culverts, natural gas lines, power lines, certain small cell support system/DAS structures, and communications lines. 
    Wireless communications facility : The set of equipment and network components including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, cabling, and antenna or related equipment, used to provide wireless data and telecommunication services. 
F.  Towers. The following provisions shall apply to towers, as defined herein: 
1.  Application requirements. 
Pre-application filing meeting. Prior to filing an application for a tower, a pre-application meeting with the staff is required. At this meeting, the applicable provisions associated with the requested tower can be reviewed and discussed. An application will not be accepted if the required pre-application meeting has not been completed. 
    An application for a new tower shall include the following as applicable to the request: 
a)  A completed site plan application and filing fee; 
b)  A development site plan, per the requirements of this ordinance, showing but not limited to the following: the location of the structure, identification of structure type, location of any proposed equipment cabinets or buildings, identification of adjacent land owners; 
c)  A map and plan for how fiber optics are being extended to the property and to the proposed tower and, where applicable, the non-tower wireless communications facility. fiber optics shall be placed underground in areas with primarily underground utilities and an additional right-of-way permit from the town shall be obtained for any work conducted within the right-of-way. Any fiber optics proposed outside the right-of-way or not within existing platted utility easements shall require an easement to be platted and presented to the staff and the planning commission for approval; 
d)  A landscape plan, per the requirements of this ordinance; 
e)  A map showing other Towers within a one mile radius of the proposed site showing their height and ground elevations at the base; 
f)  A map and other documentation which demonstrates the coverage area for the proposed tower as related to the coverage areas of the alternative sites referenced below; 
g)  A certified survey showing a circular setback for the tower, access road and road elevations to the site, adjacent property lines, existing landscaping features, identification of all nonresidential buildings and structures, property owners, existing topography and approximate delineation of any topographical changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed ten feet, and all utility lines and easements; 
h)  A list of other possible alternative sites within a one mile radius that were considered for possible use by applicant for the structure and the reason they were unsuccessful in each instance; 
i)  The name and address of the initially proposed FCC-licensed entity to use the structure; 
j)  Documentation from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) indicating whether lighting will be required for the tower and whether it is a hazard to air navigation; 
k)  A recorded covenant or deed that runs with the land (or alternate assurance approved by the Town Attorney) that provides for the owner of the tower to remove such structure(s) at his/her expense if the structure has not been used for a period of six months or more; 
l)  An affirmation by the applicant not only that the tower is currently needed to provide adequate coverage, but committing that if the site plan is approved, the tower and related equipment will be constructed and in use within 12 months of the approval. The affirmation will also acknowledge that as time passes, municipal planning circumstances will change, and agreeing to reapply for site plan approval if the tower approved by the original site plan is not timely constructed within the 12-month period if the tower is still desired. 
m)  A letter from an appropriate officer of the applicant company stating that charges made to any user of the structure will be consistent with the charges made by other tower owners in the area; 
n)  A copy of the lease agreement or letter from the property owner giving permission for the application request; 
o)  Where applicable, a plat reflecting all newly established easements associated with a tower, in addition to all recorded covenants or deeds; 
p)  Pre-addressed and unsealed postage stamped envelopes to be used by the staff to notify property owners that are within a 1,000 foot radius of the tower as measured from the base of the tower; and 
q)  Any other document that the staff, planning commission, or their consultant may request. 
2.  Processing of applications. 
a)  Staff shall review all applications for new towers within 30 days of the application filing to determine if an application is complete. During this time frame, the staff may request a third party consultant review to verify certain applicable information. 
b)  Staff shall issue initial comments to the applicant within this 30-day time frame so that the applicant can address any identified deficiencies. Once staff comments have been addressed the staff shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is complete. As applicable, the staff or the planning commission shall then either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 60 days of the date the application is determined to be complete. If the town does not make a final decision within the required 60 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved as submitted. 
c)  Requests for co-locations on existing towers shall be subject to obtaining a building permit. A site plan review will not be required for a co-location, provided the co-location is determined by staff to comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
d)  An applicant claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the staff or planning commission in the administration of this ordinance may appeal the action to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such appeal must be taken within 30 consecutive calendar days of the final action by the staff or planning commission. The appeal shall be filed with the Staff along with an appeal fee of $100.00. The Staff will fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice, as well as written notice to the appellant and the owner of right-of-way or property (if different from the jurisdiction) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
e)  An applicant claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the town rendered by the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal from the final action to the Circuit Court of Knox County, Tennessee. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after such action. 
3.  Design standards for towers. 
a)  At the time of application submittal, the applicant shall provide information demonstrating compliance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance. Where the planning commission finds that circumstances or conditions relating to the particular application are not necessary or desirable for the protection of surrounding property or the public health, safety, and general welfare, and that such conditions or circumstances make one or more requirements unreasonable, the planning commission may modify or waive such requirement, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any modification or waiver, along with justification for each, shall be requested in writing by the applicant. 
b)  All towers, as well as non-tower wireless communications facilities mounted on top of existing buildings or other structures, shall be constructed with Stealth Technology that has been approved by the planning commission. All cables and wires shall be installed inside the stealth monopole structure. Stealth technology shall not apply to existing towers, unless such towers are replaced or an existing lease is re-negotiated to provide for stealth technology. Replacement towers shall be constructed with stealth technology. 
c)  All towers that are proposed on property that is not zoned residential and does not abut property that is zoned residential shall be set back a minimum of one-half of a foot for each one foot of tower and antenna height or 50 feet, whichever is greater. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the tower and antenna to the nearest point of any property line. 
d)  All towers that are proposed on property that is zoned residential or towers that are proposed on property that is not zoned residential but abuts property that is zoned residential shall be set back a minimum of one foot for each one foot of tower and antenna height. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the tower and antenna to the nearest point of any property line. 
e)  All equipment shelters, cabinets, fencing, and all other structures accessory to a Tower shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet on property that is not zoned residential and that does not abut property that is zoned residential. All equipment shelters, cabinets, fencing, and all other structures accessory to a Tower shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet on property that is zoned residential or property that is not zoned residential but abuts property that is zoned residential. Setbacks shall be measured from the farthest most protrusion of the structure(s) to the nearest point of any property line. 
f)  All access ways leading to a tower and/or its accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all side and rear property lines. 
g)  Towers and attached antennae, including a lightning rod, that are proposed on property that is not zoned residential shall not exceed a height of 165 feet. This also applies to a non-tower wireless communication facility that is constructed on top of another building or structure with the height being the overall height of the building/structure and tower together, measured from the average grade at the building or structure plane to the highest point. The setback requirements in this Ordinance shall apply regardless of whether the tower is a monopole or a non-tower wireless communication facility constructed on top of another building or structure. 
h)  Towers and attached antennae, including a lightning rod, that are proposed on property that is zoned residential shall not exceed a height of 75 feet. This also applies to a tower that is constructed on top of another building or structure with the height being the overall height of the building/structure and Tower together, measured from the grade to the highest point. The setback requirements in this ordinance shall apply regardless of whether the tower is a monopole or a non-tower wireless communication facility constructed on top of another building or structure. 
i)  No accessory building or structure for a tower shall exceed 15 feet in height. 
j)  Towers shall not be permitted within the area adopted as the Mixed Use Town Center, as shown in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan Update, as amended. 
k)  Towers shall not be illuminated, except in accordance with state or federal regulations. 
l)  The site shall be unstaffed. Personnel may periodically visit the site for maintenance, equipment modification, or repairs. To accommodate such visits, ingress/egress shall only be from approved access points. 
m)  Fencing used to enclose Towers and their accessory structures shall be properly maintained and in compliance with state or federal regulations. 
n)  The fenced area that encloses the Tower and its accessory structures shall be landscaped with non-exotic, non-invasive plant material that is reviewed and approved as part of a landscape plan that shall accompany the application. This material shall meet the minimum sizes provided for in the town's landscaping requirements and shall include species and a spacing arrangement that will screen the fenced area from view. A landscape maintenance letter of credit shall be provided to cover the maintenance of the approved plant material for a minimum of two years. If an existing structure is being used for stealth purposes as part of a non-tower wireless communication facility, the plant material requirements may be waived by the planning commission. 
o)  Existing trees around a tower site shall be preserved and may count toward fulfilling a portion or all of the landscaping requirements stipulated in this ordinance. 
p)  All driveways and off-street parking areas shall be constructed with a non-erodible improved surface, such as asphalt, concrete, permeable pavers, that is properly drained and maintained. The driveway shall be a minimum width of 12 feet and a maximum width of 24 feet. The composition of the driveway and off-street parking areas shall be designed by the applicant's engineer and shall be based on the heaviest vehicles that are likely to use such facilities. A turn around area is also required for emergency responders and shall be a component of the approved design. 
q)  There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety instructions, or signs which are required by a federal, state, or local agency. Such signs shall not exceed five total square feet in area. 
r)  All new towers shall be designed and constructed to provide for co-location unless an applicant can clearly demonstrate that co-location is not feasible given a proposed tower's height. A tower design, including stealth technology, and placement shall provide for any anticipated height extension that may occur in the future. Additional height shall require additional co-location. Options for co-location shall be reviewed with the staff and planning commission based on the height and placement of the proposed tower. 
s)  All option and site lease agreements shall permit the possibility of co-location. 
t)  To ensure the structural integrity of a tower, the owner of such tower shall ensure that the tower is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for structures that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If upon inspection the Town of Farragut concludes that a tower fails to comply with applicable codes and standards and constitutes a danger to person or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower at the owner's expense. 
G.  Small cell support structures and distributed antenna systems (DAS). The following provisions shall apply to small cell support structures and das, as defined in this ordinance: 
1.  Application requirements. 
Pre-Application Filing Meeting. Prior to filing an application for a small cell support structure or DAS, a pre-application meeting with the staff is required. At this meeting, the applicable provisions associated with the request can be reviewed and discussed. An Application will not be accepted if the required pre-application meeting has not been completed. 
This meeting will allow for early coordination by identifying existing structures that might be suitable for co-location or that might qualify as non-tower wireless communication facilities. This will also help identify any other issues which may relate to (i) the use of right-of-way or utility poles and/or (ii) the application to the proposed request of any other local zoning, subdivision regulations, or other rules, regulations or adopted plans, including, but not limited to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Architectural Design Standards. The meeting will provide an opportunity for an initial discussion regarding proposed structure locations, design, and the application submittal and approval process. Coordination with utilities for possible use of pre-existing structures will be required. Applicants shall supply the provider's preferred locations, structure design, style, and structure height at least one week prior to the pre-application meeting or upon request for such meeting. 
Unless provided for otherwise, all proposed small cell support structures/DAS shall be subject to staff review and approval by the planning commission. Certain non-tower wireless communication facilities applications, including co-locations, may be reviewed and approved by the staff provided the staff determines that a more formal review with the planning commission is not necessary based on the location and/or physical characteristics of the proposed facilities. 
Applications for small cell support structures or DAS shall include the following information as applicable to the request: 
a)  A completed site plan application and filing fee. Applications are limited to three structures per application. 
b)  A development site plan, signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in Tennessee, showing the proposed location of each small cell support structure and any existing small cell support structures within 500 feet of each proposed location. This plan shall specifically identify, for each location, existing utility poles within 500 feet and their predominant physical characteristics (type, material, height, color, etc.). The plan shall address whether an existing utility pole is proposed to be used to accommodate a small cell support structure or whether a new monopole is being requested. The plan shall also address if an existing utility pole is being replaced in order to accommodate a small cell support structure. 
c)  A map and plan for how fiber optics are being extended to the small cell support structure/DAS and, where applicable, the non-tower wireless communications facility. Fiber optics shall be placed underground in areas with primarily underground utilities and an additional right-of-way permit from the town shall be obtained for any work conducted within the right-of-way. Any fiber optics proposed outside the right-of-way or not within existing platted utility easements shall require an easement to be platted and presented to the staff and the planning commission for approval. 
d)  For non-tower wireless communications facilities proposed on buildings or other structures that are not within the right-of-way, the development site plan shall include the proposed small cell support structures, their physical characteristics, and stealth technology applications that would be proposed based on the proposed location and context. 
e)  An indication of existing improvements, such as pedestrian facilities, accesses, landscaping, and underground utilities, that are within 25 feet of the proposed small cell support structure(s) and any other information that may be pertinent to or impact the decision on where to place the structure and its related equipment. 
f)  A map and other documentation which demonstrates the coverage area for each proposed small cell support structure. This shall include a statement of the telecommunications objective(s) for each proposed small cell support structure location, whether the proposed facility is necessary to prevent or fill a gap or capacity shortfall in the applicant or provider's service area, whether it is the least obtrusive means of doing so, and whether there are any alternative sites or other applications that would have fewer aesthetic impacts while providing comparable service. 
g)  A statement by an authorized representative that the Applicant or provider holds all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the FCC, and any other agency of state or federal government with authority to regulate telecommunications facilities that are required in order for the applicant to construct the proposed facility. 
h)  A statement by an authorized representative that the applicant or provider is in compliance with all conditions required for such license and approvals. 
i)  A full description of the number and dimensions of all small cell support structures to be installed including, but not limited to, all underground structures, antennae, the height of above ground structures and any equipment cabinets or buildings associated with the installation. 
j)  Where structures are permitted above ground, a vertical profile sketch or drawing of the structures, signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in Tennessee, indicating the height of the structure and the placement and physical dimensions of all antennas and equipment enclosures. 
k)  For non-tower wireless communications facilities to be mounted on existing utility poles or replacement utility poles, the profile sketch shall verify compliance with the height parameters provided for in this ordinance. 
l)  Written approval from the property owner(s) stating that the applicant or provider has permission to apply to construct a facility on their property (e.g., on an existing building with a non-tower wireless communication facility in the form of a small cell support structure). In the case of non-town-owned utility poles, the utility provider shall acknowledge permission for the applicant to apply to use their pole(s) for small cell support structures. Monopoles within the right-of-way or proposed on town-owned utility poles shall be considered by the staff and planning commission, as representatives of the town, as part of the application review. Final approval to use town-owned property for small cell support structures shall be acknowledged in writing by the duly authorized representative of the town. A lease agreement or a franchise agreement with the town will typically be required as a condition of staff or planning commission approval. 
m)  Photographs of view shed from each proposed small cell support structure location taken in at least four directions. 
2.  Processing of applications. 
a)  Staff shall review all Applications for new small cell support structures within 30 days of application filing to determine if an application is complete. During this time frame, the staff may request a third party consultant review to verify certain applicable information. 
b)  Staff shall issue comments to the applicant within this 30-day time frame so that the applicant can address any identified deficiencies. Once staff comments have been addressed the staff shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is complete. As applicable, the staff or the planning commission shall then either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 60 days of the date the application is determined to be complete. If the town does not make a final decision within the required 60 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved as submitted. 
c)  An applicant claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or decision of the staff or planning commission in the administration of this ordinance may appeal the action to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such appeal must be taken within 30 consecutive calendar days of the final action by the staff or planning commission. The appeal shall be filed with the staff along with an appeal fee of $100.00. The staff will fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give public notice, as well as written notice to the appellant and the owner of right-of-way or property (if different from the jurisdiction) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
d)  An applicant claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the town rendered by the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal from the final action to the Circuit Court of Knox County, Tennessee. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after such action. 
3.  Design standards for small cell support structures/DAS. 
    The regulations in this subsection shall apply to small cell support structures and DAS. Temporary, mobile or wheeled cellular antenna structures shall not be permitted without prior approval from the staff or, where applicable, the planning commission. 
a)  Monopole small cell support structures shall include stealth technology and shall not exceed the lesser of either the maximum building height for the zoning district within which they are located or three feet above the predominant height of the shortest Utility poles within 500 feet of the proposed monopole. Small cell support structures that involve replacing existing utility poles shall be subject to adhering to the height of the utility pole that is being replaced plus an additional three feet. Replacement utility poles that will more effectively accommodate a stealth technology shall be prioritized as part of the application review process. 
b)  Non-tower wireless communication facilities that incorporate small cell support structures shall include stealth technology appropriate for the proposed location and context. With the exception of utility poles, non-tower wireless communications facilities shall not exceed the lesser of either the maximum building height permitted in the associated zoning district or ten feet above the height of the existing structure on which the small cell support structures are proposed. In relation to utility poles, non-tower wireless communications facilities shall not extend more than three feet above the predominant height of the shortest utility poles within 500 feet. 
c)  Small cell support structures shall be designed and constructed to accommodate a minimum of two service providers. Based on the proposed location and context, this may be exempted for non-tower wireless communications facilities. 
d)  Small cell support structures shall not interfere with other utilities, encroach onto or over sidewalks and other pedestrian or bicycle facilities, interfere with landscaping, visibility, or other matters of public safety. 
e)  Small cell support structures proposed in an area with primarily underground utilities shall be placed underground with the exception of an antenna. all wiring shall be concealed within the pole and antenna and the antenna shall include stealth technology appropriate for the location and context. 
f)  Small cell support structures proposed in an area with primarily overhead utilities shall apply stealth technology that is appropriate for the location and context. 
g)  Where wiring to an antenna cannot be concealed within a utility pole (e.g., wooden poles), all wiring to the antenna shall be concealed within the most Stealth conduit possible that matches the color of the utility pole. 
h)  Small cell support structures proposed on property zoned residential shall be encouraged to be non-tower wireless communication facilities (such as those contained behind building parapets or concealed within other existing structures) that include stealth technology appropriate for the location and context. 
i)  Where an applicant can clearly demonstrate that employment of a non-tower wireless communication facility is not possible on a property zoned residential, all small cell support structures shall be placed underground. In all cases, antennas proposed on property zoned residential shall be concealed with concealment wrap or a similar application. 
j)  Small cell support structures shall not be illuminated, except to fulfill certain state or federal regulations, or where illumination is integral to the stealth technology, such as a design intended to look like a street light pole. 
k)  Small cell support structures shall not include advertisements and may only display information required by a federal, state, or local agency. Such display shall not exceed one square foot in area, unless required by state or federal regulations, or unless a larger display is integral to the stealth technology. Such display shall not exceed the width of the pole, unless a wider sign is integral to the stealth technology such as a design which integrates a decorative banner. 
l)  The use of cooling fans is discouraged. When needed, fans with lower noise profiles must be used. 
m)  Small cell support structures shall not be located within 500 feet of an existing small cell support structure unless an applicant can clearly demonstrate that such distance prohibits the carrier's ability to provide service. Multiple carriers are permitted and encouraged to locate on one small cell support structure, where possible. 
n)  Reasonable efforts shall be made by the applicant and assessed as part of the application review process to locate new small cell support structures in the order of hierarchy below, based on the following functional roadway classification from the most to least preferred: 
Interstate 
Arterial 
Collector 
Local 
o)  Reasonable efforts shall be made by the applicant and assessed as part of the application review process to locate new small cell support structures based on the following hierarchy of zones and land uses from the most to least preferred: 
Commercial 
Institutional 
Public parks 
Agricultural 
Residential 
H.  Factors to consider in evaluation of applications. 
As part of Staff and Planning Commission review of Applications filed for telecommunications facilities, the conformity of the Application with the foregoing requirements, including but not limited to the following, shall apply: 
1.  The application is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance. 
2.  The adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria, the configuration of the site, and the extent to which the site is formed by logical boundaries (e.g., topography, natural features, streets, relationship of adjacent uses, etc.) that provide for the ability to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.  The extent to which the proposal responds to the impact of the proposed development on adjacent land uses, especially in terms of visual impact. 
4.  The extent to which the proposed telecommunications facility is camouflaged (i.e., use of stealth technology). 
5.  The extent to which the proposed facility is integrated with existing structures (i.e., buildings, signs, utility poles, etc.). 
6.  An applicant's compliance with all town requirements with respect to previous applications. 
I.  Amendments to approved plans. 
Amendments to approved plans shall be reviewed by the Staff once the Application for the associated amendment is deemed complete and, where applicable, forwarded to the Planning Commission for consideration and approval. Evaluation of the amendment shall be based on the applicable criteria of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 17-08, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. IV. - Measurement of setbacks, open space, visibility triangle, use of lots and access points. 
A.  Measurement of setbacks. 
1.  Setbacks shall be measured from the foundation of a building to the nearest point of any property line, except when the overhanging roof, eaves, gutters, or other architectural feature protrudes more than two feet from the foundation. In such case, the setback shall be measured from the furthermost projection of the building; 
2.  Patios, decks, pergolas, arbors, and other similar non-roofed and/or non-enclosed structures attached to and/or adjacent to a principal building shall not be required to meet the side and rear setback requirements of the principal building. Such non-roofed and non-enclosed structures shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from side and rear property lines; and 
3.  Setbacks shall be measured from the furthermost protrusion of any non-building structure to the nearest point of any property line. 
B.  Open space. No yard, open space, or lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted as open space for, any other building or structure. 
C.  Visibility triangle. The following regulations provide for the maximum safety of persons using sidewalks and streets, and for the maximum enjoyment of the use of property: 
1.  On any corner lot, no wall, fence, sign, structure, plant growth, or any other object, whether movable or stationary, which obstructs the vision at elevations between 21/2 feet and ten feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a visibility triangle, created by measuring 25 feet from the rights-of-way intersection along each right-of-way (ROW). (See Illustration 2. (see Chapter 1).) 
2.  In any required front yard, except as provided in subsection C.1 above, no fence, wall, hedge or yard ornament shall be permitted which materially impedes vision across such yard above the height of 31/2 feet. 
D.  Use of lots and access points. The purpose of the following is to clarify certain conditions pertaining to the use of lots and access points: 
1.  Double frontage lots shall provide the required front yard setbacks along both streets. 
2.  For all buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from all intersecting streets the same as the required front yard setback. The interior side yard shall be the same as required for interior lots. 
3.  On all lots of record, all yards (front, rear and side) shall conform to the district regulations except where existing yards on the same side and in the same block of the street do not meet the requirements of the district. The yards on such street may be equal to the average depth or width of the existing yards provided such average depth does not extend into the visibility triangle. 
4.  Where a permitted use of land involves no structures, such use, excluding agricultural uses, shall nonetheless comply with all yards and minimum lot area requirements applicable to the district in which located, as well as obtaining any other license or permit applicable to that particular use. 
5.  Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than required by the Farragut Subdivision Regulations for a street of its classification, the depth of the front yard shall be measured by starting at a line located a distance equal to 50 percent of the total required right-of-way from the centerline of the street. 
6.  No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for at least 25 feet. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. V. - Day care facilities. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the development requirements specific to day care facilities, which shall include child care facilities and adult care facilities. 
A.  Child care facilities. 
1.  All child care facilities shall have the applicable license from the State of Tennessee. An applicant shall submit a copy of the application for such license at time of site plan submittal or at time of building permit application submittal, whichever is applicable. Upon receipt of the temporary license from the State of Tennessee, the applicant shall submit a copy of such license to the Town of Farragut. Upon expiration of the temporary license and the receipt of the permanent license from the State of Tennessee, the applicant shall submit a copy of the permanent license to the Town of Farragut. Each time the license is renewed or revised by the State of Tennessee, a copy of such license shall be submitted to the Town of Farragut. 
2.  Before a child care facility can open for operation, if applicable, a site plan and landscape plan must be approved and implemented. 
3.  With the exception of Drop-In Child Care Centers, as defined by the State of Tennessee, a fenced outdoor play area of not less than 3,000 square feet or 100 square feet per child permitted by the State license, whichever is greater, shall be provided. Such fenced outdoor play area shall meet the following development criteria: 
a.  Fences shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from all front lot lines; 
b.  Fences shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all side and rear lot lines; 
c.  Fenced outdoor play areas shall not include any required buffer strips; and 
d.  A minimum of one shade tree for each 1,500 square feet of fenced outdoor play area shall be planted within the fenced outdoor play area. Where the resultant figure contains a fraction, any fraction shall be counted as one shade tree. All other landscaping requirements applicable to the site shall also be met. 
B.  Adult care facilities. All adult care facilities shall have the applicable license from the State of Tennessee. If a site plan is required, the applicant shall submit a copy of the application for such license at time of site plan submittal. Upon receipt of the license from the State of Tennessee, the applicant shall submit a copy of the license to the Town of Farragut. Each time the license is renewed or revised by the State of Tennessee, a copy of such license shall be submitted to the Town of Farragut. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 09-04, § 1, 5-28-2009) 
Sec. VI. - Customary home occupations. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the permitting process and the development criteria for Customary Home Occupations. 
A.  Application/permit process. 
1.  Applicants shall submit a completed Customary Home Occupation Application and the required fee to the town hall; 
2.  Town staff shall review the application for conformance with the requirements and approve or deny the application within 15 working days of submittal. If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal staff's decision to the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA); and 
3.  The approved application shall represent the permit and shall constitute a contract agreement. 
B.  All Customary Home Occupations shall comply with the following development criteria: 
1.  Home occupations shall be undertaken by the residents of the dwelling unit; 
2.  No more than one person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
3.  The space devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building; 
4.  No alteration to any building shall indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for other than residential purposes; 
5.  No articles, materials, goods, or equipment indicative of the home occupation shall be visible from any public street, or adjacent properties. Outdoor sales and storage is prohibited; 
6.  No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. Off-street parking shall be provided; 
7.  The proposed uses shall not increase noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference; 
8.  Where applicable, recognized professional licenses and required permits of the occupant(s) trade or trades which are practiced shall be obtained and maintained as valid; and 
9.  Dwelling units and accessory buildings shall not be used as a primary or incidental storage facility for a business, industry, commercial, or agricultural activity conducted elsewhere. 
C.  The following occupations are permitted as customary Home Occupations: 
1.  Artist, photographer, sculptor, graphic artist, wood worker, writer, or author; 
2.  Craftsperson; 
3.  Dressmaker, milliner, seamstress, tailor, baker, or interior decorator; 
4.  Personal services such as masseuse, manicurist, cosmetologist, hair dresser, and barber; 
5.  Sales representative; 
6.  Lawyer, engineer, architect, land planner, drafts person, manufacturing or company representative, off-site inspector, broker, financial or business consultant, real estate representative, insurance agent, or accountant; 
7.  Computer programmer, word processor, telemarketer, telephone answering service, information specialist, or similar uses which are in support of computer related technology; 
8.  Teaching, including tutoring, musical instruction, or dancing; 
9.  Home day care and babysitting, provided that the total number of clients does not exceed four and that such clients are cared for less than 18 hours per day; and 
10.  Other similar occupations as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. VII. - Senior living community. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish development requirements that would be specific to what is defined as a senior living community in this ordinance. Unless specified below, all other requirements associated with this use shall be provided for in the base zoning district. 
B.  General plan/plat approval requirements. 
1.  After consulting with the Town staff as part of a preliminary sketch plan review, a concept plan, as regulated in the applicable portions of the Farragut Subdivision Regulations, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the development plan submission. The concept plan shall be of the entire senior living community development and is required whether the project is developed in multiple phases or not. The concept plan is a precursor to the more detailed site plan that will subsequently be required per the applicable provisions of this section and the base zoning district. 
2.  Where public streets and/or public utilities are to be constructed or extended in association with the overall development, a preliminary plat and final plat shall be provided as regulated in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. All applicable requirements shall be included as part of the plat submissions. 
3.  The approved plans and plats shall be in compliance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, the Architectural Design Standards, and all other adopted plans and ordinances of the Town of Farragut, as amended. 
C.  Land area. In addition to the other requirements of this section, a senior living community shall only be permitted on tracts that are contiguous and that, in total and as part of the concept plan approval, are at least ten acres. 
D.  Height. 
1.  Whenever the adjacent property is zoned residential and/or agricultural, no buildings to be constructed within 100 feet of a periphery property line shall exceed the maximum height permitted in the base zoning district. 
2.  When abutting all other zoning districts or where buildings are greater than 100 feet from a periphery property line such buildings shall not exceed three stories, or 45 feet in height. No accessory structure shall exceed 15 feet in height, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
E.  Access. The primary access to the development shall be from a street having a classification of major collector or arterial on the Major Road Plan. Such street, based on its classification on the Major Road Plan, shall be built to a standard that is generally consistent with the cross sections provided for in the Subdivision Regulations and the Town of Farragut Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, as amended. Private access ways internal to the development and that connect to public streets shall be constructed with compaction, aggregate base, binder, and surface course that complies with the standards for a local street in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
F.  Accessory uses. Any accessory use, such as dining facilities, personal care services, retail stores, or pharmacies shall be only for the use and benefit of the residents of the development and shall be oriented so that such uses are not readily identifiable from a public street or adjacent residentially zoned property. 
G.  Freestanding independent and catered living buildings. 
1.  As defined, senior living communities may include smaller single family attached and detached residential scale buildings that provide housing for individuals that are more independent than those living in a traditional senior care facility. The provisions below are specific to the form and arrangement of such buildings as part of a senior living community. 
a.  Building arrangement. If arranged around the periphery and the abutting property is zoned residential or agriculture, freestanding buildings may be used as form based transition from the senior living community. The building envelopes shall be shown on the concept and site plan and platted as part of a final plat. The envelopes must demonstrate that the freestanding buildings are at least 20 feet apart, at least 35 feet from the periphery of an abutting residential and/or agriculture zoning district, and are generally consistent with the predominant size, scale, height, and arrangement of residential structures that abut that portion of the senior living community. Where the abutting property is undeveloped and zoned residential and/or agriculture and transitional buildings are proposed along this interface in the senior living community, the size, scale, height, and arrangement of residential structures shall be reviewed as part of the concept plan. 
    As part of the analysis of appropriateness of the transitional buildings along the undeveloped properties, the planning commission shall consider the surrounding context and the overall concept plan proposed by the applicant. 
b.  Landscaping. Though freestanding buildings may serve as form based transition to abutting residential areas they shall be constructed so as to avoid blank walls facing the periphery and shall include landscaping within the 35-foot peripheral setback. Such landscaping shall be shown and approved as part of the overall landscape plan for the elderly care community. The landscaping shall primarily ensure a naturalized transition and shall not include barriers such as screen walls and privacy fences. 
c.  Architectural design standards. All buildings, including residential scale freestanding independent and catered living buildings, within a senior living community shall comply with the Town's adopted Architectural Design Standards. This will help ensure effective transitions to abutting residential areas. 
H.  Parking. As provided for in Chapter 4, Parking and Loading. 
I.  Lighting. 
1.  As provided for in Chapter 4, Outdoor Site Lighting, with the following additional provisions: 
a.  Exterior lighting within the senior living community shall have a consistency. 
b.  Street Lighting shall follow the requirements in Chapter 3, Section XXVII. K.2 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Parking lot lights shall have decorative posts and brackets and a decorative fixture, such as a bell shaped style fixture. The bulbs shall be contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
d.  Building mounted lights shall be decorative, such as the acorn, lantern, or bell shaped styles. The bulbs shall be contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
e.  Bollard lighting shall be permitted provided the bulbs are contained within the fixture so that they are not visible. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 5-25-2006; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. VIII. - Farragut Municipal Flood Damage Prevention Regulations. 
A.  Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
1.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 13-7-201-13-7-210] delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, Board of Mayor and Aldermen, do ordain as follows: 
2.  Findings of Fact. 
a.  The Town of Farragut, Tennessee, and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations found in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Ch. 1, Section 60.3. 
b.  Areas of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
c.  Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
3.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This ordinance is designed to: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities; 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
d.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
e.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
4.  Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are: 
a.  To protect human life, health, safety and property; 
b.  To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
c.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
d.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
e.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodprone areas; 
f.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas to minimize blight in flood areas; 
g.  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area; 
h.  To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP. 
B.  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application given its stated purpose and objectives. 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate structure to the principal structure on the same lot and, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall conform to the following: 
1.  Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of vehicles and storage. 
2.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
4.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in damage to other structures. 
5.  Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of floodwaters. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the local enforcement officer's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood-related erosion hazard is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See " Special flood hazard area. " 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This term is also referred to as the 100-year flood or the one percent annual chance flood. 
    Basement means any portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See " Structure. " 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Emergency flood insurance program or emergency program means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with Section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not "per se" covered under the Program. 
    Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this ordinance which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this ordinance. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing structures. See "Existing construction." 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood Insurance Study is the official report provided by FEMA, evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and structures and their contents. 
    Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    Flood-related erosion area management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on the Town of Farragut, Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By the approved Tennessee program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means, as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means, as corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    100-year flood. See "Base flood." 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies. 
    Reasonable safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the Special Flood Hazard Area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency [means] the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development, as designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of FEMA to assist in the implementation of the NFIP for the State. 
    Structure, for purposes of this ordinance, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the initial improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial improvement; or (2) in the case of substantial damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    The term ["substantial improvement"] does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project or; (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
C.  General Provisions. 
1.  Application. This ordinance shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 
2.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified on the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, as identified by FEMA, and in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Number(s) 47093C-0238F, 0239F, 0352F, 0356F, and 0360F dated, May 2, 2007, and Community Panel Number(s) 47093C-0241G, 0242G, 0243G, 0244G, and 0357G, Dated August 5, 2013, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
3.  Requirement for Development Permit. A development permit shall be required in conformity with this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
4.  Compliance. No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
5.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
6.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Tennessee statutes. 
7.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
8.  Penalties for Violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication therefore, be fined as prescribed by Tennessee statutes, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Farragut, Tennessee from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Administration. 
1.  Designation of Ordinance Administrator. The Town Administrator or his/her designee is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  Permit Procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
a.  Application stage. 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where Base Flood Elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be floodproofed where Base Flood Elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance. 
(3)  A FEMA Floodproofing Certificate from a Tennessee-registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed non-residential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in this ordinance. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
b.  Construction Stage. Within AE Zones, where Base Flood Elevation data is available, any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered land surveyor and certified by same. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or floodproofing. 
    Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
3.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
b.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. 
c.  Notify adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
d.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community FIRMs through the Letter of Map Revision process. 
e.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
f.  Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with this ordinance. 
g.  Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new and substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with this ordinance. 
h.  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a Tennessee-registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with this ordinance. 
i.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
j.  When Base Flood Elevation data and floodway data have not been provided by FEMA, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the Town of Farragut, Tennessee FIRM meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or flood proofed to a level of at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. All applicable data including elevations or flood proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in this ordinance. 
k.  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files. 
E.  Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
1.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State of Tennessee and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces; 
c.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
d.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
e.  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
f.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
g.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
h.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
i.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this ordinance; 
j.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provision of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced; 
k.  All new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall provide copies of all necessary Federal and State permits, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344; 
l.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development proposals shall meet the standards of this ordinance; 
m.  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the entire structure shall meet the standards for new construction; 
n.  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple Base Flood Elevations, the entire structure shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation. 
2.  Specific Standards. In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard and Other Flood Areas (Zone X), in addition to those set forth above, the following provisions are required: 
a.  Residential Structures. Where Base Flood Elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than four feet above the Base Flood Elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
    Within approximate A Zones where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated to a level of at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in this ordinance). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
b.  Non-Residential Structures. Where Base Flood Elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than four feet above the level of the Base Flood Elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
    In approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than four feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in this ordinance). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures". 
    Non-Residential buildings located in all A Zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Tennessee-registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Administrator as set forth in this ordinance. 
c.  Enclosures. All new construction and substantial improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Tennessee professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the finished grade; 
(c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(2)  The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles, storage or building access. 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such partitions shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
d.  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. 
(1)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (3) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction. 
(2)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either: 
(a)  Where Base Flood Elevation data is available, the lowest floor of the manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than four feet above the level of the Base Flood Elevation; or 
(b)  In approximate A Zones, without Base Flood Elevations, the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength) that are at least four feet in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in this ordinance). 
(3)  Any manufactured home, which has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must meet the standards of this ordinance. 
(4)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  All recreational vehicles placed in an identified Special Flood Hazard Area must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(c)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction. 
e.  Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed New Development Proposals. Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(1)  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions). 
(5)  The floodway, the special flood hazard areas, and other flood areas shall be shown on all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions). 
f.  Requirements for Flood Fringe Fill. Construction fill that alters the conveyance and storage capacity of the natural floodplain is prohibited in the flood fringe one-half the linear distance between the exterior line of the floodway line and the exterior line of the 500-year floodplain line. This no fill line shall be shown on all development plans and plats. 
    The administrator may authorize an exception to this requirement if a grading plan prepared for the site shows that alteration in the storage capacity of the natural floodplain is mitigated by removal of an equal or greater volume of soil elsewhere in the floodplain located on the site. If this option is used, the administrator may also require the preparation of a drainage study by a registered professional engineer in the State of Tennessee to determine if the cut and fill activities will cause a rise in flood elevations greater than 0.01 feet within 0.5 miles (upstream and downstream) of the proposed development. In no case, however, shall the aquatic buffer be encroached with this option. 
3.  Standards for Special Flood Hazard Areas with Established Base Flood Elevations and with Floodways Designated. Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in this ordinance are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted upon approval by the planning commission and that it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development shall not result in any increase in the water surface elevation of the Base Flood Elevation, velocities, or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A Tennessee registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data, using the same methodologies as in the effective Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Farragut, Tennessee and certification, thereof. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard Zones AE with Established Base Flood Elevations but Without Floodways Designated. Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in this ordinance, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill material, new construction and substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless approved by the planning commission and certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. In no case, however, shall the aquatic buffer be encroached with this option. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance. 
5.  Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and Floodways (A Zones). Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in this ordinance where streams exist, but no base flood data has been provided and where a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  The Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation and floodway data available from any Federal, State, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations (see b. below), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in approximate A Zones meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions). 
c.  Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in this ordinance. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this ordinance. 
d.  Within approximate A Zones, where Base Flood Elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, no encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless approved by the planning commission and certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. In no case, however, shall the aquatic buffer be encroached with this option. 
e.  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance. Within approximate A Zones, require that those subsections dealing with the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, assuring watercourse carrying capacities are maintained and manufactured homes provisions are complied with as required. 
6.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones). Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in this ordinance are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in this ordinance, apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least four feet above as many feet as the depth number specified on the FIRMs, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of this ordinance. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at least four feet above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be floodproofed to at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade. A Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance and shall provide such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required in accordance with this ordinance. 
c.  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
7.  Standards for Areas Protected by Flood Protection System (A-99 Zones). Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in this ordinance are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but where Base Flood Elevations have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 Zones) all provisions of this ordinance shall apply. 
8.  Standards for Unmapped Streams. Located within the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments including fill material or other development including structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream, or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless approved by the planning commission and certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the locality. In no case, however, shall the aquatic buffer be encroached with this option. 
b.  When a new flood hazard risk zone, and Base Flood Elevation and floodway data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the standards established in accordance with this ordinance. 
F.  Variance Procedures. 
1.  Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals. 
a.  Authority. The Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  Procedure. Meetings of the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at such times, as the Board shall determine. All meetings of the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public. The Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record. 
    Compensation of the members of the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall be set by the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen. 
c.  Appeals: How Taken. An appeal to the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, or bureau affected by any decision of the administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all cases where an appeal is made by a property owner or other interested party, a fee per the general fee schedule resolution adopted by the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen for the cost of publishing a notice of such hearings shall be paid by the appellant. The administrator shall transmit to the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action was taken. The Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time which shall not be more than 90 days from the date of the hearing. At the hearing, any person or party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney. 
d.  Powers. The Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the administrator or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  Variance Procedures. In the case of a request for a variance, the following shall apply: 
(a)  The Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures as defined, herein, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this ordinance to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(c)  In passing upon such applications, the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others; 
2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion; 
3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent use; 
6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(d)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this ordinance, the Farragut Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance. 
(e)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
2.  Conditions for Variances. 
a.  Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard and the factors listed in this ordinance. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (as high as $25 for $100) coverage, and that such construction below the Base Flood Elevation increases risks to life and property. 
d.  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
G.  Legal Status Provisions. 
1.  Conflict with Other Ordinances. In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the Town of Farragut, Tennessee, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
2.  Validity. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 07-16, § 2, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 13-18, § 1, 6-27-2013) 
Sec. IX. - Gasoline/fuel service stations. 
A.  The intent of this section is to provide for facilities that fuel and service automobiles and light trucks only. The design criteria used as a guide to construct such facilities are biased towards automobile and light truck traffic only. Service stations shall not be designed to refuel and/or service trucks with more than three axles or more than ten wheels. 
    The principal building used in conjunction with the service stations shall conform to the setback requirements for principal buildings for the district in which they are located. 
B.  Fuel pump islands shall: 
1.  Be designed and oriented for automobile and light truck service only. 
2.  Be located not closer than 30 feet to any street right-of-way. 
3.  Be separated by a driveway of at least 22 feet in width when two islands are located parallel to each other. 
4.  Be separated from the principal building by a driveway of at least 20 feet where the islands are constructed parallel to the building, excluding a service attendant building constructed as a part of a pump island. 
5.  Be separated from the principal building by a driveway of at least 30 feet in width where the islands are constructed perpendicular to the building. 
6.  Be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines other than street rights-of-way. 
C.  Canopies shall be designed for automobiles, light trucks, and recreational vehicles. They shall not be constructed closer than 20 feet from any street right-of-way. 
D.  A raised curb at least six inches in height shall be constructed along boundaries of the driveways, except at the openings. On-site drainage may not be discharged through the driveway openings into the public right-of-way. 
E.  Access to the public right-of-way shall be governed by the Farragut Municipal Code. Sites are not automatically granted multiple access points. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. X. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006: Ord. No. 16-06, § 2, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. XI. - Height. 
A.  In measuring heights, the front yard grade or elevation shall be used as the base to determine the height of any building. A habitable basement shall not be counted as a story so long as it does not exceed the average front yard elevation or grade by more than three feet. Any habitable attic space shall be counted as a story. 
B.  The following structures or parts thereof are hereby exempt from the height limitations set forth in the zoning districts: 
1.  Agricultural buildings, barn, silo, windmill, but not including dwellings. 
2.  Chimneys, smokestacks, penthouse, spires, flagpoles, ventilators, skylights, derricks, conveyors, cooling towers, church steeples, and belfries. 
3.  Radio and television antenna and towers, observation towers, and power transmission towers. 
4.  Water tanks and standpipes. 
5.  Other similar and necessary mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the permitted uses of the zones in which they are located, provided that they are not used for human occupancy. 
C.  Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums, and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitations of the zone if the minimum depth of the front, side, and rear yards required in the zone is increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceeds the prescribed height limit. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XII. - Landscaping. 
    The intent of this section is to foster the town's attractiveness as a place in which to live and work, to raise the level of citizen expectations about the quality of the community's visual environment, to promote qualities in the environment that improve the town's economic well-being, and to promote the preservation of existing mature vegetation. 
A.  Applicability. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the town staff and the Visual Resources Review Board (VRRB) for review and approval for any new development or redevelopment where buffering is required and/or new or expanded above-ground stormwater facilities are needed. A landscape plan shall also be submitted for all new developments or redevelopments involving commercial, office, institutional, public, and semi-public projects and for new recreational areas associated with any residential development. In addition, where a new ground-mounted sign is to be erected, a landscape plan shall be submitted for the plant material to be provided around the base of the sign. 
    With the exception of ground-mounted signs, no grading permit shall be issued or, in association with subdivision development, final plat recorded until a landscape plan has been submitted to the town staff and the Visual Resources Review Board (VRRB) for review and approval. 
B.  The landscape plan. 
1.  Landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the latest requirements of the Tennessee State Board of Architectural and Engineering Examiners. Excluding plans prepared for ground-mounted signs, landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, nursery professional, horticulturalist, forester, or other person with proven training and experience in the field of landscape design. 
2.  All landscape plans shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 1" = 20' for small tracts and 1" = 50' for large tracts on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. A minimum of two complete sets of landscape plans shall be submitted at the time of application. One reduced copy of a complete set on a sheet(s) no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches shall also be submitted. Once a landscape plan has been presented to and approved by the VRRB, four copies of the approved landscape plan shall be submitted. 
3.  The landscape plan shall include a "plant schedule" which lists the number and common and botanical name(s) of all existing and proposed plant material to be counted toward fulfilling landscaping requirements. The "plant schedule" shall also list the height and caliper (where applicable) of all new plant material at the time of planting and the intended use (e.g., buffer strip, stormwater basin, shade trees, replacement trees, etc.) of all plant material. Examples of plant schedules may be obtained from the town staff. 
4.  In addition to the "plant schedule," each set of landscape plans shall also include the following information: 
a.  A drawing of the site showing all existing and proposed improvements; 
b.  The location and an identification of all visibility triangles, as defined in this ordinance; 
c.  The location and an identification of all overhead and underground utilities, including light poles, and a written indication of whether the proposed plant material will interfere with these utilities; 
d.  Where existing trees are involved, a summary of required replacement trees and trees proposed for credit, as provided for in the Tree Protection Ordinance found in the Farragut Municipal Code; 
e.  The location, species name, and size of all existing trees and shrubs to be credited toward fulfilling the requirements of this ordinance. The outline of all trees shall be drawn based on the anticipated canopy at maturity; 
f.  Where a heavily wooded area is being used to fulfill buffer strip requirements, an identification of each individual tree will not be required. The plan, however, must document the wooded area in terms of approximate density, predominant species, the general distribution of these species, and their level(s) of maturity. The plan must clearly address how such areas will contribute toward fulfilling the requirements of this ordinance; 
g.  The location and species name of all trees and shrubs to be planted. The outline of all trees shall be drawn based on the anticipated canopy at maturity; 
h.  A graphic distinction between existing trees and shrubs and plant materials to be installed; 
i.  The location and an identification of all areas to be grassed and mulched; 
j.  The location and an identification of all areas to be counted toward fulfilling the requirements for landscaping between buildings and adjacent parking lots and access ways. If separate areas are involved, the square footage for each area shall be listed; 
k.  The location and an identification of the total square footage of any improvements that would factor into the total lot coverage, as defined in Chapter 2; 
l.  The location and an identification of the top of any new or modified stormwater detention basin and an indication of the linear distance around the top of the basin; 
m.  The delineation and linear distance associated with the static water elevation around any new or modified stormwater retention basin; 
n.  An identification of any slopes on the inside or outside of a stormwater basin that will be steeper than 3:1 (run/rise); 
o.  The zoning of the subject property and all abutting properties; 
p.  The location and an identification of all required buffer strips; 
q.  The maximum finished grade where grade work is proposed within a required buffer strip; 
r.  The location, dimension, and composition of any berms, fences, walls, or other similar materials to be used to fulfill buffer strip requirements; 
s.  A table which summarizes the number of required and provided shade, stormwater basin, replacement, and buffer strip plant units; 
t.  A table which summarizes the required and provided square footages of all landscaped areas to be used to fulfill the landscaping requirements between buildings and adjacent parking lots and access ways; 
u.  Proposed slope stabilization measures for those slopes steeper than 3:1 (run/rise); and 
v.  The location and an identification of tree protective fencing, including a detail of proposed fencing material and how such fencing will be secured into the ground. 
C.  Recommended plant lists. To aid in the selection of appropriate trees and shrubs and to help promote the intent of the town's landscaping requirements, the VRRB maintains a list of recommended canopy trees, understory trees, and large shrubs. For purposes of determining those species noted on these lists, the following definitions were used: 
    Canopy tree: An evergreen or deciduous tree whose mature height is commonly expected to exceed 30 feet and is commonly expected to have a crown spread of 30 feet or more. 
    Understory tree: An evergreen or deciduous tree whose expected height at maturity rarely exceeds 30 feet. 
    Large shrubs: An evergreen or deciduous shrub whose expected height at maturity commonly exceeds eight feet. 
D.  Area landscaping requirements. 
1.  Shade trees. 
a.  Definition. For purposes of this section, a shade tree shall be considered any tree which has the following characteristics: 
(1)  The height at maturity is expected to exceed 30 feet with an expected crown spread of at least 30 feet; 
(2)  At the time of planting, such tree has at least a two-inch caliper, as measured six inches above the ground; 
(3)  The trunk can be easily maintained in a clear condition (no branches) at least five feet above adjacent ground level; and 
(4)  If newly planted, such tree is either noted as a recommended shade tree on the VRRB's "Canopy Tree" list or is approved by the VRRB as a comparable tree. 
b.  Planting requirements. One shade tree shall be planted for every 2,500 square feet of proposed improvements factoring into the total lot coverage, as defined in Chapter 2, created as part of a new development, re-development, and/or expansion. 
c.  Spacing requirements. Shade trees may be clustered or arranged in any reasonable manner. However, no new parking space shall be greater than 100 feet from the trunk of a required shade tree and shall be no more than 125 feet from at least two or more required shade trees. Distances shall be measured in a straight line from the trunk of the tree six inches above adjacent ground level to the nearest portion of the parking space. 
    Trees to be counted toward fulfilling the shade tree requirement shall be located within 50 feet of new on-premises impervious surfaces. 
    Exceptions to the above distance requirements may be granted by the VRRB where only an access way is provided in the front yard and shade trees are needed in that area in order to fulfill other landscaping requirements. An exception may also be granted by the VRRB to permit a portion of the required number of shade trees to be planted along the side(s) or rear(s) of a building where no parking spaces or access ways are located and where such areas would not otherwise require landscaping. 
d.  Street frontage shade tree requirement. For any development, regardless of the parking lot location, at least 25 percent of the total required number of shade trees shall be planted in the front yard(s) between the principle building and adjacent public rights-of-way. 
e.  Shade tree substitutions. Where, because of an obvious potential for interference with buildings, utilities, or other similar considerations, or where a more creative landscape design would be promoted, the VRRB may permit smaller understory trees to be substituted for shade trees. However, these understory trees shall either be listed on the VRRB's recommended "Understory Tree List" or approved by the VRRB as comparable trees. At the time of planting, these understory trees shall meet the following minimum size requirements: deciduous understory trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper, as measured six inches above the ground; evergreen understory trees shall be at least six feet tall; and, multi-stem understory trees shall be at least eight feet tall. In addition, all understory trees shall be located so as not to create any view obstructions and such trees shall not constitute more than 20 percent of the total required number of shade trees. 
    Due to variations in caliper for different tree species, the VRRB may also permit certain understory deciduous species to be planted at an initial caliper of 11/2 inches, provided that the overall required total of caliper inches based on two-inch caliper trees is satisfied and the design intent is clearly not compromised. 
f.  Parking lot design requirements related to shade trees. Where shade trees are planted in parking lot islands, at least 100 square feet of pervious land area shall be provided for each tree within the island. Smaller square footage requirements may be considered by the VRRB where understory trees are used to fulfill a portion of the shade tree requirements. Islands shall be designed with an appropriate width to prevent bumper damage to trees and to allow for car doors to swing open without interference to either the car or the tree. 
    Raised curbs shall be provided between all landscaped areas and areas devoted to vehicular movement. 
2.  Landscaping between buildings and parking lots. A landscaped area between all buildings and any abutting parking lots and vehicular access ways is required. The minimum landscaped area shall be determined by multiplying 21/2 feet by the building's length facing a parking lot or vehicular access way. Landscaping within parking lot islands and/or under canopies and building overhangs shall not count toward fulfilling this requirement. In multiple building complexes, the required landscaped area must be provided for each building. 
    All portions of the landscaped area required between buildings and parking lots shall contain live plant materials. At least 25 percent of this required landscaped area shall contain live plant materials other than grass, such as ground cover, shrubs, and/or understory trees in combination with mulch. The VRRB may consider commonly recognized hard forms of landscaping, such as landscape stone, only where such material would be essential to and would notably enhance the design of the project. Such areas, however, must not exceed 25 percent of the overall required landscaped area and must be combined with live plant material, such as ground cover, shrubs, and/or understory trees, so that the intent of softening the appearance of hardscape elements is not compromised. 
3.  Landscaping within parking lots. Perimeter parkways, interior parkways, terminal islands, and interior islands shall be planted with grass and/or trees, shrubs, or ground cover in combination with mulch. The VRRB may consider commonly recognized hard forms of landscaping, such as landscape stone, only where such material would be essential to and would notably enhance the design of the project. Such areas, however, must be limited in size and scope and must be combined with live plant material, such as ground cover, shrubs, and/or trees, so that the intent of softening the appearance of hardscape elements is not compromised. 
4.  Landscaping of stormwater basins. 
a.  Planting requirements. For new or enlarged stormwater detention basins, a minimum of one tree shall be planted for every 20 linear feet around the top of the basin. Shrubs may be substituted for trees along a portion of or the entire basin rim, provided all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  A minimum of one large shrub, as defined in these requirements, is planted for every five linear feet around the top of the basin along the basin section(s) where such shrubs are proposed; 
(2)  The shrub is either listed on the VRRB's recommended "Large Shrub" list or is approved by the VRRB as a comparable shrub; and 
(3)  A minimum of one tree is planted for every 40 linear feet around the top of the basin along the basin section(s) where such shrubs are proposed. 
    For new or enlarged stormwater retention basins, a minimum of one tree shall be planted for every 40 linear feet around the delineated static water elevation. The VRRB shall review the landscaping for retention basins from the perspective of ensuring that the design intent of promoting these areas as visual amenities is not compromised. 
b.  Size requirements. For stormwater basins, deciduous canopy and understory trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper, as measured six inches above the ground, at the time of planting. However, due to variations in caliper for different tree species, the VRRB may also permit certain understory deciduous species to be planted at an initial caliper of 11/2 inches, provided that the overall required total of caliper inches based on two-inch caliper trees is satisfied and the design intent is clearly not compromised. 
    Evergreen canopy and understory trees shall be at least six feet tall at the time of planting. Multi-stem trees shall be at least eight feet tall at the time of planting. At least 40 percent of all plant material shall have a flowering component. 
    Large shrubs shall be at least three feet in height at the time of planting. 
c.  Placement requirements. Planting requirements shall vary depending on whether the basin is a detention or a retention basin. In the case of stormwater detention basins, the trunk of each tree or shrub shall be located within 25 feet of the top of the basin and shall not be located below a point on the basin slope one-half the distance between the top of the slope and the bottom of the slope. 
    In the case of stormwater retention basins, the trunk of each tree shall be located within 50 feet of the delineated static water elevation. The tree shall also be planted so that the trunk is at least two feet above the delineated static water elevation or the designed retention elevation, whichever is greater. 
    In the case of all stormwater basins, plant material must be located on the property on which the basin is located. Plant material shall also be arranged so as not to interfere with the functionality of the basin or jeopardize the long-term survival of other trees and/or shrubs. The placement of plant material shall be arranged so as to provide access to the basin and promote a natural looking landscape theme. 
d.  Stabilization of stormwater basins. If the inside or outside slopes of a newly created or modified stormwater basin are steeper than a ratio of 3:1 (run/rise), such slopes shall be lined with a water permeable landscaping mat and overlaid with mountain stone, field stone, creek rock, river stone, or other comparable material. The stone/rock shall be stacked/installed in such a manner that the slope will be stabilized. 
    In the case of slopes that are no steeper than 21/2:1 (run/rise), alternate methods of stabilizing such slopes may be approved by the town staff if sufficient and credible evidence is provided that such alternate measures will provide permanent stabilization in a timely manner. The town staff may require a separate irrevocable letter of credit to ensure that such alternate measures will achieve the desired stabilization. If, within a time frame established by the town staff, such slopes have not been properly stabilized, the town staff may require such slopes to be stabilized with rock material as outlined above. 
    If the slopes of the basin are gentler than 3:1 (run/rise), such slopes shall be planted with perennial grass that will provide for a thick and continuous ground cover. 
5.  Landscaping of required buffer strips. 
a.  Buffer trees and shrubs. New trees and shrubs to be planted in required buffer strips shall either be listed on the VRRB's recommended "Canopy Tree", "Understory Tree", and "Large Shrub" lists or approved by the VRRB as comparable plant material. 
b.  Planting requirements. 
(1)  Buffer strips which are required to be a minimum of 25 feet in width shall be planted based on the following number of plant units per 100 linear feet of buffer strip: 
Required Plant Material/100 Feet C - Canopy Trees 4 U - Understory Trees 4 S - Large Shrubs 4  

Typical buffer strip of 25 feet in width. 
(2)  Buffer strips which are required to be a minimum of 35 feet in width shall be planted based on the following number of plant units per 100 linear feet of buffer strip: 
Required Plant Material/100 Feet C - Canopy Trees 5 U - Understory Trees 6 S - Large Shrubs 6  

Typical buffer strip of 35 feet in width. 
(3)  Buffer strips which are required to be a minimum of 50 feet in width shall be planted based on the following number of plant units per 100 linear feet of buffer strip: 
Required Plant Material/100 Feet C - Canopy Trees 6 U - Understory Trees 8 S - Large Shrubs 7  

Typical buffer strip of 50 feet in width. 
c.  Size and arrangement of buffer trees and shrubs. Deciduous canopy and understory trees shall have at least a two-inch caliper, as measured six inches above the ground, at the time of planting. However, due to variations in caliper for different tree species, the VRRB may also permit certain understory deciduous species to be planted at an initial caliper of 11/2 inches, provided that the overall required total of caliper inches based on two-inch caliper trees is satisfied and the design intent is clearly not compromised. Evergreen canopy and understory trees shall be at least six feet tall at the time of planting. Multi-stem trees shall be at least eight feet tall at the time of planting. And, large shrubs shall be at least three feet tall at the time of planting. 
    Plant material to be used for buffering may be arranged in any reasonable manner, provided the plant material is distributed throughout the entire buffer strip and is spaced so as to provide a natural look which will promote the long-term survival of the plant material. 
d.  Plant material substitutions. Where a design or the specific conditions associated with a site necessitate, the VRRB may permit larger plant material, such as understory trees, to be substituted for smaller plant material, such as large shrubs, on a one to one basis. In all cases, however, a mixture of plant material shall be provided so that a natural look is clearly conveyed. 
e.  Berms, fences, and walls. Where a berm, timber fence, or masonry wall is used, the required plant units may be reduced by one-half for that portion of the buffer strip fronted by the berm, fence, or wall. Where a berm, fence, or wall does not extend the full length of the buffer strip, the regular required number of plant units shall be provided along that portion of the buffer strip not fronted by the berm, fence, or wall. The required minimum height for all berms, fences, and walls shall be six feet. In addition, where masonry walls are used, such walls shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. And, where berms are used, the slopes of berms shall not exceed 3:1 (run/rise) and shall be planted with perennial grass and/or other suitable plant material. 
f.  Structures within a required buffer strip. No structures other than fences, walls, or signs shall be permitted within a required buffer strip. The planning commission, however, may consider permitting certain structures associated with utilities to be placed within a required buffer strip, provided all landscaping requirements can be met. 
g.  Existing wooded areas as buffers. Existing wooded areas may be used to fulfill the buffering requirements of this section, provided such wooded areas are located within and largely cover the full depth of the required buffer strip and are supplemented, where necessary, to equal the plant unit requirements of newly planted buffer strips. Where, because of a dense canopy of mature trees or some other unique condition, additional plant material would likely not survive, deficiencies in terms of plant material requirements may be addressed with the installation of a timber fence, architecturally compatible masonry wall, or some comparable alternative approved by the VRRB. 
    Existing individual trees and shrubs located within a buffer strip may also be substituted for required new buffer trees and shrubs, provided the existing tree or shrub is safe, healthy, meets the minimum size requirements for new plant material, and provides a significant screen. 
    Existing trees and shrubs located within 25 feet of a required buffer strip may count toward 20 percent of the required number of trees and shrubs, provided the trees and shrubs are safe, healthy, meet the minimum size requirements for new plant material, and provide a significant screen. In addition, all other landscape requirements shall be met and a note shall be added to the landscape plan which states that all trees and shrubs to be counted toward fulfilling buffering requirements and which are not located within the required buffer strip shall be treated as though they were in the buffer strip and shall be preserved. Any such trees and shrubs removed shall be replaced with new buffer trees and shrubs which meet the criteria specified in this ordinance. In addition, these new buffer trees and shrubs shall be approved by town staff and shall be located within the required buffer strip. 
h.  Grading in required buffer strips. Grading shall not be permitted within required buffer strips where wooded areas exist. In all other portions of required buffer strips, the finished grade shall not be steeper than a ratio of 4:1 (run/rise). 
6.  Landscaping of ground-mounted signs. A landscaped area around the base of all ground-mounted signs is required. The minimum landscaped area shall be determined by multiplying the longest length of the sign face by five feet. This square footage of landscaped area must then be distributed around the sign base. The number of shrubs to be planted within this area shall be based on the sign face dimensions. A minimum of four shrubs shall be required where the sign face is less than 20 square feet and a minimum of six shrubs shall be required where the sign face is greater than 20 square feet. 
    All required shrubs must be at least one foot in height at the time of planting. The remainder of the landscaped strip shall be planted with grass, ground cover, and/or seasonal flowers. 
    Any lights directed toward a ground-mounted sign shall be placed, screened, and/or designed to minimize light that does not illuminate the target area. Blinders, or some other type of protectors, may be required to be placed on the lights so as to direct the beam away from adjacent properties, rights-of-way, access easements, or driveways. All external lighting must be reviewed as part of the sign permit process and a field review shall verify compliance. 
    Curbing, railroad ties, fencing, or other similar types of vehicular barriers shall be placed around landscaped areas to protect such areas from vehicular traffic. 
7.  Exclusivity of area landscaping requirements. All area landscaping requirements shall be met independently. For example, a tree to be counted toward fulfilling the shade tree requirements shall not be counted toward fulfilling the buffer strip or detention basin tree requirements. 
E.  General landscaping provisions. 
1.  Tree preservation/removal. The preservation and/or removal of existing trees shall be in accordance with the Tree Protection Ordinance [now chapter 113] found in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
2.  Standards for crediting existing trees and shrubs. Existing trees/shrubs will only be credited as fulfilling landscaping requirements where such trees/shrubs meet the following requirements: 
a.  They are healthy, safe, and meet the size, location, and other applicable requirements of this ordinance; 
b.  They are comparable, in terms of species classification and general characteristics, to new trees and shrubs that would be permitted in the proposed location; and 
c.  They do not and are not likely to interfere with utilities, vision clearance standards, or obscure streetlights. 
3.  Mixture of trees. At a minimum, developments which would require 20 or more new trees as part of the planting requirements of any section of this ordinance (e.g., shade, detention basin, buffering) shall be provided with the following variety of trees: 
Number of Required Trees Minimum Required Variety of Trees 20-29 2 30-39 3 40-49 4 50+ 5  
Where multiple trees are required, no one species shall constitute more than 75 percent of the total number of required trees for that given area. 
4.  Prohibited plant material. Plant material which would interfere with underground or overhead utilities shall not be permitted. 
    Plant material, fences, walls, berms, and other similar objects to be planted or constructed within any visibility triangle and which would obstruct views at elevations between 21/2 feet and ten feet shall not be permitted. 
5.  Stabilization of slopes. In order to ensure the long term maintainability of slopes, slopes that are 2.5-3.0:1 shall be matted and planted with grasses that do not require mowing. Matting and grasses shall be approved by town staff. Exotic invasive species shall be prohibited. Slopes steeper than 2.5:1 are prohibited. Retaining walls or knee walls shall be constructed so as to maintain slopes gentler than 2.5:1. 
F.  Completion and maintenance assurance requirements and continued maintenance responsibilities. 
1.  Landscape completion assurance. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Completion, or the recording of a final plat, all landscaping shall be planted. If, because of the time of year involved, the required plant material shown on the town approved landscape plan cannot be installed or would likely incur significant losses, an irrevocable letter of credit or other form of surety acceptable to the town attorney may be provided to the town in order to ensure satisfactory installation at an appropriate time. The irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable surety shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. A cost estimate from a professional landscape installer may be required in order to assist the town staff in helping to establish and/or verify an appropriate surety amount. 
b.  If landscaping is not planted or, in the case of existing plant material, not preserved in accordance with the town-approved landscape plan and/or tree preservation/removal plan, the town retains the right to cash the approved form of surety submitted and, after written notification, enter the property, and complete the landscaping. 
2.  Landscape maintenance assurance. 
a.  Once all required landscaping has been planted in accordance with the town approved landscape plan, a two-year landscape maintenance irrevocable letter of credit or other form of surety acceptable to the town attorney shall be provided to the town staff. To help establish and/or verify a dollar amount, a minimum of one cost estimate based on 110 percent of the total cost of landscape replacement, including existing trees/shrubs counted toward fulfilling landscaping requirements, may be required by the town staff. 
b.  Unless a completion irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable form of surety is posted, the landscape maintenance assurance, as provided for above, shall be submitted to the town staff prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Completion, or the recording of a final plat. In cases where an irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable form of surety was issued to ensure satisfactory completion, such surety shall not be released until a landscape maintenance irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable form of surety has been provided to town staff. 
c.  Prior to the release of the landscape maintenance irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable form of surety, the town staff shall inspect the site to ensure that all required plant material, including existing trees/shrubs counted toward fulfilling landscaping requirements, are healthy and are otherwise in accordance with the town approved plans. If plant material has died and has not been replaced, the town retains the right to cash the approved form of surety submitted and, after written notification, enter the property, and replace the dead, dying, or otherwise out of compliance plant material. 
3.  Continued maintenance requirements. 
a.  Upon expiration of any applicable landscape maintenance irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable form of surety, property owners shall remain responsible for maintaining plant material in a healthy and orderly manner. Specifically, this shall mean that: 
(1)  All plant growth in landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods so that plant materials do not interfere with utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or otherwise constitute a traffic hazard; 
(2)  All landscaped areas, with the exception of those devoted to buffering, shall be maintained in a relatively weed-free condition and clear of undergrowth; 
(3)  All plant material shall be fertilized and irrigated at intervals as are necessary to promote optimum growth; and 
(4)  All trees, shrubs, ground covers, and other plant materials shall be replaced if they die or become unhealthy because of accidents, drainage problems, disease, or other causes. 
b.  In locations where manmade materials are used to satisfy a portion of the landscaping requirements of this ordinance, such materials shall be maintained in good repair including, where applicable, periodic painting or finishing. 
c.  Subsequent town issued permits, such as grading, building, and sign permits, may be withheld if, after written notification, required landscaping or landscaping to be preserved is not properly maintained. 
4.  Removal of required plant material. Where any tree or shrub which was required as part of an approved landscape plan is removed, such tree or shrub shall be replaced with an equivalent tree(s) or shrub(s) approved by town staff. 
5.  Topping of required plant material. Tree topping, as defined in this ordinance, of any tree that is used to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be prohibited. Where a tree or a portion of a tree is deemed by an arborist or comparable tree professional to be hazardous, such tree or portion thereof shall not be topped, but instead removed or pruned as recommended by a tree professional. Each required tree that is deemed hazardous and removed shall be replaced with a new tree that meets all applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
    If a tree is topped, such tree shall be removed and shall be replaced with a new tree(s) that meets all applicable requirements of this ordinance. If the topped tree is larger than two inches at DBH, replacement trees shall be planted per a one to one (1:1) ratio. For example, a topped tree that is ten inches at DBH shall be replaced with five two-inch caliper trees. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 08-09, § 2, 6-26-2008; Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, 6-25-2009) 
Sec. XIII. - Outdoor site lighting. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish outdoor lighting requirements that reduce the negative effects of lighting, but at the same time address the need for adequate lighting for safety and visibility concerns. The following requirements shall apply to all developments and/or facilities, excluding single-family and two-family dwellings and street lighting. In no case, however, shall any light shine or glare so as to create a traffic safety hazard on any adjacent properties, rights-of-way, access easements, or driveways. 
A.  Performance standards and criteria. 
1.  No lights shall shine or glare directly onto adjacent properties, rights-of-way, access easements, or driveways. For the purposes of this ordinance, glare shall be defined as any brightness within the field of vision of such a character as to cause annoyance, discomfort, interference with vision, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
2.  The maximum number of footcandles at a property line that is adjacent to non-commercial or non-office zoned land shall be 0.5 footcandles. The maximum number of footcandles at a street right-of-way or a property line that is adjacent to commercial or office zoned land shall be three footcandles. 
3.  Light poles, including any supporting base, shall not exceed 28 feet in height. The height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the pole. 
    If an existing development is expanding, existing light poles are taller than 28 feet, and new light poles are to be added as part of the expansion to the project, the planning commission may approve a light pole taller than 28 feet so as to match the existing light poles if it can be shown that the taller light pole will not create any negative effects on any adjacent properties, rights-of-way, access easements, or driveways. In no case shall new light poles exceed the height of the existing light poles or 40 feet in height, whichever is less. 
4.  All pole lights shall be directed toward the ground. No portion of the bulb or the globe/glass/plastic surrounding the bulb shall protrude from the light box/housing. The shoebox style fixture shall be used unless it can be shown that a different style would be equivalent or better than these requirements. If the pole lights are located adjacent to property zoned residential or agriculture and such land is below the pole base elevation, exterior glare shields shall be added to the pole lights. 
5.  Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance, all wall lights shall be directed toward the ground. No portion of the bulb or the globe/glass/plastic surrounding the bulb shall protrude from the light box/housing. The wedge style fixture shall be used unless it can be shown that a different style would be equivalent to or better than these requirements. The maximum mounting height on the wall for all wall lights shall be 15 feet. 
    Decorative wall-mounted lights may be used in lieu of a wedge style or comparable fixture provided they are located at public entrance ways into the building, the globe/glass/plastic are frosted/milky/white acrylic, the bulbs are frosted or yellow, the bulbs do not protrude from the globe/glass/plastic, and the maximum total wattage shall be 50 watts (standard bulb)/12 watts (compact florescent). 
6.  All ground-mounted lights, whether used to illuminate a building or a sign, shall be designed to minimize light that does not illuminate the target area. Blinders, or some other type of protectors, may be required to be placed on the lights so as to direct the beam away from adjacent properties, rights-of-way, access easements, or driveways. 
7.  Lights located under gasoline service station canopies, canopies for bank automatic teller machines, and other such similar canopies shall be recessed into the structure ceiling and shall use light shields so as to prevent glare. No portion of the bulb or the glass/plastic surrounding the bulb shall protrude from the structure ceiling unless it can be shown that a different style would be equivalent to or better than these requirements. 
8.  All electrical lines servicing all lights shall be underground. 
B.  Plan submittal and post installation requirements. 
1.  All site plans as required in Chapter 4 of the zoning ordinance shall include a lighting plan. The lighting plan shall include a scaled layout plan of the site showing the locations of lights, the height and type of proposed fixtures, and an isofootcandle diagram extending to and including all adjacent driveway, rights-of-way, easements, etc. Such plan shall be prepared and certified by a licensed electrical engineer. 
    Upon completion of the installation of the lights, a certification by a licensed electrical engineer shall be submitted to the Town of Farragut which shall verify that the lights have been installed per the approved lighting plan. 
2.  Existing facilities that are adding new lights or changing existing lights shall submit a lighting plan to the town staff for review and approval. All new lighting shall meet the criteria established in this ordinance. 
    The lighting plan shall include a scaled layout plan of the site showing the locations of lights, the height and type of proposed fixtures, and an isofootcandle diagram extending to and including all adjacent driveway, rights-of-way, easements, etc. Such plans shall be prepared and certified by a licensed electrical engineer. 
    Upon completion of the installation of the lights, a certification by a licensed electrical engineer shall be submitted to the Town of Farragut which shall verify that the lights have been installed per the approved lighting plan. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-24, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 08-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 09-11, § 1, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 12-20, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-2013; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 5-23-2013) 
Sec. XIV. - Lots or parcels. 
A.  On subdivided land where the map is of official record in the Register's Office of Knox County, Tennessee, only one dwelling structure may be erected on a lot, except as permitted as a special exception. 
B.  No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut, for a minimum of 25 feet, on a public road, as prescribed in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
C.  Where the owner of a lot consisting of one or more adjacent lots-of-record does not own sufficient land to enable the conformance to the yard or other requirements of this ordinance, an application may be submitted to the board for a variance from the spatial requirements of this ordinance. Such lot may be used as a building site, provided however, that the yard and other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is possible in the opinion of the board. 
Adjacent lots-of-record in single ownership shall be used as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size, and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subjected to the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  No recorded lot shall be divided into two or more lots unless such division results in the creation of lots each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the district in which the property is located. No reduction in the size of a recorded lot below the minimum requirements of this ordinance shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XV. - Marinas and boat docks. 
A.  Side yards shall not be less than 50 feet and this area shall be free of both primary and accessory buildings. 
B.  A buffer strip may be required by the board. 
C.  One parking space for each boat mooring plus two spaces per 100 square feet of building space. The board may require additional spaces where public boat launching ramps are provided. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XVI. - Mining and mineral extraction. 
A.  The following regulations shall apply to the mining and extraction operations of drilling, deep shaft, sand and gravel pits, quarries, surface mines, and to the removal of topsoil, sand, clay, shale, gravel or other earth for purposes other than those customarily involved in the grading of streets, highways, rights-of-way or for agricultural purposes, and such excavation necessary in preparing land for the construction of foundations, footing, cellars, or other structures below the natural grade. 
B.  No premises or buildings shall be used for any mining and extraction purpose listed in the foregoing paragraph until an application, in writing, is filed with and a conditional use permit has been approved by the board and issued by the building official after a public hearing, and such operations shall be conducted in conformity with the following conditions: 
1.  All equipment, building, and premises used for such purpose shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the performance standards set forth in this ordinance. 
2.  The excavations shall be confined to areas at least 200 feet from any property line, and further, no overburden, spoilbank or stockpile may be deposited within 100 feet of any property lines except that such excavation may, with the written consent of the owners of the adjoining property, be conducted within such limits in order to reduce the elevation thereof to conform with the existing contour or average grade of the adjoining property or in order to provide for adequate drainage. 
3.  The excavations shall be confined to areas at least 100 feet from the right-of-way of any existing or platted street, road or highway; except, that excavations may be conducted within such limits in order to reduce the elevation thereof to conform to the existing or established elevation of the adjoining or platted street, road, or highway, or in order to provide for adequate drainage. 
4.  Any building containing power driven or power producing machinery or equipment shall be at least 500 feet from all adjacent property and such building or equipment shall be at least 200 feet from the right-of-way lines of any existing or platted street, road, or highway. 
5.  All roadways on, and all vehicular entrances to and exits from the private properties on which such operations are conducted to any public roads shall be located to ensure safety, to lessen congestion and to facilitate transportation and shall be so maintained as to eliminate any nuisance from dust to neighboring properties. 
6.  A plan of operations shall be submitted for approval by the board which shall provide, in all respects, for the adequate safeguarding and protection of neighboring interests and the general public health and safety, and which shall include a satisfactory plan for the routing of trucks, materials, and equipment from the points of extraction to the permittee's processing operations, a plan and program for the restoration of the land to maximize its reuse potential and to minimize potential detrimental effects on the area by reducing, insofar as is reasonably possible, peaks and depressions and controlling erosion. Any such plan approved by the U.S. Federal Government or the State of Tennessee shall be sufficient to meet these requirements. 
7.  Whenever the permit issued by the town administrator or his designated representative has expired or whenever the operation of any gravel or sand pit quarry, or other excavation shall have been discontinued for any period exceeding 12 consecutive months, then, except as may otherwise be permitted upon application to and after hearing by the board, all plants, buildings, structures (except fences) and equipment shall be entirely removed from the property and the property shall be restored in accordance with the approved plan and program for restoring land. 
8.  If the property to be used for such excavation is within 100 feet of any residential zone or platted subdivision, it shall be enclosed along the exterior boundaries thereof by a buffer strip. 
9.  No excavation shall take place or plant operated on any property, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except whenever any reasonable or necessary repairs to equipment are required to be made. 
C.  Upon application in writing, the board may approve the issuance of an amended permit to alter the plan of operations theretofore approved or to extend the life of the permit when the duration of the mining operation was underestimated in the application for the original permit. 
D.  A cash bond equal to $500.00 per acre of land to be excavated during the permit period shall be filed with the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen to guarantee the proper restoration and reclamation of the land in accordance with the approved plan; however, proof of bond posted with the State of Tennessee in meeting requirements of the Tennessee Strip Mine Law of 1967 [repealed-see now T.C.A. § 59-8-101 et seq.) shall be acceptable in lieu of this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XVII. - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to permit the operation and maintenance of legitimate nonconforming buildings and uses. 
A.  Nonconforming buildings. 
1.  Operation. Such existing buildings and structures which, as a result of this ordinance and amendments to it, do not comply with required yard and setback areas, exceed height limitations or lack sufficient parking space or otherwise fail to comply with then applicable rules and regulations, may continue to exist and be utilized subject however to the following: 
a.  If a tract or parcel of realty has located thereon an existing nonconforming building or nonconforming structure which has remained vacant from a conforming use or has remained vacant from a nonconforming grandfathered use for more than 365 days, then in such event such building or structure may not again be occupied for any purpose unless a variance or special exception for such further occupancy be granted by the board. 
b.  In considering an application by a party for such variance or special exception said board shall require the applicant to comply with such then applicable rules and regulations as would be applicable to new construction upon the tract or parcel to the extent possible insofar as such relate to matters other than the actual building(s) or structure(s) sought to be occupied. As to the building or structure itself, the board may impose such reasonable conditions as it may determine so as to bring such building or structure as nearly as possible into conformity with, but not exceeding, current zoning rules and regulations and current building and occupancy code standards. The board may not impose conditions and requirements with respect to said building(s) or structure(s) the cost of which exceed 50 percent of the value of the building or structure. The town administrator, or his designee, shall not issue an occupancy permit for such building or structure unless an application for variance or special exception shall have been approved by the board and all conditions and requirements imposed by the board have been satisfied. 
2.  Expansion permitted as special exception. Nonconforming buildings and structures may be permitted to expand provided that the board determines that there is reasonable space for their expansion and that the expansion does not compound their condition of being nonconforming. 
3.  Repair and replacement permitted as special exception. Nonconforming buildings and structures may be reconstructed if damaged by fire, flood, wind, or accident provided it is determined by the board that the cost of reconstruction does not equal or exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost. If the board determines that the cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost, then the building or structure shall be reconstructed in conformance with the district requirements. 
4.  Violation of prior ordinance or resolutions. Any building or structure created prior to this ordinance but interpreted by the board to have been in violation of ordinances or resolutions then in effect is not to be granted any rights of a nonconforming building or structure and is subject to removal. 
B.  Nonconforming uses. 
1.  Operation. Such existing use or activity which, as a result of this ordinance and amendments to it, occurs within a district in which it is not either a permitted use or permitted as a special exception may continue. Such continuation does not include the change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. 
2.  Expansion permitted as special exception. Nonconforming uses may expand provided the board determines that there is reasonable space on the property owned and occupied by the nonconforming user prior to the zoning designation which rendered the use nonconforming. Property acquired after the zoning designation which renders the use nonconforming cannot be utilized as reasonable space. Existing commercial and industrial uses within or adjoining residential districts may expand only if they provide a buffer strip along those property lines which adjoin private residentially zoned property. Said buffer strip shall be equal in width to the corresponding yard requirement for the district in which the commercial or industrial use is located and shall conform with the definition of buffer strip contained in Chapter 2. 
3.  Repair and replacement permitted as special exception. Nonconforming uses shall not be terminated as a result of damage or destruction of the structure or building which they occupy providing the board determines that there was reasonable space on the property owned and occupied by the nonconforming use at the time of its becoming nonconforming. 
4.  Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. Any building structure or land area which is used in whole or in part as a nonconforming use which is abandoned by or vacant from that nonconforming use for a consecutive period of 365 days shall not be utilized again for a nonconforming use and may only have permitted uses or special exception uses conducted within the building and/or land area. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XVIII. - Nursing homes. 
    The following regulations shall apply to nursing homes as defined in Chapter 2: 
A.  At least a portion of the development site shall be adjacent and contiguous to the right-of-way of a major or minor arterial. Access to the public right-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of the Farragut Municipal Code, but in no instance shall the principal access be onto other than a major or minor arterial. 
B.  Landscaped buffer strips, installed in accordance with the definition provided in Chapter 2, shall be required along the side and rear property lines, regardless of the adjacent zoning classification. 
C.  A certificate of need shall have been issued by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment or other appropriate state agency and evidence of such shall be submitted prior to beginning the development review process in the Town of Farragut. 
D.  All nursing home projects must be on sewer. 
E.  Area regulations. 
1.  Maximum lot coverage: Determined by zoning district. 
2.  Maximum building height: Determined by zoning district. 
3.  Maximum number of nursing home units per acre: Determined by site and building design. 
F.  On-site incineration of any type is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 16-05, § 3, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. XIX. - Off-premises outdoor advertising. 
    The intent of this section is to regulate off-premises outdoor advertising. Nothing contained in this section shall imply approval by the Town of Farragut of the continued existence and use of such off-premises outdoor advertising (also known as billboard). 
A.  Off-premises outdoor advertising is to be the sole and exclusive use on a tract of land upon which the use is located. 
B.  Any existing off-premises outdoor advertising must be removed before a building permit will be issued for the development, expansion, remodeling, or redevelopment of a lot. 
C.  Location and setbacks. The outermost edge (cabinet) of an off-premises outdoor advertising structure shall conform to the setback requirements for principal buildings for the district in which it is located. 
    This section recognizes that there may currently be existing billboards with nonconforming setbacks; however, when a lot is subdivided, the configuration of the lot must be such that all other setbacks shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XX. - Parking and loading. 
A.  Off-street parking requirements. 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Residential off-street parking space shall consist of a parking lot, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the lot it is intended to serve. 
b.  Unless approved by the planning commission as provided for in this ordinance, any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
c.  The placement of motor vehicles for sale or the repair of vehicles on required off-street parking facilities is prohibited. This provision does not apply to the placing of a "For Sale" sign on or in not more than one licensed vehicle, boat, or other equipment at the same time located in a private residential driveway and which licensed vehicle, boat, or other equipment is owned by an occupant of said private residence. 
d.  Wherever parking is required by this ordinance, no building permit shall be issued prior to approval of entrance to affected city streets and/or state highways by the appropriate town and/or state official. 
2.  Location and setbacks. 
a.  With the exception of shared parking, as provided for in this ordinance, all off-street parking shall be located on land owned by or under long-term lease to the owner or owners of the principal use it is intended to serve. 
b.  Where the commercial parking lot abuts side lot lines of a residential district, the required buffer strip shall not be used for parking purposes. 
c.  Where parking is to be provided in the front yard of a commercial, office, or multi-family development, the parking lot shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the front property line. 
d.  Where parking is to be provided in the rear or side yard of a commercial or office development, the parking lot shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the side or rear property line. 
e.  Where parking is to be provided in the rear or side yard of a multi-family development, the parking lot shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the side or rear property line, except as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance. 
3.  Number of parking spaces required. 
    Bicycle parking. The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces required whenever any use or building is created, developed or modified requiring vehicular parking, shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
Required Bicycle Parking Land Use Category Required Motor Vehicular 
Parking (minimum) Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Per 
Motor Vehicular Spaces Non-Residential First 100 spaces 2 spaces per 25 (or fraction thereof) Next 400 spaces 2 spaces per 50 (or fraction thereof) All additional spaces 2 spaces per 100 (or fraction thereof)  
Land Use Category Residential Dwelling Type Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Residential Single or Two-Family None (0) Multi-Family Spaces provided at same ratios as non-residential uses; or 
2 external spaces per building entranceway where dedicated secure interior bicycle storage space is provided for each unit. Notes: 1) Bicycle rack designs that support two bikes per fixture count as two parking spaces. 
   2) Non-Residential multi-tenant developments are to be considered as a whole. 
   3) Bicycle parking calculated as a cumulative minimum (e.g. 85 vehicular spaces = 8 bike spaces, 
    2+2+2+2; 185 vehicular spaces = 12 bike spaces, 8 (for first 100) +2+2)  
    Bicycle parking spaces must include a securely anchored rack that supports the bicycle upright by its frame in two places, enables the frame and one or both wheels to be secured (a U-lock should be able to lock a frame component and wheel), and prevent the wheel of the bicycle from tipping over. Inverted "U", "A", Post & Loop, and similarly designed racks are strongly recommended. Such rack designs support two bikes per fixture and count as two parking spaces. Bike lockers are also permitted. Comb, toast, wave, and traditional school-yard rack types do not generally meet these requirements and should not be utilized. 
    Bicycle racks shall be provided in visible locations on a concrete or comparable pad surface designed for bicycle parking. Racks shall be conveniently located near the building entrance in an unobstructed usable manner and shall be adequately distributed within multi-tenant developments. Their placement must not impede pedestrian or accessible routes and should not cause conflicts between bicycles and pedestrians. Bicycle parking facilities shall also be sufficiently separated from motor vehicle parking areas to protect parked bicycles from damage. 
    Vehicular parking. Unless a modification, as authorized in this ordinance, is approved by the planning commission as part of the site plan review process, provisions for off-street parking in all districts at such time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, shall be based on the minimum number of off-street parking spaces provided below. For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Assisted-care living facility: 3/4 parking spaces per each housing unit. 
    Automobile and/or truck repair shop: One parking space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Automobile sales, new and/or used: Five plus one per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Banks, business offices: One per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Barbershop or beauty parlor: One per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Boarding or rooming house: One for each lodging unit. 
    Bowling alleys: Five per bowling lane. 
    Business services: One for every 50 square feet of customer service area, plus two per three employees based on the design capacity of the largest shift. 
    Carpet, rug, linoleum and floor covering sales: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Churches: One per 30 square feet of gross floor area of auditorium. 
    Coin-operated automatic automobile washing establishments: Three stack-up spaces per washer bay. Such spaces must be designed so that the spaces will not limit ingress or egress to the site. 
    Coin-operated laundry and/or dry cleaning establishments: One per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Conveyor-type automatic automobile washing establishments: One stack-up space per five feet of conveyor tunnel. Such spaces must be designed so that the spaces will not limit ingress or egress to the site. 
    Country club/private club: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Plus 11/2 per hole for golf course, two per tennis court, and one per 100 square feet of surface for swimming pools. 
    Day care center: One per employee plus one per 25 children. 
    Dry cleaning and laundry collection stations: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Furniture and major appliance establishments: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Gasoline/mini-mart station: Two per one gas pump island plus two per each employee during the major work shift or two per one gas pump island plus one per 150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
    Governmental office building: One per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Handicapped/accessible parking spaces: Where parking is provided, the number of handicapped/accessible parking spaces shall be as specified by the current adopted edition of the International Building Code, as amended by the Town of Farragut. 
    Hospital: Two per bed. 
    Hotel: One per one room or suite. 
    Independent living and care: One parking space per bedroom and one guest space per ten bedrooms. 
    Indoor soccer, inline hockey, baseball, and softball fields: 41 parking spaces per indoor play field. 
    Kennel: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Lawn and tractor sales and service establishments: One parking space per 690 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Library: One for each 400 square feet of floor area. 
    Mortuary establishments: One per 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Motels and tourist courts: One per guest bedroom. 
    Nursing homes: One per three patient beds. 
    Professional offices: One per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Residential: 
    Single and two-family dwellings : Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
    Apartments/multi-family: 13/4 spaces per dwelling unit. 
    Residential recreational facilities: 
    Pavilion: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area or a minimum of three parking spaces, whichever is greater. 
    Arbor: No parking required. 
    Decorative fountain: No parking required. 
    Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, coffee houses, or other similar establishments serving food or beverage: One per 100 square feet of gross floor space plus one per 200 square feet of discernable outdoor dining area. 
    Retail liquor store: One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Retail stores (except as otherwise specified herein): One per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Retail stores larger than 50,000 square feet: 31/2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Retail warehousing, building supplies, home improvement super centers/stores, and construction supplies establishments: One parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Schools shall be provided with parking spaces under the following schedules: 
    Elementary, junior high, and the equivalent private or parochial schools: Two per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds, plus one space for each 150 square feet of seating area, including aisles, in any auditorium. 
    Senior high schools and the equivalent private or parochial schools: Two per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds, plus one space per five students, or one space for each 150 square feet of seating area, including aisles, in any auditorium, gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium, whichever is greater. 
    Kindergartens, day schools, and the equivalent private or parochial schools: Two parking spaces per three teachers and employees normally engaged in or about the building or grounds, plus one off-street loading space per eight pupils. 
    Shopping centers: For shopping centers and other multiple use buildings larger than 75,000 gross square feet, there shall be four parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    For shopping centers and other multiple use buildings between 50,000 and 75,000 gross square feet, there shall be 41/2 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    For shopping centers and other multiple use buildings with less than 50,000 gross square feet, there shall be five parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
    Parking for detached facilities and buildings that are located on the same lot, parcel, or tract as the shopping center and/or multiple use building shall be in accordance with the regulations of parking required for such uses in these regulations. 
    Skating rinks: One parking space per 130 square feet of skating surface area. 
    Stadiums and sports arenas: One per 12 feet of benches. 
    Swimming pools (nonresidential): One per 150 square feet of water area for swimming pools developed as part of a subdivision, or one per 100 square feet of water area for public swimming pools. 
    Theaters, auditoriums and places of assembly without fixed seats: One per 100 square feet of gross area. 
4.  Increasing or reducing required parking. 
    Where an applicant requests to increase or reduce parking from the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces, such request shall be based on demonstrated parking demands that are typical for the proposed use(s) throughout a majority of the year. An applicant shall be responsible for providing such documentation and this documentation shall be current and part of the site plan submittal. 
    Where the planning commission is asked to consider an increase from the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces and the applicant can properly demonstrate a need based on the language provided in this ordinance, the planning commission shall not authorize additional parking spaces in excess of ten percent above the minimum number required unless the following measures are provided and reflected on the approved site and landscape plans: 
a.  An additional interior parking lot island is provided for every five parking spaces in excess of the minimum required; and 
b.  The additional surface parking and travel lanes associated with the parking in excess of the minimum required shall be constructed in permeable pavers or a comparable and widely recognized low impact development surface parking application. 
5.  Off-street parking lot construction and maintenance. Whenever the required off-street parking requires the building of a parking lot, and wherever a parking lot is built, such parking lot shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
a.  All areas devoted to permanent off-street parking shall be of a sealed-surface construction such as plant mix asphalt, penetrating asphalt or concrete, or permeable pavers and shall be properly maintained; 
b.  The curbs surrounding parkways, terminal islands, and interior islands shall be constructed with six-inch-high raised curbs to prevent uncontrolled access of vehicles. Where the area within a parkway or island is being used to accommodate stormwater, an alternate means of preventing uncontrolled access of vehicles into such areas may be considered. In the same manner, stormwater may be directed from the parking lot into the parkway or island without being inhibited by curbing. 
6.  Minimum site design. To provide for orderly, safe, and systematic circulation within parking areas, off-street parking areas shall meet the following general requirements: 
a.  Backing prohibited onto public street. Except for parcels of land devoted to one and two family uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress. 
Turn-around areas. Back-up or turn-around areas located at the end of dead-end parking aisles shall be a minimum of ten feet in depth. 
b.  Handicap parking. 
    Each handicapped/accessible parking space shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 19 feet in length. Such spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle, which shall be a minimum of five feet in width and extend the full length of the parking spaces they serve. For every six handicapped/accessible parking spaces, at least one shall be a van-accessible parking space. Such van-accessible parking space shall have an adjacent access aisle of eight feet in width. 
    Handicapped/accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible building entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest route to an accessible pedestrian entrance to the parking facility. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located near the accessible entrances. 
c.  Compact car parking. An applicant may design and construct up to 20 percent of their parking spaces for compact cars, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency, in accordance with the dimensions listed below in this ordinance. Compact car spaces shall be grouped together to the greatest possible extent in areas clearly designated for compact cars. Parking lots shall have a system of regulatory compliant signs beginning at the entrance that clearly indicates the location of compact car spaces. 
d.  Parking space and travel lane dimensions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the minimum parking space width shall be measured perpendicular to the center line of the parking space. For standard cars, the minimum parking space width shall be nine feet and the minimum parking space depth shall be 19 feet. For compact cars, the minimum parking space width shall be eight feet and the minimum parking space depth shall be 17 feet. Travel lanes shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Travel Lane Width 
(one way) Travel Lane Width 
(two way) Parking 
Angle Standard 
Space Compact 
Car Standard 
Car Compact 
Car 45 14 feet 12 feet 24 feet 22 feet 60 16 feet 14 feet 24 feet 22 feet 90 22 feet 19 feet 24 feet 22 feet  
e.  Shared off-site parking. Share off-site parking is encouraged, where applicable, as a means of more efficient land use. The development of a site should take into consideration any opportunities to share parking with an adjacent use. Shared off-site parking shall be considered as part of a site plan review and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than 30 percent of an applicant's required amount of off-street parking may be shared with an adjacent use; 
(2)  Off-site parking shall be within 500 feet of the property for which it is being requested; 
(3)  Off-site parking may only be provided if the off-site lot has an excess number of spaces or if the applicant can demonstrate, using the latest peak demand analyses published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other comparable source acceptable to the Planning Commission, that the on-site and off-site uses have non-competing peak demands; 
(4)  The amount of off-site parking spaces shall not be less than the amount of reduced on-site parking spaces; 
(5)  Off-site parking spaces provided by a separate private property owner shall be subject to a shared parking easement agreement that is legally binding and runs with the land and that is graphically displayed on a recorded plat. Site plan approval where off-site parking is requested shall be subject to the recorded agreement and plat; and 
(6)  Uses sharing a parking facility shall provide for safe, convenient walking between uses an parking, including safe, well-marked pedestrian crossings, signage, and adequate lighting that complies with the Town's outdoor site lighting requirements. 
f.  Addressing fractions in parking space determination. In any determination of parking requirements as set forth in this section, where the resultant figure contains a fraction, any fraction less than one-half may be dropped and any fraction one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space. 
g.  Driveways and other access ways. Driveways and other access ways shall meet the requirements of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
h.  Perimeter parkways. Perimeter parkways no less than 20 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the front property line. Perimeter parkways no less than ten feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the side and rear property lines (Illustration 5 (see Chapter 1)). If an access easement exists on a front property line, a perimeter parkway no less than 20 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the edge of the access easement. If an access easement exists on a side or rear property line, a perimeter parkway no less than ten feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the edge of the access easement. 
i.  Interior parkways. Interior parkways not less than ten feet wide shall be provided for at least every other parking aisle. The curbs shall be constructed with six-inch-high raised curbs to prevent uncontrolled access of vehicles. 
j.  Terminal islands. Terminal islands not less than five feet wide from inside of curb to inside of curb shall be provided for at both ends of parking rows and interior parkways. The curbs shall be constructed with six-inch-high raised curbs to prevent uncontrolled access of vehicles. 
k.  Interior islands. Interior islands not less than 71/2 feet wide from inside of curb to inside of curb and extending the full length of the parking space shall be provided every 15 spaces within a row. As an alternative, an interior island not less than ten feet wide from inside of curb to inside of curb and extending the full length of the parking space shall be provided every 20 spaces within a row. 
l.  Curbing around parkways or islands. Curbing around parkways or islands shall be constructed with six-inch-high raised curbs to prevent uncontrolled access of vehicles. Where the area within a parkway or island is being used to accommodate stormwater, an alternate means of preventing uncontrolled access of vehicles into such areas may be considered. In this manner, stormwater may be directed from the parking lot into the parkway or island area without being inhibited by curbing. 
B.  Off-street loading requirements. For all commercial and institutional uses, a plan for parking lot and loading areas access shall be submitted as part of the site plan application. No service loading space shall be counted for required parking space. A plan for delivery circulation through a site shall be included as part of the site plan. 
C.  On-street parking. In relation to on-street parking within the Town Center District (TCD), the primary street cross section included as Diagram TCD-1, as amended, shall be used. In other areas, where on-street parking spaces are proposed, such applications shall be considered only on joint access easements and streets classified as local on the Major Road Plan. Such on-street parking shall also be reviewed with the Town Engineer, emergency service providers, and other applicable entities to ensure that adequate space is available and no safety-related issues will be created. A minimum parking space width of eight feet and a minimum parking space depth of 23 feet shall be provided. 
D.  Turning radius requirements. When designing curb radii for a site, the default design vehicle should be the passenger vehicle. Therefore, the default corner radius should be 15 feet. Larger design vehicles should be used only where they are known to regularly make turns at the intersection, and corner radii should be designed based on the larger design vehicle traveling at crawl speed. In such case, the turning radius shall not exceed 25 feet. In all cases, consideration shall be given to minimize any pedestrian and vehicular conflicts. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-09, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 5-25-2006; Ord. No. 06-23, § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 07-39, § 3, 1-10-2008; Ord No. 08-12, § 1, 7-24-2008; Ord. No. 09-01, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-2009; Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 1-27-2011; Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-27, §§ 1, 2, 1-26-2012; Ord. No. 14-13, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 16-06, §§ 4, 5, 3-24-2016; Ord. No. 16-16, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-27, § 1, 3-9-2017; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-24-2019) 
Sec. XXI. - Right-of-way requirements. 
    Before any building permit is issued by the town administrator, it shall be determined that there is sufficient right-of-way along the existing or proposed street(s) to meet the minimum standards for the classification of the adjoining street(s) as specified in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
A.  When a building permit application indicates that a project will occur on only one side of an existing street, half of any additional right-of-way width required to meet the minimum standard specified in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations, measured from the centerline of the present right-of-way, shall be dedicated to the Town of Farragut or the State of Tennessee as appropriate. 
B.  When a building permit application indicates that a project will occur on both sides of an existing street, the entire additional right-of-way width required to meet the minimum standard specified in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations, if any, shall be dedicated to the Town of Farragut or the State of Tennessee as appropriate. 
C.  Such right-of-way dedication as may occur pursuant to subsections A and B above shall be reflected through a transfer by deed which shall be accompanied by a property line survey prepared by a surveyor licensed by [the] State of Tennessee. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XXII. - Pedestrian facilities. 
A.  Where new construction or the redevelopment of a site necessitates a site plan review by the planning commission, walking trails or sidewalks, as determined by the planning commission, shall be constructed on all abutting streets. Preference shall be given to walking trails along collector and arterial streets because the greater width better accommodates a variety of users. 
B.  Where new construction or the redevelopment of a site necessitates a site plan review by the planning commission, sidewalks or walking trails, as determined by the planning commission, shall be constructed from the parking lot to the pedestrian facility abutting the street on which the property fronts and to adjacent developments. The planning commission may also require a pedestrian facility to be constructed on an adjacent shared access easement. 
C.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all pedestrian facilities are completed or a letter of credit is provided to the town to ensure completion. 
D.  All pedestrian facilities shall be constructed per the standards established in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
E.  All pedestrian facilities shall be free and clear of obstructions. All sidewalks shall maintain a minimum clear width of five feet. With the exception of bollards placed to prevent vehicular access, all walking trails shall maintain a minimum clear width of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 09-17, § 1, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. XXIII. - Site plan regulations. 
    It is the intent of this section to foster the town's attractiveness as a place in which to live and work by facilitating orderly and cost effective development. 
A.  Applicability. To ensure compliance with all Town regulations, site plans shall be required for all new developments, modifications to existing developments, and/or redevelopments of all non single-family and two-family residential uses. Such plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission prior to any land disturbance or the issuance of a grading or building permit. 
    In order to prevent unnecessary and costly revisions, the applicant shall consult early and informally with the planning commission staff for advice and assistance. This will enable the applicant to become thoroughly familiar with all applicable regulations and other official plans or public improvements which might affect the area. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-104 [T.C.A. § 13-4-104], site plans for any public use, including, but not limited to, schools, parks, streets, public buildings, and utilities shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Site Plan Approval. The development standards in existence at the time of and applicable to the specific site plan approved shall be vested in accordance with Title 14, Chapter 7, of the Farragut Municipal Code, as amended. 
C.  Site plan requirements. 
1.  All site plans shall be prepared and certified by a licensed engineer, landscape architect, architect, and/or surveyor, as may be appropriate, and in accordance with state law regarding the practice of these professions. 
2.  The site plan preparer shall certify that the submitted site plan includes and addresses all items identified in the application checklist. 
3.  Upon completion of improvements of the approved site plan, the applicant shall submit finalized, stamped approved site plans and all associated revisions as a pdf and approved as-builts as a pdf prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. 
4.  All site plans shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 1" = 20' for small tracts and 1" = 50' for large tracts on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. A minimum of four complete sets of site plans must be submitted at time of application. One reduced copy of any 81/2 inches by 11 inches sheet shall also be submitted. 
5.  All site plans shall comply with the town adopted fire codes and shall show adequate accessibility of buildings for emergency apparatus. 
6.  All site plans shall set forth the proposed development of the total land tract and shall show the following information: 
a.  Dimensions and calls of all property lines. 
b.  North point, verbal and graphic scale, acreage of site, and location map. 
c.  A tree preservation/removal plan as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
d.  Required buffer strips. 
e.  Contour lines showing existing and proposed grades. 
f.  Stabilization details for all slopes greater than 3:1 (run/rise). Per the Town Engineer, certification from a geo-technical engineer may be required. 
g.  A stormwater management plan (which can be incorporated into the grading and drainage plan), including drainage calculations and applicable details, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
h.  An erosion and sediment control plan as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
i.  Calculations verifying maximum lot coverage. 
j.  Calculations verifying landscaping requirements between buildings and parking lots. 
k.  Locations of all existing and proposed buildings, including all building entrances. 
l.  Elevations/schematics of proposed buildings. The building materials, colors, architectural style, and building height shall be indicated. The location on the building where the address will be posted shall also be indicated. 
m.  Parking lots, including islands, interior parkways, parking lot design, interior traffic circulation, and associated dimensions. 
n.  Loading areas for truck delivery. 
o.  Driveway(s) to adjacent rights-of-way and/or joint access easements. 
p.  Distances from the proposed driveway to existing driveways and intersections on the same street and which are located within the immediate vicinity of the proposed new driveway. 
q.  Pedestrian access ways and pedestrian circulation patterns, showing the connections between building entrances, parking areas, sidewalks, walking trails, adjacent rights-of-way, etc. 
r.  Garbage dumpsters and recyclable containers including location, screening, and access. All dumpsters and recyclable containers shall be screened with a permanent structure that is architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
s.  HVAC systems including screening. 
t.  Location of all existing and proposed on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, poles, pad mounted transformers, and buried lines. 
u.  Fire hydrant locations and water line sizes. 
v.  A lighting plan. 
w.  Antennas, including location, size, height, type, and screening. 
(Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 3-28-2008; Ord. No. 12-14, §§ 1, 2, 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 15-18, § 1, 11-12-2015) 
Sec. XXIV. - Special events permit. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the permitting process and the requirements for special events held by private entities within the Town of Farragut. For a commercial or office entity, a special event may constitute a grand opening, a sidewalk sale, or some other type of activity that is unique to their establishment. For not-for-profit or non-profit entities, a special event may constitute a fund raiser of some sort such as a car wash. For residential uses, a special event may be a neighborhood function on subdivision owned open space or a yard sale or garage sale for an individual residence. For schools and freestanding churches and other places of worship, a special event may be Vacation Bible School, a holiday pageant or program, a child consignment sale, of some other type of activity that is unique to the services offered. 
A.  Commercial, Office and Not-For-Profit/Non-Profit Entities. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  Each individual permanent commercial and office entity is eligible for a special event. Within the Regional Commercial District, Retail/Warehousing (C-2-R/W) and in the case of a multi-tenant facility, only the multi-tenant facility is eligible for a special event, not each individual tenant/entity. Off-site not-for-profit and non-profit entities are eligible for a special event, but shall be sponsored by an on-site commercial or office entity. 
b.  There shall be a maximum of four special event permits per entity per year. 
c.  The duration of each special event shall not exceed ten calendar days. 
d.  No special events are permitted on vacant or vacated properties. 
e.  Sales from food trucks are permitted if part of an approved special event and shall be subject to a fee, as provided for in the adopted Town of Farragut Fee Schedule. 
f.  Activities of the special event shall not materially affect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation within the immediate vicinity of the event. The traffic generation of the special event shall not be allowed to create a hazardous condition for traffic in public rights-of-way. 
2.  Sign Requirements. 
a.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per event not to exceed 20 square feet. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
b.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
c.  Ground-mounted signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street edge of pavement as measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of the street edge of pavement. Signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all entrance driveways. 
d.  All signs shall be a minimum [of] ten millimeter corrugated plastic. Ground mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts. All signs shall be affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
e.  All signs shall have a white background. 
f.  A minimum of 15 percent of the gross sign area shall include the Shop Farragut logo and website address. The sign shall also include the business name. 
g.  Sign letters shall meet the Visual Resources Review Board's adopted legibility requirements. 
h.  No banners, streamers, balloons, flags-on-a-rope, other types of wind activated displays, or any sign prohibited in the Farragut Sign Ordinance is permitted. 
i.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the special event. 
3.  Permitting Process. A special events permit application and filing fee shall be submitted to the Town Hall prior to the commencement of the event. The applicant must have an approved permit in hand prior to holding an event. 
    All special event permit applications shall include the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. 
b.  Name, street address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and signature of individual identified who assumes the responsibility of meeting the conditions of the permit. 
c.  Applicant status (commercial, office, not-for-profit, non-profit). 
d.  Location of event. 
e.  Nature/name of event. 
f.  Date range of event. 
g.  Previous special event permits approved during the calendar year. 
h.  If applicable, a drawing of the sign which includes dimensions that show the length and width of the sign, the height and width of all letters and figures, and the overall height of the sign. 
i.  If having tent(s), sidewalk sales, or any other outdoor activities, include a site plan showing locations for such activities. A separate tent permit may be required per fire safety requirements. 
B.  Residential Uses. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  Each homeowner association and individual residence is eligible for a special event. 
b.  There shall be a maximum of two special event permits per homeowner association and residence per year. 
c.  The duration of each special event shall not exceed three calendar days. 
d.  Special events permits can only be applied for and issued to the property owner of record. 
e.  No special events are permitted on vacant or vacated properties. Open space owned by a homeowner association may be used for a special event provided the land, without modifications, can accommodate the proposed activity. 
2.  Sign Requirements. 
a.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per event not to exceed six square feet and four feet in height. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
b.  Ground-mounted signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street edge of pavement as measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of the street edge of pavement. 
c.  No banners, streamers, balloons, flags-on-a-rope, other types of wind activated displays, or any sign prohibited in the Farragut Sign Ordinance is permitted. 
d.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the special event. 
3.  Permitting Process. A special events permit application and filing fee shall be submitted to the Town Hall prior to the commencement of the event. The applicant must have an approved permit in hand prior to holding an event. 
    All special event permit applications shall include the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. If a homeowner association, name, street address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and signature of individual identified who has legal authority and who assumes the responsibility of meeting the conditions of the permit. 
b.  Location of event. 
c.  Nature/name of event. 
d.  Date range of event. 
e.  Previous special event permits approved during the calendar year. 
f.  If a homeowner association and having tent(s) or any other outdoor activities, include a site plan showing locations for such activities. 
C.  Freestanding Schools, Churches, and Other Places of Worship. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  Each freestanding school, church, and other place of worship is eligible for a special event. 
b.  There shall be a maximum of four special event permits per entity per year. 
c.  The duration of each special event shall not exceed ten calendar days. 
d.  No special events are permitted on vacant or vacated properties. 
e.  Activities of the special event shall not materially affect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation within the immediate vicinity of the event. The traffic generation of the special event shall not be allowed to create a hazardous condition for traffic in public rights-of-way. 
2.  Sign Requirements. 
a.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per event not to exceed 16 square feet. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
b.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
c.  Ground-mounted signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street edge of pavement as measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of the street edge of pavement. Signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all entrance driveways. 
d.  All signs shall be a minimum [of] ten millimeter corrugated plastic. Ground-mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts. All signs shall be affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
e.  Sign letters shall meet the Visual Resources Review Board's adopted legibility requirements. 
f.  No banners, streamers, balloons, flags-on-a-rope, other types of wind activated displays, or any sign prohibited in the Farragut Sign Ordinance is permitted. 
g.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the special event. 
3.  Permitting Process. A special events permit application and filing fee shall be submitted to the Town Hall prior to the commencement of the event. The applicant must have an approved permit in hand prior to holding an event. 
    All special event permit applications shall include the following information: 
a.  Applicant's name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. 
b.  Name, street address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and signature of individual identified who assumes the responsibility of meeting the conditions of the permit. 
c.  Location of event. 
d.  Nature/name of event. 
e.  Date range of event. 
f.  Previous special event permits approved during the calendar year. 
g.  If applicable, a drawing of the sign which includes dimensions that show the length and width of the sign, the height and width of all letters and figures, and the overall height of the sign. 
h.  If having tent(s) or any other outdoor activities, include a site plan showing locations for such activities. A separate tent permit may be required per fire safety requirements. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 11-22, § 1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 4-27-2017) 
Sec. XXV. - Swimming pools. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the development requirements specific to swimming pools. A swimming pool shall be any pool or open tank not located within a completely enclosed building and containing water to a depth at any point greater than two feet. Swimming pools and required barriers shall meet the minimum requirements established in the swimming pool code adopted in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
A.  Private residential swimming pools. Swimming pools and any part thereof, including aprons, walks, decks, and equipment rooms, shall be considered accessory structures and shall meet the setback requirements established for such in the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Recreational and commercial swimming pools. Swimming pools and any part thereof, including aprons, walks, decks, and equipment rooms, shall be considered a principal structure and shall meet the setback requirements for principal buildings and structures established in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006) 
Sec. XXVI. - Manufactured and modular building units. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide for the use of manufactured and modular building units for certain uses and to establish development criteria. 
A.  Single-family residential uses. Manufactured and modular building units, as defined in this ordinance, may be used for single-family residential dwelling units, provided the following development criteria are met: 
1.  Such dwellings are built on a permanent foundation, such as concrete block or poured concrete; 
2.  Such dwellings shall meet all applicable building, safety, and fire codes; 
3.  All wheels, tongues, and other appurtenances used for towing are removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; and 
4.  Such dwellings have the same general appearance as site-built homes, including veneers and roof coverings. 
B.  Churches and other places of worship and hospital complexes. Manufactured building units, as defined in this ordinance, may be used for temporary church or hospital complex expansions to existing facilities as permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception. Such special exception shall be renewed annually by the Board of Zoning Appeals for a total time period not to exceed four years. The site plan for such expansions shall be approved by the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the proposed expansion on the basis of the following items: 
1.  Such units shall be architecturally compatible and maintained compatible with the principal building; 
2.  Such units shall be underpinned and meet all applicable building, safety, and fire codes; 
3.  All wheels, tongues, and other appurtenances used for towing shall be removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; and 
4.  Such units shall be removed upon completion of the replacement, permanent building facilities. 
C.  Non-residential uses. Modular building units, as defined in this ordinance, may be used for permanent buildings, provided the following development criteria are met: 
1.  Such units are built on a permanent foundation, such as concrete block or poured concrete; 
2.  All appurtenances used for towing are removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; 
3.  Such units shall meet all applicable building, safety, and fire codes; 
4.  Such units have the same general appearance as a site-built building, including veneers and roof coverings. 
D.  Construction trailers. Construction trailers may be used for the purposes of a construction office during the duration of a construction project in all zoning districts. Such trailers shall not be placed on a site prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or the expiration of a building permit, whichever comes first. Such trailers shall be located outside of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord No. 08-13, § 1, 7-24-2008) 
Sec. XXVII. - Commercial and office co-ownership developments. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish requirements and criteria to provide for the sale and individual ownership of office and commercial space within buildings located within commercial and office developments. Such sale shall follow the requirements established in the Horizontal Property Act, Tennessee Code Annotated § 67-27-101 et seq. [T.C.A. § 67-27-101 et seq.], and the following regulations, unless otherwise stated, the defined terms contained in the Horizontal Property Act shall have the same meaning. 
A.  Applicability. The owner of any development that is zoned commercial or office, may give, devise, sell, transfer, assign, convey, and mortgage the fee simple interest in the apartments within or spaces appurtenant to a defined area of a building, provided the requirements and criteria of this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town of Farragut are met. 
B.  General provisions. 
1.  Provisions dealing with the land. 
a.  The land on which the development is located shall be a single parcel and shall not be subdivided or sold in pieces as part of this development option. No subdivision plat shall be required as part of this development option. Only apartments located within the building(s) shall be sold; 
b.  The land on which the development is located shall be held in joint, undivided ownership by all the co-owners of the apartments within the building(s); 
c.  The land on which the development is located shall meet all the minimum requirements established within the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Farragut; 
d.  The entire site shall meet the minimum development requirements of the Town of Farragut; and 
f.  Already developed sites shall meet the minimum development requirements of the Town of Farragut and shall be modified accordingly if necessary. 
2.  Provisions dealing with the building. 
a.  The individual apartments sold within the building(s) shall include only the space from common wall to common wall and any part of open space upon the property clearly delineated for independent use adjacent to and in connection with the use of the foregoing; 
b.  The building(s) shall meet the minimum building requirements established for condominiums in the adopted building codes; and 
c.  Existing buildings being converted to condominium ownership shall be inspected and modified if necessary to meet the minimum building requirements established for condominiums in the adopted building codes. 
3.  Provisions of co-ownership. The general common elements of the property shall be the areas that are owned in common by all the co-owners, as defined in the Horizontal Property Act, and shall include the following: 
a.  The land; 
b.  The foundation, main walls, roofs, halls, lobbies, stairways, and entrances and exits or communication ways; 
c.  The basements, flat roofs, yards, and gardens; 
d.  The premises for the lodging of janitors or persons in charge of the building; 
e.  The compartments or installations of central services, such as power, light, gas, cold and hot water, refrigeration, reservoirs, water tanks and pumps, and the like; 
f.  The elevators, garbage incinerators and, in general, all devises or installations existing for common use; and 
g.  All other elements of the building rationally of common use or necessary to its existence, upkeep and safety. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 7-27-2006; Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 3-25-2010) 
Sec. XXVIII. - Group-based outdoor sales permit. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the requirements and the permitting process for group based outdoor sales held within the Town of Farragut. The purpose of such group-based outdoor sales events is to create a gathering purpose, to add to the sense of community, and to generate foot traffic for existing permanent businesses at the location of the event. Such events are intended to be occasional, intermittent, or periodic in duration. A group-based outdoor sale is an event characterized by multiple participants gathering on common or parking areas of established retail shopping centers for the purpose of selling merchandise to the public. An example of a group-based outdoor sales event would include a seasonal farmers market. These regulations are intended to assist in the economic development of the town, but without lessening a quality of life which the citizens of Farragut strive to maintain and improve to the greatest extent possible. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Each multi-tenant facility located within the General Commercial District (C-1), General Commercial District, Three Stories (C-1-3), Regional Commercial District (C-2), or the Planned Commercial Development District (PCD) shall be eligible for group-based outdoor sales permits. Each event shall obtain a separate permit. 
2.  Participants of the group-based outdoor sales event may be off-premises or on-premises businesses. 
3.  Each group-based outdoor sales event shall be held on an intermittent, occasional, or periodic basis. 
4.  Each group-based outdoor sales permit shall be valid from date of permit approval to December 31 of that same calendar year. Such permit may be revoked if the terms of the permit are violated. A permit may be denied if a previously issued permit was revoked. 
5.  Group-based outdoor sales permits shall not be issued for vacant or vacated properties. 
6.  Sales from trucks with more than three axles are prohibited. 
7.  Activities of the group-based outdoor sales event shall not materially affect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation within the immediate vicinity of the event. The traffic generation of the group-based outdoor sales event shall not be allowed to create a hazardous condition for traffic in public rights-of-way. 
B.  Sign Requirements. 
1.  There shall be a maximum of one sign per group-based outdoor sales event not to exceed 20 square feet. For a two-sided sign, only the area of a single face shall be considered. 
2.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
3.  Ground-mounted signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street edge of pavement as measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of the street edge of pavement. Signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all entrance driveways. 
4.  All signs shall be a minimum ten millimeter corrugated plastic. Ground-mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts. All signs shall be affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
5.  All signs shall have a white background. 
6.  Sign letters shall meet the Visual Resources Review Board's adopted legibility requirements. 
7.  No banners, streamers, balloons, flags-on-a-rope, other types of wind activated displays, or any sign prohibited in the Farragut Sign Ordinance is permitted. 
8.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of each stint of the group-based outdoor sales event. For example, if an event occurs only on weekends, the sign shall only be permitted on weekends during the event. Signs may be posted 24 hours before each stint of the group-based outdoor sales event and shall be removed within 24 hours at the end of each stint of the group-based outdoor sales event. 
C.  Permitting Process. A group-based outdoor sales permit application and filing fee shall be submitted to the Town Hall prior to the commencement of the event. The applicant must have an approved permit in hand prior to holding an event. 
    All group-based outdoor sales permit applications shall include the following information: 
1.  Applicant's name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. The group outdoor sales permit can only be applied for and issued to the owner of record of the property upon which the group based outdoor sales event is to occur or his/her/its legal representative. 
2.  Name, street address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and signature of individual identified who assumes the responsibility of meeting the conditions of the permit. 
3.  Location of group-based outdoor sales event. 
4.  Nature/name of group-based outdoor sales event. 
5.  Date range of group-based outdoor sales event. Include specific dates when actual outdoor sales event will be held. 
6.  Previous group-based outdoor sales event permits approved in the past three calendar years. 
7.  If applicable, a drawing of the sign which includes dimensions that shows the length and width of the sign, the height and width of all letters and figures, and the overall height of the sign. 
8.  Include a site plan showing locations for the all outdoor sales. If having tent(s), a separate tent permit may be required per fire safety requirements. 
(Ord. No. 86-16, 4-1986; Ord. of 2-2006; Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-12-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, adopted July 12, 2012, set out provisions amending § XXIII. To preserve the existing section numbering, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as amending § XXVIII (formerly entitled "Outdoor sales permit"). 
Sec. XXIX. - Grand opening special events permit. 
    It is the intent of this section to establish the permitting process and the requirements for grand opening special events held by commercial entities within the Town of Farragut. The purpose of this grand opening special events permit is to help give new businesses additional publicity so that they have greater opportunity to showcase their business and customer service, which in turn will bring back repeat customers to their business. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Each individual permanent commercial entity located within the General Commercial District (C-1), the Regional Commercial District (C-2), or the Planned Commercial Development District (PCD) is eligible for a grand opening special events permit. 
2.  A commercial entity is eligible for one grand opening special events permit when such entity is opening for business for the first time at a particular location. 
3.  The duration of each grand opening special event shall not exceed 20 calendar days. 
B.  Sign Requirements. 
1.  In order to brand the grand opening events and to increase the recognizability of grand opening signs, all grand opening signs shall be town owned. 
2.  Upon payment of a security/damage deposit, the Town of Farragut shall provide grand opening sign(s) to the applicant. The town's grand opening signs shall be dark blue with white letters, shall be 32 square feet, and shall be a minimum ten millimeter corrugated plastic. The corner of the sign will remain blank so that users can personalize the sign with additional information. 
3.  There shall be a maximum of one grand opening sign per each street on which the lot, parcel, or tract fronts. When more than one grand opening sign is permitted, such signs shall be a minimum of 150 feet apart. 
4.  In addition to the grand opening sign, the commercial entity may also have a 20 square foot special event sign. Such special event sign shall comply with the sign requirements established in Chapter 4, Section XXIV, Special Events Permit, of this ordinance. 
5.  For ground-mounted signs, the maximum sign height shall be six feet. 
6.  Signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street edge of pavement as measured from the farthest most protrusion of the sign to the nearest point of the street edge of pavement. Signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all entrance driveways. 
7.  Ground-mounted signs shall be affixed to studded T-posts and affixed in such a manner that they do not move in the wind. 
8.  Signs shall not be posted until the commercial entity is open for business. 
9.  All signs and any associated support posts shall be removed at the end of the grand opening special event. If the permitted time frame is exceeded, the commercial entity shall lose their deposit and lose a special event permit for the calendar year. 
C.  Permitting Process. A grand opening special events permit application and filing fee and security/damage deposit shall be submitted to the Town Hall prior to the commencement of the event. The applicant must have an approved permit in hand prior to holding the event. 
    All grand opening special event permit applications shall include the following information: 
1.  Applicant's name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address. 
2.  Name, street address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, and signature of individual identified who assumes the responsibility of meeting the conditions of the permit. 
3.  Location of event. 
4.  Date range of event. 
5.  If applicable, a drawing of the separate special event sign which includes dimensions that show the length and width of the sign, the height and width of all letters and figures, and the overall height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 1-24-2013) 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this appendix is the town's subdivision regulations, as adopted in October 1987 and revised February 2006. Amendments are indicated in parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, T.C.A. § 13-4-301 et seq. 

Answers To Questions Often Asked About Subdivision Regulations 
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS OFTEN ASKED ABOUT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
1.  Are subdivision regulations fair to everyone? 
    Yes, the written regulations provide the municipal Planning Commission with uniform procedures, standards of design and construction by which to appraise equally and fairly all plats for land subdivision. 
2.  Who is affected by the regulations? 
    Every owner of land within the planning region who divides land into smaller parcels, or changes the size or shape of existing lots. 
3.  Am I affected if I resubdivide my tracts into two parcels? 
    Yes, "subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or divisions for immediate or future sale or building development, and includes resubdivision. 
4.  What's to prevent me from recording a subdivision plat without approval? 
    The county registrar of deeds is prevented by law from recording land subdivision lying within planning regions without final approval in writing. 
5.  Can I sell by an unapproved plat and then record my lots by metes and bounds? 
    No, state law makes it a misdemeanor, punishable by law, to use an unapproved subdivision plat even if metes and bounds description is used in the instrument of transfer or sale. 
6.  What happens if I sell unapproved and unrecorded lots from my subdivision? 
(a)  A state law has been broken (Section 10, Chapter 22, Public Acts of 1951). 
(b)  Some cloud would exist on the title of the lot. 
(c)  Most lending agencies will not approve or guarantee loans. 
(d)  State law requires that public bodies shall not extend sewers, water mains, lighting or other utilities in unauthorized roads. 
(e)  Where zoning is in effect a building permit to construct any building will be withheld. 
(f)  Any building or structure erected in violation may be forced to be vacated or removed. 
(g)  The legislative body of a county or municipality may stop sales by injunction or other legal action. 
7.  What improvements will I need to install in my subdivision? 
    Farragut Subdivision Regulations require the developer to grade and improve streets, install storm drainage, sewers, and water mains in accordance with adopted specifications. 
8.  Why doesn't the lot buyer instead of the developer pay for improvements? 
    The lot buyer does-at the time he purchases his property. If lots are sold before improvements are in, the community bears the expense of providing needed improvements that should have been originally planned for and installed by the developer. 
9.  Won't subdivision regulations cause expensive development and cost me a lot of money? 
    Quite the contrary! Properly planned subdivisions make the most of land with a minimum of construction and operating cost. Good design takes advantage of all capabilities of the site and results in a minimum amount of streets and utilities with a maximum number of well-arranged and easier sold lots. Good land subdivision affects the value of the land and the immediate return to the investor, while saving the developer money. 
10.  How do I go about having a subdivision approved? 
    The Farragut Planning Commission's printed set of regulations includes the procedure for having a plat approved. The Planning Commission meets at regular intervals and your plans are submitted in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered. It is suggested that you consult your Planning Commission early so as to become familiar with the official plans that might affect your area. 
11.  What if I wish to lay-out a commercial or industrial subdivision? 
    The provisions of subdivision regulations apply to all subdivision of land, including that for use of business and industry. Since space, parking and service requirements will vary greatly, it is impossible to establish standards for all types of uses. For that reason, specific requirements for lot sizes and area are set forth only for residential areas. 
12.  Where can I get technical site planning assistance? 
    The Planning Commission will help by recommending several competent subdivision designers who can contribute much to the financial success of your subdivision. Although they will not prepare final plans for you, trained planners are available at the East Tennessee Office of the Tennessee Local Planning Assistance Office in Knoxville, Tennessee. 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

A. - Purpose. 
    Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once land has been cut up into streets, lots and blocks and publicly recorded, the correction of defects is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility in that roads and streets must be maintained and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in many important respects. It is therefore to the interest of the public, the developer and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards. 
    The following subdivision regulations guiding the Planning Commission are designed to provide for the harmonious development of the planning region; to secure a coordinated layout and adequate provision for traffic and also to secure adequate provision for light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewer and other sanitary facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
B. - Authority. 
    These subdivision regulations are adopted under authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-4-301 through 13-4-309 [T.C.A. §§ 13-3-301-13-4-309]. The Planning Commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in these statutes as prerequisite to the adoption of such regulations. A certified copy of the Farragut, Tennessee Major Street and Road Plan was filed in the Office of the Register of Knox County, Tennessee on September 19, 1980, and again on September 24, 1998. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
C. - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of Farragut, Tennessee. 
    Within these regulations, the term "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and include resubdivision of the land or area subdivided. Any prospective subdivider owning land located within the Town of Farragut shall submit his subdivision plat to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. The plat is to be submitted according to the procedures outlined in Article II, which plat shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Article III. Improvements shall be installed as required by Article IV of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
D. - Illustrations. 

(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL 
    As provided for in this article, the procedure for review and approval of property subdivision consists of from one to three steps. These steps include a concept plan, which provides for a general inventory of a property proposed for subdivision and a conceptual layout of the subdivision. A preliminary plat which provides for a detailed design of the subdivision and construction plans for all proposed improvements. And, a final plat which includes required certificates and, when duly signed by the secretary of the Planning Commission, becomes the legal instrument to be recorded at the Knox County Register of Deeds. 

A. - General. 
1.  Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction of the Planning Commission wishing to divide such land into two or more lots, sites, or divisions, for the purpose, either immediate or future, of sale or building development, or wishing to resubdivide for this purpose, shall file a plan with the Planning Commission staff of such proposed subdivision for submission to the Planning Commission for approval and shall obtain such approval prior to the filing of his/her subdivision plat for record. 
    Any such plat of subdivision shall conform to the minimum standards of design for the subdivision of land as set forth in article III of these regulations and other applicable ordinances and codes and shall be presented in the manner specified in the following section of this article. No plat or subdivision of land within these areas of jurisdiction shall be filed by the county register without the approval of the Planning Commission. 
    If the plat of subdivision, however, divides the tract into no more than two lots, then the approval may be endorsed in writing on the plat by the secretary of the commission without the approval of the municipal Planning Commission, upon certification by the planning staff of the municipal Planning Commission that the subdivision complies with the regulations governing the subdivision of land and provided that no request for variance from such regulations has been requested. 
2.  The plan/plat preparer shall certify that the submitted plan/plat includes and addresses all items identified in the application checklist. 
3.  In order to prevent unnecessary and costly revisions, the subdivider shall consult early and informally with the Planning Commission staff for advice and assistance. This will enable the subdivider to become thoroughly familiar with these regulations, other applicable ordinances and codes, the major road plan, and other official plans or public improvements which might affect the area. 
4.  A subdivider may omit the filing of a concept plan and a preliminary plat if all public improvement as set forth in article IV are already installed or, because of the nature of the development deemed not necessary by the Planning Commission. 
5.  Any construction, installations, or improvements of any public improvements shall require, at a minimum, the submission of a preliminary plat as prescribed by section C of article II. 
    For multiple-phase subdivisions where the subdivider does not desire to initially file a preliminary plat for the entire property, a concept plan shall first be submitted for the entire property as provided for in section B of article II. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-06-02, § 1, 1-19-2006; Res. No. PC-06-08, § 1, 3-2-2006) 
B. - Concept plan. 
    Since it is the function and duty of the Planning Commission to provide for the harmonious development of the municipality, which includes the coordination of streets, sidewalks, open spaces, recreation, and other elements which will create conditions favorable to the health, safety, convenience and prosperity, a concept plan is herein required for any subdivision which is to be developed in multiple phases. 
    The purpose of the concept plan is to provide for a review of the significant physical features of a property proposed for subdivision so that an early general agreement on the comprehensive development of the entire property, particularly transportation and open space networks and their connections with adjoining properties and the immediate area, can be secured and the final design can take into consideration and capitalize on those features identified. 
    The plan should be prepared by a professional team that includes a Tennessee licensed engineer, a Tennessee registered land surveyor, a Tennessee licensed landscape architect, and/or a physical planner with a comparable background and experience. At a minimum, the plan shall require the seal of at least one of the above listed professionals. 
1.  The application submittal process for a concept plan is as follows: 
    The subdivider shall file with the staff of the Planning Commission four full-sized copies and one 81/2-inch by 11-inch reduced copy of a concept plan of the proposed subdivision for review. At the time of such filing, the staff shall issue a receipt acknowledging said filing if requested. Neither the filing of the concept plan with the staff nor the receipt issued by the staff shall constitute "submission" of the concept plan for consideration by the Planning Commission. When the Planning Commission itself determines that it has sufficient information upon which to base its decision with respect to a particular matter, the matter will, at that time, be deemed "submitted" to the Planning Commission. 
    The concept plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100' on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  A title block which specifically indicates that this plan contains "conceptual information" which is "not intended for construction purposes." 
b.  An address and a tax map and parcel reference associated with the property. 
c.  The acreage of the property. 
d.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner(s) of record and developer(s). Where a subdivision involves multiple parcels, the owner(s) of record for each parcel shall be indicated. 
e.  The name, address, and telephone number of all professionals involved and, at a minimum, the professional seal of the principal individual responsible for preparing the plan. 
f.  Preparation and revision dates, approximate north point, location map, verbal and graphic scales, and legend. 
g.  A boundary survey, including existing rights-of-way and easements. 
h.  The location of existing improvements. 
i.  The present zoning classification on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining land. If the property to be subdivided is bisected by different zones, the zoning lines shall be identified on the plan. 
j.  A plan sheet that specifically identifies and outlines all significant physical features of the property based on readily available information and a field (on the ground) site inspection of the subject property. Such features shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, site topography, mapped wetlands and floodplains, water courses and lands that are generally inundated (e.g. ponds, lakes, perennial streams, etc.), springs, intermittent streams, slopes that exceed 15 percent, soils subject to slumping, surface depressions or sinkholes, and historic, archaeological, or cultural sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and/or on state, county, or town inventories. Such information shall be prepared and/or verified by professionals with expertise in the different features of the property being inventoried. The names and contact information for all said professionals shall be listed on the plan sheet. 
k.  The general location and approximate square footage and acreage of all tree covered areas. 
l.  The approximate density, predominant species, general distribution of predominant species, and predominant level of maturity of trees within all tree covered areas. Maturity levels shall be classified as follows: "Young stands" would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are less than six inches at DBH; "Intermediate stands" would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are six to ten inches at DBH; and "Mature stands" would be used where the predominant tree cover is from trees that are greater than ten inches at DBH. 
m.  Mean sea level contours based on readily available information, such as geographic information systems, aerial photographs, or previous surveys, drawn at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, except when specifically not required by the Planning Commission. 
n.  The proposed location and approximate grade of streets, sidewalks, and shared-use paths (also referred to in the Subdivision Regulations as bike paths) and how these proposed transportation elements will be connected both internally and to adjacent properties. Existing transportation elements which abut or stub into the property proposed for subdivision shall be shown. 
The plan sheet(s) shall also address how the street(s) within the subdivision will be designed (e.g. avoiding long straight street sections and providing more street connectivity and street intersections) to slow vehicular traffic in order to make the street(s) and abutting pedestrian and shared-use facilities more inviting to all forms of people movement. Such information shall be coordinated with other design aspects of the subdivision, such as anticipated utility locations, topography and soil conditions, and access points. Proposed pedestrian and shared-use facilities shall be included on this plan sheet. 
The subdivision shall provide for both vehicular and pedestrian/shared-use path connectivity to abutting properties. The subdivision shall have more than one public street vehicular access into and out of the development. The planning commission may waive this requirement in cases where 1) All of the surrounding properties are existing house lots of less than one acre; or 2) Where very significant topographic issues, not created by the design of the subdivision, would effectively prohibit connections; or 3) The subdivision will have 30 or less dwelling units. 
o.  The distance from the proposed subdivision entrance to existing access points on the same street and which are located within the immediate vicinity of the proposed subdivision entrance. 
p.  The location of existing utilities and an indication of those utilities which are readily available and are expected to serve the site. 
q.  The location and an identification of any areas to be designated as open space and how these open spaces will be connected both internally and to adjacent properties. Existing open spaces which abut the property proposed for subdivision shall be shown. 
r.  The proposed lot line. If the property is being developed as attached single-family dwellings, indicate the maximum building footprint for each dwelling. 
s.  A plan sheet that addresses streetscaping. This plan sheet shall specifically address how the subdivision will provide visual enhancements along and/or within the street corridors throughout the development. The plan shall include at least one visual enhancement element that is prominent and that creates an identifiable character for the subdivision. This may include, but not necessarily be limited to, a street tree planting plan, bioswales, rain gardens, landscaped boulevards and landscaped islands, village greens, rear accessed dwelling units, etc. 
t.  From the above information, a preliminary engineering certification is to be submitted that the conceptual layout of proposed transportation elements, building lots, and open space can be designed to comply with the town's applicable ordinances, particularly those ordinances governing the design of subdivision streets and stormwater management facilities. 
2.  Within 30 days after submission of the concept plan, the Planning Commission will review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to modifications as a basis for the preparation of a preliminary plat. If a plan is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications will be indicated. 
3.  If the Planning Commission fails to act on the concept plan within 30 days after being submitted to the Planning Commission, the concept plan will be deemed approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand. The applicant may waive this 30-day requirement and consent to the extension of such period. 
4.  The approval of the concept plan by the Planning Commission will not constitute acceptance of the preliminary plat. 
5.  One copy of the concept plan will be returned to the applicant with any notations at the time of approval or disapproval and the specific changes, if any, required. 
6.  The approval of the concept plan shall lapse unless an initial preliminary plat based thereon has been submitted within one year from the date of such approval or unless an extension is applied for and granted by the Planning Commission. Extensions shall be based on current requirements and shall be valid for a maximum of one year each. 
    Once a preliminary plat has been approved and construction is underway, an application shall be made every two years by the subdivider for the approved concept plan to be reviewed by the Planning Commission for those areas which have not received approval for a preliminary plat. By doing so, this will help ensure that the approved concept plan is kept up to date with any additional known information, applicable ordinances, and/or with conditions or circumstances which may change over an extended period of time. 
7.  In an attached single-family dwelling development, once construction is complete and a final plat has been recorded in at least one phase of the development, if the developer or another property owner makes application to amend any building footprints on the concept plan, all property owners shall be notified of such changes. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-07-07, § 1, 4-5-2007; Res. No. PC-11-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-20-2011; Res. PC-18-03 , § 1, 1-18-2018) 
C. - Preliminary plat. 
    The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide for a detailed design of construction plans for proposed public improvements. 
1.  The application submittal process for a preliminary plat is as follows: 
    The subdivider shall file with the staff of the Planning Commission four full-sized copies and one 81/2-inch by 11-inch reduced copy of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision for review. At the time of such filing, the staff shall issue a receipt acknowledging said filing if requested. Neither the filing of the preliminary plat with the staff nor the receipt issued by the staff shall constitute "submission" of the preliminary plat for consideration by the Planning Commission. When the Planning Commission itself determines that it has sufficient information upon which to base its decision with respect to a particular matter, the matter will at that time be deemed "submitted" to the Planning Commission. 
2.  Where a concept plan has been approved, the preliminary plat shall conform substantially to the concept plan. Where a preliminary plat does not conform substantially with the approved concept plan, a revised concept plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in coordination with the preliminary plat. This revised concept plan shall only be binding for those portions of the subdivision which have not received approval for a preliminary plat. 
    Where a subdivider chooses to omit the filing of a concept plan, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat for the entire property. 
3.  The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100' on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches in size. 
4.  All federal and state permits required for construction of the development must be filed with the preliminary plat. This shall include a notice that the applicant has submitted a copy of the preliminary plat to the United States Post Office, Local Customer Relations Coordinator. 
5.  If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined in article III, section F, the limit of the base flood elevation (the 500-year floodway and flood fringe boundary[ies]) shall be platted along with minimum floor elevations. 
6.  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design as set forth in article III and the general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in article IV and shall give the following information insofar as possible: 
a.  The proposed subdivision name and location; the name and address of the owner or owners; and the name, address, telephone number, and seal of the designer(s) of the plat who shall be a Tennessee-licensed engineer, a Tennessee-licensed landscape architect, and/or a Tennessee-registered land surveyor. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for approving subdivision names or designating names appropriate to subdivision development. 
b.  Preparation and revision dates, approximate north point, location map, verbal and graphic scales, and legend. 
c.  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, access easements, buildings, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, any public utility easements, the names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions, and the present zoning classification on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining land. If the property to be subdivided is bisected by different zones, the zoning lines shall be identified on the plat. The setback requirements shall be noted in a plat note. 
    In addition, where a concept plan has not been submitted and approved, a plan sheet that specifically identifies and outlines all significant physical features of the property based on readily available information and a field (on the ground) site inspection of the subject property shall be required. Such features shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, site topography, mapped wetlands and floodplains, water courses and lands that are generally inundated (e.g. ponds, lakes, perennial streams, etc.), springs, intermittent streams, slopes that exceed 15 percent, soils subject to slumping, surface depressions or sinkholes, and historic, archaeological, or cultural sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and/or on state, county, or town inventories. Such information shall be prepared and/or verified by professionals with expertise in the different features of the property being inventoried. The names and contact information for all said professionals shall be listed on the plan sheet. 
d.  A construction plan which shall include: 
(1)  A complete drainage plan showing all improvements, including, but not limited to, all proposed streets, sidewalks, bikepaths/walkways, easements, detention areas, storm sewers, swales, ditches, reserved areas, and lot drainage; 
(2)  Complete drainage calculations, pursuant to the Farragut Municipal Code chapter entitled "Stormwater Ordinance"; 
(3)  A plan and profile of all streets showing typical cross sections of proposed roadways, sidewalks, swales, and ditches as well as both existing and proposed finished grades of paved rights-of-way and special ditches, and details of all structures which are part of the physical improvements in the subdivision; and 
(4)  All proposed drainage structures including manholes, catch basins, junction boxes, pipe storm drains, ditches, swales, and other drainage facilities including headwalls shall be shown on the plan and profile. 
e.  Complete erosion control plan with details. 
f.  A tree preservation/removal plan, as provided for in the Farragut Municipal Code. 
g.  The distance and bearing of one of the corners of the boundary of the subdivision to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads and to an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part, and a key map showing relation of subdivision to well-known streets, railroads, and water courses in all directions to a distance of at least one-half mile. Suggested scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. 
h.  Plans for proposed utility layouts (sanitary and storm sewers, water, electricity, gas, and conduit for future telecommunication network fiber) showing feasible connections to the existing or any proposed utility systems. 
i.  Plans for street lighting, if applicable. 
j.  The locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, other open spaces, reservations, lot lines, building lines, and utilities. This shall include the ten percent open space reservation. 
k.  If the property is being developed as attached single-family dwellings, include the locations and dimension of the maximum building footprints for each dwelling. 
l.  Contours drawn at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, except when specifically not required by the Planning Commission. In areas where grade changes are proposed in association with the development of the property, contour lines shall be shown based on actual field collected and verified elevations. 
m.  Dominant ground cover. 
n.  The acreage of the land to be subdivided and the acreage of each lot being created. 
o.  Actual closure computations for the boundary traverses. Such boundary traverses shall close to an accuracy of at least one foot in 10,000. 
p.  Plans for street name signs and other traffic signs. 
q.  The proposed location and approximate grade of streets, sidewalks, and shared-use paths (also referred to in the Subdivision Regulations as bike paths) and how these proposed transportation elements will be connected both internally and to adjacent properties. Existing transportation elements which abut or stub into the property proposed for subdivision shall be shown. 
The plan sheet(s) shall also address how the street(s) within the subdivision will be designed (e.g. avoiding long straight street sections and providing more street connectivity and street intersections) to slow vehicular traffic in order to make the street(s) and abutting pedestrian and shared-use facilities more inviting to all forms of people movement. Such information shall be coordinated with other design aspects of the subdivision, such as anticipated utility locations, topography and soil conditions, and access points. Proposed pedestrian and shared-use facilities shall be included on this plan sheet. 
The subdivision shall provide for both vehicular and pedestrian/shared-use path connectivity to abutting properties. The subdivision shall have more than one public street vehicular access into and out of the development. The planning commission may waive this requirement in cases where 1) All of the surrounding properties are existing house lots of less than one acre; or 2) Where very significant topographic issues, not created by the design of the subdivision, would effectively prohibit connections; or 3) The subdivision will have 30 or less dwelling units. 
r.  A plan sheet that addresses streetscaping. This plan sheet shall specifically address how the subdivision will provide visual enhancements along and/or within the street corridors throughout the development. The plan shall include at least one visual enhancement element that is prominent and that creates an identifiable character for the subdivision. This may include, but not necessarily be limited to, a street tree planting plan, bioswales, rain gardens, landscaped boulevards and landscaped islands, village greens, rear accessed dwelling units, etc. 
7.  Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission will review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to modifications as a basis for the preparation of the final plat. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications will be indicated. 
8.  If the Planning Commission fails to act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after being submitted to the Planning Commission, the preliminary plat will be deemed approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand. The applicant may waive this 30-day requirement and consent to the extension of such period. 
9.  The approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission will not constitute acceptance of the final plat and will not be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
10.  One copy of the preliminary plat will be returned to the applicant with any notations at the time of approval or disapproval and the specific changes, if any, required. 
11.  The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse if a grading permit is not obtained within six months of approval by the planning commission. The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted within two years from the date of such approval or an extension is applied for and granted by the planning commission. Extensions shall be based on current requirements and shall be valid for a maximum of one year. 
12.  If the subdivision is going to be developed and filed as final plats in portions of the preliminary plat, the portions must be expressed as phases and be designated and titled in roman numerals. 
13.  In an attached single-family dwelling development, once construction is complete and a final plat has been recorded in at least one phase of the development, if the developer or another property owner makes application to amend any building footprints on the preliminary plat, all property owners shall be notified of such changes. 
14.  The engineering and/or surveying firm representing the applicant in a preliminary plat filing shall certify that the proposed plat conforms to all applicable standards required in the Farragut Subdivision Regulations relative to either preliminary and/or final approval. 
15.  When the applicant desires a departure or variance from the subdivision regulations, a specific request must be made in writing for such variance and an explanation provided to support the request. 
16.  Once preliminary plat approval has been granted and the site preparation completed on those roads or sections of roads proposed for final approval, the applicant's engineering representative shall certify in writing to the town that the "as-built" profiles conform to the approved preliminary design. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-07-02, §§ 1, 2, 3-15-2007; Res. No. PC-07-07, § 2, 4-5-2007; Res. No. PC-08-05, § 1, 2-21-2008; Res. No. PC-08-07, § 1, 3-20-2008; Res. No. PC-09-08, § 1, 5-21-2009; Res. No. PC-11-01, §§ 3, 4, 1-20-2011; Res. PC-18-03 , § 2, 1-18-2018) 
D. - Final plat. 
    The purpose of the final plat is to incorporate information conveyed in the preliminary plat, where applicable, to establish the legal document which, when duly signed by the secretary of the Planning Commission, becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
1.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he/she proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
    If a proposed subdivision fronts upon an existing public road and conforms to the Farragut Driveways and Other Access Ways Ordinance, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement for preliminary approval, and permit the developer to file only a final plat. Plats of correction, resubdivision plats, minor subdivision plats, and plats modifying the maximum building footprint in attached single-family dwelling developments shall be considered final plats. If the developer or another property owner makes application to modify any platted building footprints in an attached single-family dwelling development, all property owners shall be notified of such changes. If such modifications are a material change to the platted building footprint, more than 75 percent of all property owners shall agree to the change. 
2.  Any application for action which will change the boundaries of existing lots, create one or more new or additional lots, combine or reduce by one or more the number of existing lots, realign boundary lines between contiguous lots, and/or change easements on existing lots shall be signed by each owner of an interest in the legal title to the property affected. 
3.  The application submittal process for a final plat is as follows: 
    The subdivider shall file with the staff of the Planning Commission four full-sized copies and one 81/2-inch by 11-inch reduced copy of the final plat of the proposed subdivision for review. At the time of such filing, the staff shall issue a receipt acknowledging said filing if requested. Neither the filing of the final plat with the staff nor the receipt issued by the staff shall constitute "submission" of the final plat for consideration by the Planning Commission. When the Planning Commission itself determines that it has sufficient information upon which to base its decision with respect to a particular matter, the matter will at that time be deemed "submitted" to the Planning Commission. 
4.  Within 30 days after submission of the final plat, the Planning Commission will review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to modifications. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications will be indicated. 
5.  If the Planning Commission fails to act on the final plat within 30 days after being submitted at a Planning Commission meeting in accordance with sections A and D of this article, the final plat will be deemed approved and the secretary of the Planning Commission shall sign the final plat on demand. The applicant may waive this 30-day requirement and consent to the extension of such period. 
6.  Approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission shall not constitute the acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or other public way or ground. 
7.  When the plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and signed by the secretary of the Planning Commission, the applicant shall record the final plat in the office of the county register. The applicant shall then return ten blue line copies and two Mylar copies of the final plat with the recording information on each copy to the staff. Staff shall distribute these copies to all utility departments and other designated agencies. 
    Should a plat which has been approved by the Planning Commission not be recorded within six months of approval, such approval shall expire. 
8.  The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100' on sheets 18 inches by 24 inches in size. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with the streets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. 
9.  The final plat shall provide the following information: 
a.  A title block which includes the map and parcel information, the subdivision name and phase number, the purpose of the plat, and the preparation date and revision dates. 
b.  The name and address of the owner or owners, and the name, address, telephone number, and seal of the person responsible for preparing the plat who shall be a Tennessee registered land surveyor. 
c.  The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property. 
d.  Date, approximate north point, location map, verbal and graphic scales, and legend. 
e.  Lots numbered in numerical order and the acreage or square footage of each lot. 
f.  Street names. 
g.  The present zoning classification. If the property to be subdivided is bisected by different zones, the zoning lines shall be identified on the plat. The setback requirements shall be noted in a plat note. 
h.  Areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use or common open space, such as community open space to be held in common ownership by a property owner's organization, with plat notes stating their purpose, any limitations, and responsibility for future maintenance. 
i.  The lines of all streets, roads, alley lines, lot lines, reservations, and easements. 
j.  If the property is being developed as attached single-family dwellings, include the locations and dimension of the maximum building footprints for each dwelling. 
k.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line, reservation, and easement, whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent distance for the center line of curves. If the exact location of an underground utility is not known, best available information for such utility easement location shall be included. 
l.  All dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
m.  All boundary traverses, including lot and block traverses, shall close to an accuracy of at least one foot in 10,000. 
n.  All subdivisions having three or fewer lots that have a property line or iron pin located within 500 feet of an approved control point in the town's survey control system shall be tied to that system. All subdivisions having more than three lots and fewer than 16 lots and have a property line or iron pin located within 3,500 feet of an approved control point in the town's survey control system shall be tied to that system. All subdivisions containing 16 or more lots shall be tied to the system. If a final plat is a single phase of a larger preliminary plat, the subdivision shall be tied to the system. 
    Coordinates of the approved control point shall be shown on the plat and all bearings shown on the plat shall be oriented to the survey control system. The tie line shall show the bearing and distance between the approved control point and the subdivision. 
o.  If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as defined in article III, section F, the limit of the base flood elevation (the 500-year floodway and flood fringe boundary[ies]) shall be platted minimum floor elevations. 
p.  Applicable certifications found in the following section of this article. Obtaining these signatures shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
10.  The following certificates as applicable shall be presented and signed with the final plat. 
a.  Certification showing that the applicant is the land owner; that he/she offers for dedication public ways, rights-of-way, and any site for public use; and that he/she consents to the subdivision plan. 
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION 
    I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon as evidenced in Book Number _____, page _____, County Registers Office, and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other open space to public or private use as noted. 
_____
Date _____
Owner  
b.  In such cases where the community open space is to be held in common by residents of the subdivision through a property owner's association, the applicant shall submit documents and other assurances satisfactory to the Planning Commission and town attorney establishing a means of common ownership and management of such open space. The documents establishing such means shall be recorded along with the approved final plat. 
    Certification by the owner showing dedication of common areas in accordance with procedures established in these regulations. 
CERTIFICATION OF COMMON AREAS DEDICATION 
    As owner, in recording this plat I have designated certain areas of land shown hereon as common areas intended for use by the homeowners within ___________ (Name of Subdivision) for recreation and related activities. The above described areas are not dedicated for use by the general public, but are dedicated to the common use of the homeowners within the named subdivision. 
    "Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions," applicable to the above named subdivision, is hereby incorporated and made a part of this plat. 
_____
Date _____
Owner  
c.  Certification by registered surveyor or professional engineer as to accuracy of survey, plat, and placement of iron pins. 
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY ACCURACY 
    I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey to the accuracy required by the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission and that the monuments have been placed as shown hereon, to the specification of the Subdivision Regulations. This is a Category I Land Survey and the ratio of precision of the unadjusted survey is equal to or greater than 1:10,000. 
_____
Date _____
Registered Surveyor No.: _____  
d.  Certification by appropriate governmental or quasi-governmental official(s) that sewage disposal and/or water system(s) has/have been installed. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF WATER SYSTEM 
    I hereby certify that it has been certified to us that the water system(s) outlined or indicated on the final subdivision plat entitled ___________ have been installed in accordance with current local and state government requirements. 
_____
Date _____
Name, Title, and Agency 
of Authorized Approving Agent  
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF SEWER SYSTEM 
    I hereby certify that it has been certified to us that the sewer systems outlined or indicated on the final subdivision plat entitled ___________ have been installed in accordance with current local and state government requirements. 
_____
Date _____
Name, Title, and Agency 
of Authorized Approving Agent  
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
[OF] PRIVATE SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
    General approval is hereby granted for lots proposed hereon as being suitable for subsurface sewage disposal with the listed and/or attached restrictions. 
    Before the initiation of construction, the location of the house or other structures and plans for the subsurface sewage disposal system shall be approved by the local health authority. 
_____
Date _____
Local Authority  
e.  Certification by appropriate governmental or quasi-governmental official(s) that electric, gas, and/or telephone services are available. 
CERTIFICATE OF ELECTRIC, GAS, AND TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY 
    This is to certify that every lot within this subdivision has available to it a source for the service identified by signature(s) below which service source is adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such lot as to such service within such subdivision. 
_____
Date _____
GAS - Name, Title, and Agency of Authorized 
Approving Agent _____
Date _____
ELECTRIC - Name, Title, and Agency of Authorized 
Approving Agent _____
Date _____
TELEPHONE - Name, Title, and Agency of Authorized 
Approving Agent  
f.  Certification by the town engineer that the streets and other required improvements have been completed or a bond in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required improvements has been posted. 
CERTIFICATE FOR STREET APPROVAL 
    I certify that streets, sidewalks, and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to Town specifications, or that a security bond in the amount of $_____ has been posted with the Planning Commission to assure completion of all required improvements in case of default. Streets are public streets maintained at public expense. 
_____
Date _____
Town Engineer License No.:  _____  
g.  Certification of approval of street names for Knox County E-911 purposes by the Knox County Street Addressing Department. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF STREET NAMES 
    This is to certify that the subdivision shown hereon has been reviewed for compliance with the Knox County Uniform Street Naming & Addressing System Ordinance, and the road names are hereby approved for recording. 
_____
Knox County Addressing Division _____
Date  
h.  Certification of release of easements. In the case of a plat which changes a specific easement, only applicable agencies will be required to sign. 
RELEASE OF EASEMENT(S) CERTIFICATION 
    Except as noted or shown on this plat, the following parties hereby consent to the release of all rights that may have accrued for their use and benefit (1) in the utility, drainage, and construction easements along the original lot lines or (2) in prior easements identified hereon which are being eliminated by this plat, on the condition that new utility, drainage, and construction easements are provided along the new property lines or as facilities are otherwise installed or shown hereon. The above provisions notwithstanding prior easements or prior utility placements are not released unless specifically noted hereon. Existing easements or placements shown hereon will not be adversely affected by the development as herein proposed. 
_____
Signature (sewer) _____
Date _____
Signature (water) _____
Date _____
Signature (electricity) _____
Date _____
Signature (gas) _____
Date _____
Signature (telephone) _____
Date _____
Signature (cable) _____
Date _____
Signature (Town of Farragut) _____
Date  
i.  Certification of approval to be signed by the secretary of the Planning Commission. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING 
    I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown here has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Farragut, Tennessee, with the exception of such variances, if any, as are noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission and that it has been approved for recording in the Office of the County Register of Deeds. 
_____
Date _____
Secretary, Planning Commission  
j.  Certification by appropriate governmental or quasi-governmental official(s) on resubdivision plats that water and sewer services are available. 
CERTIFICATE OF WATER AND SEWER AVAILABILITY 
    I hereby certify that every lot within this resubdivision has available to it water and sewer service that is adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such lots. 
_____
Date _____
Name, Title, and Agency of Authorized Approving Agent  
k.  Certification by the town engineer that some form of security in a sufficient amount to assure completion of streets, utilities, and all other required improvements has been posted. This certification shall be used in lieu of the "Certificate for Street Approval," "Certificate of Approval of Water System," "Certificate of Approval of Sewer System," and "Certificate of Electric, Gas, and Telephone Availability." 
CERTIFICATION OF BONDING FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
    I certify that a security bond in the amount of $_____ has been posted with the Planning Commission to assure the completion of streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other required improvements. 
_____
Date _____
Town Engineer License No.:  _____  
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-06-25, § 1, 7-20-2006; Res. No. PC-07-02, § 3, 3-15-2007; Res. No. PC-07-07, § 3, 4-5-2007; Res. No. PC-11-01, §§ 5, 6, 1-20-2011) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

A. - Streets. 
1.  Conformity to the Major Road Plan and the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan - 2010, as amended. The town's adopted Major Road Plan, as amended, shall serve as the official document regarding street classifications involving the town's existing and future transportation system. For those streets that are classified on the Major Road Plan as collector or arterial, an abutting subdivision that fronts along such street(s) shall be improved along such frontage as part of the subdivision process to provide for a context appropriate (i.e. appropriate in relation to the proposed development, the street in question, and its physical surroundings) complete streets cross section consistent with the Complete Streets Cross Section exhibits in the Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan - 2010, as amended. Where a subdivision fronts on only one side of a collector or arterial street, only the side of such street abutting the subdivision shall be required to be improved to the complete streets cross section. 
2.  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets within proposed projects at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. 
3.  Access streets to subdivision boundaries. Sufficient access streets to adjoining properties shall be provided in subdivisions to permit harmonious development of the area. 
4.  Right-of-way and pavement widths. The minimum width of any right-of-way is measured from lot line to lot line. The width of pavement is measured from pavement edge to pavement edge, thus excluding the gutter and curb section. Standards for both right-of-way and lane width for applications falling within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall not be less than as follows: 
a.  Major arterial streets. 
Right-of-way 100 feet Curb and gutter (TDOT 6-30) 30 inches Lane width 12 feet*  
    Reduction in lane width may be permitted due to existing conditions based on the recommendation of the town engineer. 
    Such streets are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and are located on the major road plan. Turn lanes may be required by the Planning Commission if warranted by the traffic impact study. 
b.  Minor arterial streets. 
Right-of-way 80 feet Curb and gutter (TDOT 6-30) 30 inches Lane width 12 feet*  
    Reduction in lane width may be permitted due to existing conditions based on the recommendation of the town engineer. 
    Such streets are used primarily to handle moderate to high traffic speeds and volumes. These streets should be reflected on the major road plan. Turn lanes may be required by the Planning Commission if warranted by the traffic impact study. 
    The Planning Commission may, at the recommendation of the town engineer, elect to allow three twelve-foot lanes distributed as follows: 
Right-of-way 70 feet Curb and gutter (TDOT 6-30) 30 inches Lane width 12 feet*  
c.  Major collector streets. 
Right-of-way 60 feet Curb and gutter (TDOT 6-30) 30 inches Lane width 12 feet  
    Such streets are used primarily to carry slow to moderate traffic speeds and volumes. These streets act primarily as the transition between local traffic and through traffic. These streets should be reflected on the major road plan. Turn lanes may be required by the Planning Commission if warranted by the traffic impact study. 
d.  Local collector streets. 
Right-of-way 50 feet Curb, extruded 8 inches Lane width 13 feet  
    Such streets are used primarily to carry slow traffic speeds and volumes. The streets primarily serve the internal movements of residential areas to major collector status streets. These streets should be reflected on the major road plan. Turn lanes may be required by the Planning Commission if warranted by the traffic impact. 
e.  Local streets. 
Right-of-way 50 feet Curb, extruded 8 inches Curb, rolled 24 inches(multi- 
family residen- 
tial) Lane width 13 feet  
    Such streets are used primarily to serve individual residential lots. Typically, both speeds and volumes are very slow. In such cases where local streets intersect with arterial or major collector streets, the Planning Commission may require a twelve-foot center lane if warranted by the traffic impact study. 
f.  Frontage roads. 
Right-of-way 40 feet Pavement width 30 feet Curb, extruded 8 inches  
    Typically, access or frontage roads are used in commercial and/or multi-family developments to facilitate internal traffic movements or reduce the overall number of curb cuts to higher status streets. Such frontage roads shall conform to the radius requirements, at points of ingress and egress, on arterial streets. 
NOTE: In extreme cases where topography or other physical conditions make a street of the required minimum width impractical, the Planning Commission may modify the above referenced requirements. However, through proposed neighborhood or local business areas, the street right-of-way width may be increased 11 feet on each side to provide for movement of vehicles into and out of necessary off-street parking areas without interference to traffic. 
5.  Additional right-of-way widths on existing streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements. 
a.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on only one side of the existing street, one-half of the required width of the right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
6.  Restriction of access. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street the Planning Commission may require frontage roads, or such other treatment as may be required to afford separation to through and local traffic. Subdivisions abutting or containing an existing or proposed major street shall comply with the provisions of the driveways and other access ways ordinance. 
a.  Paved acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required along any arterial or collector street or highway at the determination of the commission. 
b.  Frontage roads (roads which parallel the public streets giving access and which extend along the entire frontage of particular properties) shall be constructed in order to provide safe and efficient vehicular movement between specified access points. All frontage roads shall be dedicated as public streets and shall be maintained by the public. 
c.  Frontage roads shall be constructed in conformance with standards of the subdivision regulations. Dedicated right-of-way for frontage roads shall be ten feet greater than the width of the proposed frontage road. 
d.  Items a through c of this subparagraph shall apply in their entirety to commercial property having road frontage greater than the distance between access points specified in the access ordinance. For commercial property of lesser road frontage, the commission may waive or reduce requirements (i.e., require dedicated right-of-way for frontage roads rather than constructed frontage roads). 
7.  Street grades. Grades on streets shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Arterial streets and highways: Seven percent. 
b.  Collector streets: Ten percent. 
c.  Residential streets: 12 percent. 
d.  Dead end and loop streets: 14 percent. 
8.  Horizontal curves. When a deflection angle of more than six degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the following radii shall be used: 
a.  Arterial streets and highways: 600 feet. 
b.  Collector streets: 400 feet. 
c.  Residential streets: 150 feet. 
d.  Dead end and loop streets: 100 feet. 
9.  Vertical curves. Vertical curves shall conform to AASHTO stopping sight distance for the following design speeds: 
a.  Arterial streets and highways: 50 mph. 
b.  Collector streets: 40 mph. 
c.  Residential streets: 35 mph. 
d.  Dead end and loop streets: 30 mph. 
10.  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. 
    To permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius, property line radii at all street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet. Where the angle of the street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the Planning Commission may require a greater radius. 
    All intersections of two or more streets shall have a grade that does not exceed four percent of the following distance from the intersection: 
a.  Arterial streets and highways: 150 feet. 
b.  Collector streets: 100 feet. 
c.  Residential streets: 60 feet. 
d.  Dead end and loop street: 50 feet. 
11.  Tangents. Reverse curves in road right-of-way shall be corrected by tangents of not less than the following: 
a.  Arterial streets and highways: 150 feet. 
b.  Collector streets: 100 feet. 
c.  Residential streets: 75 feet. 
d.  Dead end and loop streets: 50 feet. 
12.  Street jogs. Street jogs of less than 200 feet shall not be allowed, except where both intersecting streets are cul-de-sacs in which case the street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. 
13.  Dead end streets and cul-de-sacs. 
a.  The use of dead end streets and cul-de-sacs shall be discouraged in favor of loop and other connected street designs. The planning commission may permit the limited use of dead end streets and cul-de-sacs to enhance the protection of desirable natural features inherent to the property or as a temporary stub out to abutting properties for future connections. When permitted, dead end streets and cul-de-sacs shall be no more than 500 feet in length unless necessitated by topography and approved as a variance by the planning commission. 
Dead end streets and cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least 74 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 94 feet. 
b.  Where dead end streets are stubbed out to abutting properties, such streets shall be provided with a temporary turn-around as recommended by the Town Engineer and Fire Marshal. 
14.  Private streets and reserve strips. Private streets are prohibited. All streets shall be constructed per these regulations and shall be dedicated to the town. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the town under conditions approved by the Planning Commission. 
15.  Drainage. All streets and roads must be so designed as to provide for the discharge of surface water from the right-of-way of all streets and roads by grading and drainage as shall be approved by the planning commission. Where possible, water should be discharged by surface drainage into open ditches or swales. Such open ditches and swales shall be platted on the final plat as water quality drainage easements. In order to reduce run off, such open ditches and swales shall be kept in a vegetated state. No piping or the use of any type of hard surface (rip rap, river rock, etc.) shall be permitted in a water quality drainage easement. Where water cannot be adequately discharged by surface drainage, the planning commission shall require the installation of a storm sewer. 
    A street shall not carry water for a distance greater than 400 feet from the beginning point of the runoff. Discharge from the street shall be handled by means of a catch basin-The number, size, type, and location to be determined by the town engineer. Pipes under the right-of-way, for purposes of discharging water into the pipe, must be no less than 18 inches in diameter. Drainage shall not discharge into a sinkhole as a means of an outlet for runoff, unless the depression has a storage capacity for a 100-year flood without flooding any adjacent properties, or creating overflow runoff that will adversely affect existing drainage courses. 
16.  Street Names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and names shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place or court. The Planning Commission shall have the power to approve or disapprove street names and if necessary determine and assign names to public rights-of-way on submitted plats. 
17.  Street Elevations. The Planning Commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets for determination of proximity to floodplains. No street shall be approved for construction within a floodplain if it is proposed to be constructed more than one foot below the elevation of the 500-year flood as defined in Article III, Section E. Fill may be used for streets provided such fill does not increase upstream flood heights. Drainage openings shall be so designed as to not restrict the flow of floodwaters or increase upstream flood heights. 
18.  Connectivity. The subdivision shall provide for both vehicular and pedestrian/shared-use path connectivity to abutting properties. The subdivision shall have more than one public street vehicular access into and out of the development. The planning commission may waive this requirement in cases where 1) All of the surrounding properties are existing house lots of less than one acre; or 2) Where very significant topographic issues, not created by the design of the subdivision, would effectively prohibit connections; or 3) The subdivision will have 30 or less dwelling units. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-09-08, § 2, 5-21-2009; Res. PC-17-01 , § 1, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 1-18-2018; Res. No. PC 18-04, § 2, 1-18-2018) 
B. - Sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities. 
1.  Provisions for Sidewalks and Other Pedestrian Facilities. Sidewalks shall be constructed on all collector and arterial streets which a subdivision fronts. Sidewalks shall be constructed on at least one side of all new spine streets. Spine streets are those main streets located within a subdivision which connect less traveled streets located deeper within the subdivision to the subdivision entrance(s). 
    Additional sidewalks along non-spine streets internal to a subdivision may also be required by the Planning Commission. In making their determination, the Planning Commission shall consider the anticipated use of such facilities, the frequency of pedestrian/vehicular conflicts, and whether such additional facilities would significantly contribute to the town's existing or projected pedestrian network. 
    In lieu of sidewalks being constructed along spine and/or non-spine streets, the Planning Commission may approve an alternate comprehensive pedestrian system for the subdivision. Such system shall include sidewalks, bicycle/pedestrian paths, greenways, or any combination thereof. 
2.  Placement of sidewalks and other pedestrian and shared-use facilities. A grassed or landscaped strip of at least six feet in width shall be provided between the back of the street curb and the edge of the approved pedestrian or shared-use facility on all streets classified as a local or collector on the Major Road Plan. A grassed or landscaped strip of at least eight feet in width shall be provided between the back of the street curb and the edge of the approved pedestrian or shared-use facility on all streets classified as an arterial street on the Major Road Plan. When there is a deceleration or taper lane and the right-of-way is not of adequate width to accommodate a six-foot or eight-foot grassed or landscaped strip between the back of the street curb and the edge of the pedestrian or shared-use facility, the grass or landscaped strip may be reduced in width to a minimum of three feet for that abutting section, if approved by the planning commission. 
    If the Town of Farragut is constructing a new pedestrian or shared-use facility on an existing street next to an existing residential subdivision, a grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided or, if possible, additional width in excess of the minimum required shall be added to the pedestrian or shared-use facility to provide the greatest pedestrian and vehicular separation possible in the given context. 
3.  Widths of Sidewalks and Other Pedestrian Facilities. Sidewalks fronting on access easements or public streets shall be a minimum of five feet in width. Bicycle/pedestrian paths and greenways shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. 
4.  Completion and Bond Requirements for Sidewalks and Other Pedestrian Facilities. Prior to the recording of a final plat, all pedestrian facilities shall be completed or a bond provided to ensure completion. A two-year maintenance bond for all pedestrian facilities shall also be provided before the final plat is recorded or the completion bond is released. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-07-02, § 4, 3-15-2007; Res. No. PC-09-05, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-2009; Res. No. PC-11-09, § 1, 6-16-2011; Res. No. PC 18-04, § 2, 1-18-2018) 
C. - Blocks. 
1.  Length. Blocks shall not be less than 400 nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the Planning Commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. In blocks over 800 feet in length the Planning Commission may require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet in width to extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary. 
2.  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the Planning Commission will approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
D. - Lots. 
1.  Arrangement. Unless reductions are provided for otherwise as part of these regulations or in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, each buildable lot shall front for a minimum of 75 feet upon a public street. Where dead end streets or cul-de-sacs are permitted by the planning commission, each buildable lot shall have at least 60 feet of frontage on the dead end street or cul-de-sac. 
2.  Minimum Size. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be such as the Planning Commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where public water and sanitary sewer systems are reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such systems and provide a connection or connections to each lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewerage disposal may be used, when meeting all applicable public health regulations of the Knox County Health Department. 
a.  Residential lots served by public water and sanitary sewer systems shall not be less than 15,000 square feet in area, except for areas specifically noted in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  Residential lots not served by sanitary sewer systems shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than one acre or 43,560 square feet in area, or as specified in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, however, greater area may be required by the Planning Commission as indicated by data from percolation tests and investigations or as determined by the county health officer and soil scientist. 
3.  Building Setback Lines and Yard Requirements. All such requirements shall conform to the Farragut Zoning Ordinance. In the event a developer desires to place on record a minimum building line, which is over and above that required by the zoning classification, such building setback line must be denoted on each of the lots platted, as well as appear in the plat notes. 
    In the case of electric transmission lines where easements are not definitely established, there shall be a minimum building setback line from the center of the transmission line as follows: 
Voltage of Line Minimum Depth Building Setback Line 
From Center of Transmission Line 46 KV 38 feet 69 KV 50 feet 161 KV and over 75 feet  
4.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger to permit the additional side yard requirements of the zoning ordinance or building setback lines as outlined above. 
5.  [Subdivisions, ten lots or more]. In subdivisions of ten or more lots, all lots approved by the Planning Commission, by either final approval or bonding, shall be identified in the following manner: A minimum stake size of one inch by four inches, nominal, with a minimum above-ground length dimension of 24 inches; to be painted white with red or black numbers (the numbers to be not less than two inches tall); and to be located on the front right-of-way, between lots. These stakes must be erected at the time of final approval and shall be maintained by the developer for a period of two years. After the initial two-year maintenance period, a stake must be erected by the applicant at the time a building permit is issued and remain through the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC 18-04, § 2, 1-18-2018) 
E. - Community open space, public use and service areas. 
1.  Community Open Space. 
a.  Purpose and Intent. These regulations are established to provide for the minimum community open space needs of the residents of new subdivisions; to assure adequate maintenance of community open space and facilities, to provide for attractive and stable residential areas, to protect and enhance the natural resources and environment; and to implement the Recreation Element and other applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Farragut. 
b.  Applicability. The subsection shall apply to all developments subject to subdivision plat approval pursuant to these regulations. 
c.  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Community Open Space means that open space that is designed and improved for recreational use and/or open space that is designed or preserved to enhance the visual, mental and physical enjoyment of the residents of a subdivision and/or the community at large. Community open space may be located on or off the subdivision site, but shall be reasonable accessible to all dwelling units therein. Land designated as community open space shall be suitable for active and/or passive recreational use and may include playgrounds, tot lots, lakes, greenbelts, bikeways, recreational club houses, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities. Community open space shall not be deemed to include required minimum yards or other areas as required by these or other applicable regulations of the town, including, but not limited to, permanent structures used for the storage or direction of water courses. 
d.  Required Community Open Space. 
(1)  Amount. At least ten percent of the gross area of a subdivision, or one developed lot, whichever is greater, shall be devoted to community open space. In instances in which one developed lot would constitute more than 15 percent of the gross area of the subdivision, the Planning Commission may make a determination that an area of less than one developed lot may serve to meet the intent of these regulations. In those cases where the gross area of a subdivision is less than 50,000 square feet, community open space may not be required. 
    The Planning Commission may waive the required amount of community open space in situations of minor revisions to existing, recorded subdivided lots or in cases where the proposed subdivision is completing the in-fill process and has no contiguous area available for additional incremental subdivision. 
(a)  Dedication to the Town. The required community open space may be offered for dedication to the Town. 
(b)  Common Ownership by a Property Owner's Organization. The required community open space may be held in common ownership by a property owner's organization under the following circumstances: 
    In instances where developers chose to make significant recreational improvements to the required community open space, or post a performance bond, in accordance with Article IV, Section B, of these regulations, and has established a property owner's association in a form acceptable to the Planning Commission and Town Attorney. 
(c)  Dedication and Common Ownership. In certain instances, the Planning Commission may determine that the community open space needs of the subdivision are best served by portions of such space being dedicated to the town with other portions of such space being held in common ownership by a property owner's organization. 
(2)  Composition of Community Open Space. The primary intent of requiring community open space to be included as part of a subdivision is to provide adequate space suitable for development as neighborhood park areas. The Planning Commission recognizes, however, that a subdivision may have unique features in terms of age composition, family size, or unique environmental, topographical and historic properties. Therefore, the Planning Commission may determine that all or a portion of the required community open space may be devoted to areas other than those expressly suited for development as active park areas. The following is a guide to be used by the Planning Commission in determining the extent to which areas other than those suitable for development as neighborhood park areas may be used in fulfilling the community open space requirement: 
(a)  Greenbelt Areas. For such areas to be considered in fulfilling the requirement for community open space, the areas must be at least 25 feet in width. While no specifications are outlined for the composition in terms of existing or installed plant materials, it must be clearly demonstrated that the goals of preserving community open space that will enhance visual, mental and physical enjoyment will be achieved. The area devoted to greenbelt areas shall be counted on a square foot for square foot basis toward fulfilling the community open space requirement. 
(b)  Pedestrian and Bike Paths. 
1)  Where appropriate, pedestrian and bike paths shall be constructed within the public right-of-way as road improvements are made. 
2)  Developers shall be advised when a path included in the town's overall plan is located within a proposed development. The development shall incorporate the paths into the plan and such paths shall be constructed as part of the development. 
3)  Pedestrian and bike paths shall be located on public land or land designated as community open space. If a path is located on land designated as community open space, a minimum of a 20-foot wide greenway/walking trail easement shall be reserved in favor of the Town and reserved for public use. The Town shall accept maintenance and liability of use of this easement. 
When a path is located between two residential lots and acts as a connector, the path may be located on private property and designated as a greenway/walking trail easement. Such easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall be reserved as in the same manner as when a path is located on land designated as community open space. 
4)  The pedestrian and bike paths shall be constructed in a manner as follows: 
a)  The sub-grade shall be compacted to similar standards as roadway construction (i.e., 95 percent standard proctor compaction); 
b)  The surface shall consist of two inches of surface course asphalt, compacted, and six inches or more of crushed stone (303-01 mineral aggregate Type A, Grading D) compacted to 95 percent standard proctor compaction (i.e., pug mix); 
c)  The surface course shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and centered on the crushed stone which shall be a minimum of 11 feet wide; 
d)  Drainage shall be handled similarly to that of the construction of roadways (including swales and cross drains) with general conditions and solutions applicable. If a drain pipe is located under a path, the pipe shall be extended beyond the path with a resulting slope of not greater than 4:1 to tie into the pipe; 
e)  The gradient of a trail shall generally follow existing contours with a maximum grade of 20 percent; 
f)  Standard bike path markers and signs shall be utilized, at the correct height, as well as utilizing the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  Landscaped Entrances. When more than 2,000 square feet are devoted to identifying the entrance to a subdivision, the area shall be counted on a square foot per square foot basis toward fulfilling the community open space requirement. The maximum amount that can be counted toward fulfilling the community open space requirement shall be 4,000 square feet for each entrance. 
(d)  Boulevards and Other Street Improvements. Street improvements, such as boulevards, medians and related additional rights-of-way greater than that required by these or other regulations may be used toward fulfilling the community open space requirement. The area in excess of that required may be counted toward the required community open space on a square foot for square foot basis. 
(e)  Other Areas. In some instances, subdivisions may contain certain unique natural or man-made features that may allow such areas to qualify as meeting the intent of these regulations in providing community open space. In such cases, the Planning Commission may consider such areas as counting toward fulfilling the community open space requirement and may determine the square footage which may be counted toward fulfilling this requirement. 
(3)  Plans. Community open space areas proposed for dedication to the Town and/or to be held in common ownership by a property owner's organization shall be indicated on the concept plan and the preliminary and final plat. When the area is proposed to be held in common ownership by a property owner's organization, plans and documents relating to its improvement and maintenance shall be included for review as set out in these regulations. 
e.  General Requirements. All required community open space shall either be dedicated to the Town and/or be held in common ownership by a property owner's organization. 
(1)  Dedication to Town. Dedication of community open space shall be in a form acceptable to the Planning Commission and Town Attorney prior to final plat approval and presentation to the Town for acceptance. 
(2)  Common Ownership by a Property Owner's Organization. Prior to approval of the final subdivision plat, the developer shall provide documents and other assurances satisfactory to the Planning Commission and Town Attorney, establishing a means of common ownership and management for all common open space and recreational improvements. 
2.  Easements for Drainage, Utilities, and Construction. Drainage and utility easements shall be provided on each side, front and rear lot lines or where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. The interior lot lines shall have no less than five feet designations on each side of a lot, and front and rear easements shall be no less than ten feet on each side of the lot line. Ten-foot construction easements shall be provided along public rights-of-way to adequately provide for any construction to be performed within these easements, and shall be for the sole use of the town and its agents. Additionally, the front, rear, and side easements shall be designed to adequately provide utilities and drainage for all lots in the proposed subdivision. Where drainage is proposed to cross any lot at any point other than the side or corner of the lot, the plat shall indicate and size of the easement and the size of the pipe necessary to carry the proposed runoff. Each cul-de-sac shall have provisions for a 20-foot utility easement extending therefrom to prevent deadend water mains. Easements of the same dimensions or greater width may be required by the Planning Commission along the lines of or across lots where necessary for the extension of existing utilities, planned utilities, or for the movement of town equipment. 
a.  Coordinating Work Within Drainage, Utility, and Construction Easements. Drainage, utility, and construction easements are designed to provide access for such public improvements as street widening, stormwater drainage, the installation of sidewalks and water, sewer, telephone and cable lines, etc. These improvements may involve public and private utilities, including cable companies, the Town of Farragut, and state and federal agencies. Coordination between each of these interests is imperative. 
    To ensure coordination, the Town of Farragut maintains complete control of the drainage, utility, and construction easements. Therefore, whether a public/private utility, or state or federal agency, any entity performing work within these drainage and utility easements must submit plans to the Town of Farragut and receive written approval of those plans prior to undertaking such work. Work may not begin without first obtaining Town of Farragut approval. Construction easements, to be located along public rights-of-way, are for the sole use of the Town of Farragut and its agents. 
3.  Easements for Signs. To provide for the maximum safety of persons using sidewalks and streets, and to ensure that a sign will not obstruct the vision at elevations between 21/2 feet and seven feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway, a sign structure may not be placed within a "visibility triangle," created by measuring 25 feet from the rights-of-way intersection along each right-of-way (see Illustration 1). Additionally, to prohibit the location of signs within visibility triangles, in new subdivisions where a ground-mounted sign(s) is proposed, all subdivision plats must denote a platted sign easement outside of the visibility triangle. 
    Once a subdivision plat with sign easement has been approved and recorded, all new subdivision signs must be located within the platted sign easement. 
4.  Storm Sewers. Where in the opinion of the Planning Commission the flow of water cannot be accommodated with surface drainage, storm sewers will be required. The Planning Commission shall determine, on the basis of the watershed and the probable runoff, the size of the storm sewers. In ascertaining the size of the storm sewers, the Planning Commission may call upon its technical staff or any public or private agency to assist it in its determinations. 
5.  Water Supply and Sewerage Connection. Where a development or a subdivision lies within the current service area of the community's water utility district, but immediate connection is not possible, the subdivider shall extend the appropriate size water and sewer lines to the development or subdivision. 
    All lots less than one acre shall be serviced by both public water and sewer facilities, and lots one acre and larger shall be served by water and a sewerage disposal system approved in writing by the county Health Department. 
6.  Community Assets. In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, water courses, historical sites, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
F. - Suitability of the land. 
1.  Public Agency Approval. The Planning Commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the land proposed. 
2.  Land Subject to Flooding. 
a.  Land located within any floodway shall not be platted for residential occupancy or other building site and shall not be raised by fill or disturbed in any way. Other lands subject to flood may be platted for use only if they meet the minimum requirements of the Flood Plain District (FPD) requirements and the Farragut Municipal Flood Damage Prevention Regulations of the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, and the Aquatic Buffer Ordinance of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
b.  The following standards shall be applied in reviewing subdivision proposals involving land within a Flood Plain District (FPD) and/or other land subject to flood: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(4)  Base flood elevation and minimum floor elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals; 
(5)  The floodway, the special flood hazard areas, and the other flood areas shall be shown on all subdivision proposals; 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall meet the minimum requirements of the Flood Plain District (FPD) requirements and the Farragut Municipal Flood Damage Prevention Regulations of the Farragut Zoning Ordinance, and the Aquatic Buffer Ordinance of the Farragut Municipal Code. 
c.  Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
d.  Land subject to flood: Areas along streams, watercourses, and low areas identified as being special flood hazards areas or other flood areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or land lying within 35 feet of the top of the bank of the channel (measured horizontally) along streams and drainage channels that do not have established base flood elevations or floodways or are unmapped. 
e.  For the purposes of these standards, floodways and land subject to flood shall be identified as follows: 
(1)  The floodway areas and the land subject to flood identified on the Knox County, Tennessee, and Incorporated Areas Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers(s) 47093C-0238F, 0239F, 0352F, 0356F, and 0360F dated May 2, 2007, and Community Panel Numbers(s) 47093C-0241G, 0242G, 0243G, 0244G, and 0357G, Dated August 5, 2013, along with all supporting technical data. 
(2)  The areas along unmapped streams and watercourses. The planning commission or other designated public officials shall determine, on the basis of the watershed area and the probable runoff for the 500-year flood, the waterway area required to safely pass floodflows, or how close a structure may be located to the stream, and minimum floor elevations. All structures shall be located at least 35 feet from the top of the bank of the channel (measured horizontally), unless it is demonstrated to the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission that a lesser distance but not less than 25 feet is adequate based on engineering information. 
3.  Methods Formulated for Determination of Unsuitable Land. The Planning Commission shall not approve land unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formation or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the future residents unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by the subdivision of such land. Such land within any plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or uses which shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-08-04, § 1, 2-21-2008; Res. No. PC-13-07, § 1, 6-20-2013) 
G. - Large tracts or parcels. 
    When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
H. - Variances. 
    Variances may be granted under the following conditions: 
1.  Where the subdivider can show that strict adherence to these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship; or 
2.  Where the Planning Commission decides that there are topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site and a departure from these regulations will not destroy their intent. 
3.  Any variance granted shall be by two-thirds vote of the membership of the Planning Commission, and shall be stated in writing in the minutes of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
I. - Mobile home park. 
    Proposed mobile home park development shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for preliminary and final approval. All mobile home parks shall conform to the regulations set forth in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance concerning mobile home park development. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
J. - Zoning and other regulations. 
    No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance will be approved unless it conforms with the zoning ordinance. 
    Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations, the highest standard shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL 
    A perfectly prepared and recorded subdivision or plat means little to a prospective lot buyer until he/she can see actual physical transformation of raw acreage into lots suitable for building purposes and human habitation. Improvements by the subdivider spare the community from a potential tax liability. 
    No approval for a preliminary and/or a final plat shall be considered by the Planning Commission for an applicant who, prior to approval of the preliminary and/or final plat, is in violation of any other pertinent sections of the Farragut Municipal Code, ordinances, or Farragut Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Farragut in any development within the town. 
    The following tangible improvements are required before final plat approval in order to assure the physical reality of a subdivision which approval and recordation will establish legally. 

A. - Required improvements. 
    Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve streets and alleys, to install curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sewers, storm water sewerage and structures and water mains, and all other appropriate utilities and to provide community open space, in accordance with specifications established in this and other sections of these regulations. All such improvements are subject to inspections. Where specifications adopted by the town or other local or state agencies conflict with standards and specifications set forth in these regulations, the higher set of standards or specifications, as determined by the planning commission, shall govern. 
1.  Monuments. 
a.  Concrete four inches in diameter or square three feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with finished pavement grade. 
b.  All other corners and points shall be marked with iron pipe or solid steel rod not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
2.  Grading. All streets and roads shall be graded or filled horizontally to the full width of their rights-of-way by the subdivider or developer. Cross slopes outside of curbs shall not exceed four percent. In locations where sidewalks are present, such cross slopes shall not exceed two percent. Due to special topographical conditions, deviation from the above will be allowed only with special approval of the planning commission. 
a.  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be cleared of all trees, stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. 
b.  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of four feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth to 12 inches below subgrade. 
c.  Fill and Backfill. All fill material shall be free of waste or organic matter and shall not contain any rock exceeding six inches in maximum dimension. Borrow material to be used for soil fill shall be tested for maximum dry density and optimum moisture content (standard Proctor ASTM D698) prior to commencement of fill placement activities. Fill soils shall be compacted in thin layers of no more than six inches by sheepsfoot compactor or other equipment approved by the Town Engineer. All fill soils shall be compacted to a minimum of 98 percent standard Proctor maximum dry density and within plus or minus three percent of optimum moisture content. Six density tests should be performed no less than every 10,000 square feet of area per six-inch lift (approximately one test every 50 feet). 
    All testing described above shall be performed by a qualified, independent testing firm, pre-approved by the town engineer. The owner or contractor shall be responsible for coordinating the testing and must notify the Farragut subdivision inspector as to the scheduled testing time. A Farragut subdivision inspector shall be present for all testing. Additionally, soils in fill areas prior to fill placement, as well as soils at finished subgrade elevation in both cut and fill areas shall be proofrolled. All subgrade areas must be proofrolled immediately prior to placement of base stone. Proofrolling shall be performed under the observation of the Farragut subdivision inspector, as well as a representative from the owner's or contractor's testing firm. The top eight inches of the entire subgrade (cuts and fills) shall be compacted to the above fill requirements. 
3.  Storm Drainage. An adequate drainage system, including storm sewers, necessary swales, open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water pursuant to the Farragut Municipal Code chapter entitled "Stormwater Ordinance." 
    Specific plans for accommodating storm runoff, including, but not limited to, the following information: The locations, sizes, and profiles of storm drains, culverts, open ditches, and swales; data and computations used in making the determinations of the sizes of storm drains, culverts, open ditches, and swales; and other pertinent information necessary in dealing with storm drainage shall be submitted to the planning commission. Drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent flooding or ponding on building sites. Sites for septic tanks and drainfields shall be indicated on the drainage plans. 
    Where possible, water should be discharged by surface drainage into open swales or ditches. Such swales and ditches shall be platted on the final plat as water quality drainage easements. In order to reduce run off, such swales shall be kept in a vegetated state. No piping or the use of any type of hard surface (rip rap, river rock, etc.) shall be permitted in a water quality drainage easement. Where water cannot be adequately discharged by surface drainage, the planning commission shall require the installation of a storm sewer. 
    All other stormwater facilities shall be in platted drainage easements. Drainage easements with pipes buried up to eight feet deep shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, drainage easements with pipes buried eight feet to 12 feet deep shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide, and drainage easements with pipes buried more than 12 feet deep shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide. 
4.  Roadway Improvements. 
a.  Mineral Aggregate Base (crushed stone). All crushed stone shall meet the Tennessee Department of Highways specifications for road and bridge construction for Mineral Aggregate Base, Class "A" Aggregate, Grading D, and shall be compacted to 80 percent of solid rock density as determined by AASHTO-85. 
b.  Bituminous Pavement. Bituminous plant mix base shall consist of asphalt cement AC-20 and aggregate conforming to Grading B Subsection 903.06 Tennessee Department of Highway Specifications. Asphaltic concrete surface shall consist of asphalt cement AC-20 and aggregate conforming to Grading E. Subsection 903.11, Tennessee Department of Highway Specifications. 
c.  Adjusting Sewer Frames. All manholes and catch basins shall be adjusted to conform to the proposed surface of the street before the asphaltic concrete surface is placed. 
d.  Concrete Curb, Curb and Gutter, Sidewalks, and Driveways. Concrete shall be selected, proportioned, and mixed in such a manner as to provide a compressive strength of 3,000 psi in 28 days. The poured concrete shall be cured by a liquid membrane-forming compound, or other approved methods of curing concrete. 
    Within the Town of Farragut, the subdivider shall provide extruded curbs or gutters as specified in these regulations on both sides of all new streets and meet all street and curb construction standard. 
e.  Streets, Curb and Gutter Construction Standards. 
Road Classification Aggregate Base Binder Surface Curb and Gutter Arterial 10" (2 runs) 5" (2 runs) 1.5" 30" C&G, or ditches if approved Collector 8" (2 runs) 3" 1.5" 30" C&G, or ditches if approved Local Street 8" (2 runs) 2.5" 1.5" 8" extruded curb, or min. 24" "rollover" curb, if approved  
Notes: 
1.  Aggregate Base shall consist of grade D crushed stone. 
2.  Binder shall consist of grade B or BM asphalt. 
3.  Surface shall consist of grade D asphalt; grade EM may be used on Local Street with grades less than ten percent. 
4.  Tack coat shall be applied in accordance with TDOT Standard Specs. 
5.  Curb and gutter, as well as "rollover" curb, shall have a minimum six-inch concrete thickness. 
5.  Sidewalk Construction. 
a.  General Requirements. Regardless of the zoning classification, all sidewalk constructed in the Town of Farragut shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  Five feet wide; 
(2)  Concrete four inches thick; and 
(3)  Stone four inches thick. 
Sidewalks shall have wire mesh reinforcing or be constructed of Fiber Mesh concrete at 11/2 pounds of fiber per yard of concrete. 
b.  Handicap Accessibility Requirements. Sidewalks shall meet the following minimum design requirements. Such design standards are illustrated in appendix D to this subdivision appendix: 
(1)  Curb cut ramps shall be located as shown in appendix D to this subdivision appendix; 
(2)  Ramps shall be provided at all corners of street intersections where there is existing or proposed sidewalk and curb. Ramps shall also be provided at walk locations in mid-block and across from corner ramps at T-intersections; 
(3)  The surface texture of the ramp shall be that obtained by a coarse brooming, transverse to the slope of the ramp; 
(4)  Care shall be taken to assure a uniform grade on the ramp, free of sags and short grade changes; 
(5)  Drainage structures shall not be placed in line with ramps; 
(6)  The normal gutter line profiles shall be maintained through the area of the ramp; 
(7)  Crosswalk and stop line markings, if used, shall be so located so as to stop traffic short of ramp crossings; 
(8)  The maximum slope of a ramp shall be 12:1 from face of curb to back of ramp; and 
(9)  The ramp shall be the same width as the sidewalk with the sides sloped uniformly to a maximum of 10:1, preferably 12:1. The 12:1 dimensions shall be used unless otherwise directed by the Town Engineer. 
c.  Quality Assurance. The contractor shall provide manufacturer's certificates that materials meet requirements, as specified. Tests for compressive strength will be taken at the Town's discretion. 
d.  Form Material. Steel or wood forms of a size and strength to resist movement during concrete placement and to retain horizontal and vertical alignment until removal shall be used. Straight forms which extend for the full depth of the concrete and which are free of distortion and defects shall be used. 
    Flexible spring steel forms or laminated boards to form radius bends shall be used, where required. 
    Forms shall be coated with a non-staining form release agent that will not discolor or deface the concrete surface. 
e.  Concrete Mix Design. The concrete mix shall be designed to produce standard-weight concrete consisting of Portland Cement, aggregate, air-retaining admixture, and water which shall produce or possess the following properties: 
(1)  Compressive Strength: 3,000 psi minimum at 28 days; 
(2)  Slump Range: Two inches to four inches; 
(3)  Air Content: Five percent to eight percent; 
(4)  Portland Cement which conforms to ASTM C150 Type I, II, or V, depending on soil conditions, and which is used in a 41/2 sack mix; 
(5)  Aggregates which are between one-half inch and five-eighths inch; and 
(6)  Water which is clean and drinkable. 
f.  Construction Preparation. All subgrade and base materials shall be compacted to 95 percent of maximum density, unless otherwise specified. 
    Ground shall be excavated to provide a continuous depth of stone and concrete, so that the top of the sidewalk is flush with the existing ground or back of curb. Final excavating and filing shall be performed to prepare finished subgrade. High spots shall be lowered and low spots raised to grade with approved materials and compacted in place by tamping. Raising the subgrade under forms after forms are in place shall not be permitted. 
    Forms shall be set to alignment and grade. Forms shall be secured rigidly in place by use of steel or wood stakes. Forms shall be cleaned thoroughly for each use and coated with a release agent as often as necessary to prevent concrete from adhering. 
g.  Placing and Finishing Concrete. Conditions under which the concrete is to be installed shall be examined. Any detrimental conditions shall be corrected before proceeding with additional work. 
    Expansion joints (redwood headers, or equal) shall be spaced periodically (a maximum of 30 feet) and shall be cut to the full cross section of the sidewalk. Additionally, concrete shall be scored at not less than six feet nor more than ten feet. 
    Concrete shall be placed without disturbing forms and the surface shall be brought to the required line and cross-section by strike-off guided by side forms. Concrete shall be placed continuously between expansion joints. Wire mesh shall be placed at approximately two inches below the top of concrete. Concrete shall be tamped for proper compaction to force coarse aggregates down and to bring a layer of mortar to the top surface. Concrete shall be spread thoroughly along the edges. 
    Concrete mix shall be placed and screened to the proper grade and floated to a uniform surface. 
h.  Repairs. Prior to the release of the two-year maintenance bond, sections of concrete pavement shall be repaired where such sections: 
(1)  Do not conform to the proper grade; 
(2)  Contain cracks or other defects which impair strength, safety, or appearance of the sidewalk; 
(3)  Have been damaged or discolored during construction; and 
(4)  Do not conform to the requirement of handicapped accessibility. 
Repairs shall be made by removing and replacing defective sections between expansion joints. 
6.  Installation of Utilities. 
a.  All utilities, including electrical, telephone, conduit for future telecommunication network fiber, and other utility facilities shall be installed underground by the subdivider and in accordance with state, local and utility agency design standards, unless, in the opinion of the planning commission or town engineer, special conditions require otherwise. In such event, such installation shall be directed by the planning commission or town engineer or the designee of these individuals. Additionally, all utility valves or other control mechanisms and maintenance structures shall be located behind the curbline outside of the paved right-of-way. Exceptions to this requirement shall be approved in writing by the town engineer prior to installation. 
b.  After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground works including sewers, water mains, gas mains, electrical wiring, telephone lines, etc. shall be installed completely and thoroughly throughout the length of the road. 
c.  In addition to the electric, telephone, cable television, etc., an empty conduit with tracer wire and a minimum of four inches in diameter must be installed a minimum of 36 inches deep. This conduit is for the expansion of future telecommunication networks and must cross the streets at the utility boxes to ensure adequate future access. Installation of the conduit at time of construction will provide for future expansion of services without digging up the right-of-way or the streets. 
7.  Water Supply System. 
a.  Water mains properly connected with the community water supply system shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both domestic use and fire protection. 
b.  The size of water mains, the location and type of valves and hydrant, the buried depth and amount of soil cover, the pipes, and other features of the installation shall be approved by the planning commission upon the recommendation of an applicable inspection agency or individual, and shall conform with accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems, the adopted fire codes, and the utility which will be operating the system. Under no circumstances shall the placement of utility valves or other control mechanisms and maintenance structures be located within the area that is paved. Only exceptions to this requirement shall be approved in writing by the town engineer. 
c.  All new or replacement water supply systems, together with attendant facilities, proposed to be located within a floodplain shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
8.  Sanitary Sewers. 
a.  All lots connected to a sewerage system shall be approved by the utility operating the system. Sanitary sewers shall meet all design specifications and requirements of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC), the County Health Department, and the utility which will be operating the system. Additionally, all utility valves or other control mechanisms and maintenance structures shall be located behind the curbline outside of the paved right-of-way. Only exceptions to this requirement shall be approved in writing by the town engineer. 
b.  All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems, together with attendant facilities, proposed to be located within an area subject to flood shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
9.  Erosion Control. The Planning Commission shall require that all new development to be in conformance with the grading, soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations as set forth by the Town of Farragut, Tennessee. 
    An erosion control bond is required prior to the issuance of a grading permit by the town. The amount will be determined by the town engineer at his (her) discretion based on area disturbed, surrounding area, and nearby waterways. 
10.  Street Name and Traffic Signs. The subdivider shall provide and install street and traffic signs per the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), latest edition. All street name signs shall be of blue background. All signs shall be mounted on two-inch square tube poles unless a proposed alternative is approved as part of the preliminary plat. 
11.  Two-Year Maintenance Bond. The applicant shall place with the Town of Farragut a maintenance bond which covers roads, drainage, erosion control, sidewalk, and walking trail construction (the facilities). The purpose of the bond is to pay for or reimburse the town for the cost of any maintenance or repair required to be made (in the sole opinion of the town engineer) to the facilities during the two-year period following the completion of construction of the facilities, which have not been repaired by or at the expense of the constructing contractor. 
    The bond amount shall be determined on a project by project basis. The town engineer shall provide the planning commission staff and applicant with the appropriate bond amount based on the size and complexity of the project. The bond shall be for a period of two years. If all deficiencies have not been repaired by the end of the two-year period, the applicant may petition the planning commission staff to extend the maintenance bond for a period not to exceed one year. If all deficiencies have not been repaired by the end of the that one-year period, the staff will cash the maintenance bond. The applicant may appeal the cashing of the maintenance bond to the planning commission and request to extend the maintenance bond for a period not to exceed one year. If all deficiencies have not been repaired by the end of the one-year extension granted by the planning commission, the staff shall cash the maintenance bond. 
    The town will accept appropriately prepared and worded irrevocable letters of credit from a federally insured lending institution or appropriately prepared and worded escrow deposit agreements from a federally insured lending institution. The maintenance bond shall be approved by the planning commission staff prior to the planning commission secretary's signature being affixed to the final plat, with commencement of the two-year maintenance period beginning upon written notice of acceptance or approval of the town engineer. 
12.  Public Road/Drainage Maintenance Bond. The applicant may be required to place a Public Road/Drainage Maintenance Bond with the town prior to the issuance of a grading permit to ensure the maintenance and safety of existing improvements. The bond amount shall be set by the town engineer at his/her discretion based on adjacent street condition and/or presence, nature, and conditions of nearby drainage structures, and other location specific appropriate considerations. The bond may be cashed by the town to pay for repairs or maintenance to the existing streets, rights-of-way, drainage structures, or other public improvements damaged as a result of the new construction and/or transportation materials to a construction site. This bond will only be valid throughout the construction period. End of construction period shall be evidenced by the recording of the final plat or the release of any completion bonds. 
    The town will accept appropriately prepared and worded irrevocable letters of credit from a federally insured lending institution or appropriately prepared and worded escrow deposit agreements from a federally insured lending institution. In the event repairs are necessary, the town reserves the right to issue a stop work order on activities related to said construction determined to be causing damage which shall remain effective until released by the town engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-07-02, §§ 5-7, 3-15-2007; Res. No. PC-09-08, § 3, 5-21-2009; Res. No. PC-11-03, §§ 1-5, 2-17-2011; Res. No. PC-11-09, §§ 2, 3, 6-16-2011; Res. No. PC-12-04, § 1, 5-17-2012) 
B. - Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. 
    No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for recordation by the county register of deeds until the required improvements listed or agreed upon are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the planning commission. 
    In lieu of completed improvements, the planning commission on behalf of the Town of Farragut may accept either of the following methods of bonding: 
1.  An appropriately prepared and worded irrevocable letter of credit from a federally insured lending institution submitted to the Town of Farragut in the full amount of the estimated cost of required improvements with a minimum of a 15 percent inflationary cost added to the total cost. 
2.  An appropriately prepared and worded escrow deposit agreement from a federally insured lending institution for the benefit of the Town of Farragut in the full amount of the estimated cost of all required improvements with a minimum of a 15 percent inflationary cost added to the total cost. 
    Such bonding ensures that the improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the Town of Farragut in the event of default by the subdivider or developer. The method of bonding will be determined by the planning staff and the developer, and approved by the planning commission. The bond amount shall be set by the town engineer. 
    The conditions of each bond shall provide for a default thereof if the improvements covered by such bond have not been approved and accepted by the Town of Farragut within a period not to exceed one year. The applicant may petition the staff to extend the completion bond for a period not to exceed one year. If the staff finds that the public interest will not be adversely affected by such extension, the one-year extension may be granted. If all improvements have not been completed by the end of the second one-year period, the staff shall cash the completion bond. The applicant may appeal the cashing of the completion bond to the planning commission and request to extend the completion bond for a period not to exceed one year. If the planning commission finds that the public interest will not be adversely affected by such extension, the one-year extension may be granted. If all improvements have not been completed by the end of the one-year extension granted by the planning commission, the staff shall cash the completion bond. 
    As improvements are completed, the staff may reduce the face value of such bond until all improvements are completed. If the planning commission determines at any time during the bond that the character and the extent of such development requires additional improvements or that additional funds are needed to ensure the completion of improvements, then the face value of such bond shall thereupon be increased by the determined amount so the new face value of the bond will reflect the cost of improvements to the developer or subdivider. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006; Res. No. PC-11-09, § 4, 6-16-2011) 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS 
    The enforcement of these regulations and penalties for the unapproved recordation or transfer of land is provided by state law in the authority granted by public acts of the State of Tennessee. 

A. - Enforcement. 
1.  No plat or plan of a subdivision of land into two or more lots located within the Farragut Planning Region shall be admitted to the land records of the county or received or recorded by the County Register of Deeds until said plat or plan has received final approval in writing by the Planning Commission as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-302 [T.C.A. § 13-4-302]. 
2.  No board, public officer, or authority shall light any road, lay or authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, or the construction of other facilities or utilities in any road located within the planning region unless such road shall have been accepted, opened or otherwise received the legal status of a public road prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such road [is] shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Commission, or on a road plan made and adopted by the commission as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-307 [T.C.A. § 13-4-307]. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2006) 
B. - Penalties. 
1.  No county register shall receive, file, or record a plat of a subdivision within the planning region without the approval of the Planning Commission as required in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-302 [T.C.A. § 13-4-302], and any county register so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. 
2.  Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-306 [T.C.A. § 13-4-306] provides that "Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having submitted a plat of such subdivision to the municipal Planning Commission and obtained its approval as required by this chapter and before such plat be recorded in the office of the appropriate county register, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The municipality, through its solicitor or other official designated by its chief legislative body may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction." 
3.  Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of the subdivision regulations shall be deemed unlawful building or structure, and the building inspector of the municipality or other official designated by the chief legislative body and/or the Town Attorney or other official designated by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § [1]3-4-308 [T.C.A. § 13-4-308]. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2006) 
ARTICLE VI. - RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE; RESOLUTION 82-08 
    WHEREAS, Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 13-4-201-13-4-203 {T.C.A. §§ 13-4-201-13-4-203] provides that the Planning Commission shall prepare and adopt for the Town of Farragut a master plan which includes at least a Major Road Plan; and 
    WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of the Town of Farragut has adopted a Major Road Plan; and 
    WHEREAS, Section 13-4-303 of the Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-303] provides that before adoption of its subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a public hearing shall be held by the commission; and 
    WHEREAS, said public hearing was held on March 24, 1982; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission after thorough study presentation and conference hereby adopts these Farragut Subdivision Regulations. 
    These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after this 24th day of March, 1982. 
_____
Chairman 
Farragut Municipal Planning Commission _____
Secretary  
    Notice of public hearing published in the West Side Story on the 17th day of March, 1982. 
APPENDIX A. - SAMPLE IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT 
    Full Address of Financial Institution 
    Phone and Fax # of Financial Institution and Contact Person 
    Date 
    Irrevocable Standby Credit Number (Include Number Assigned) 
    Applicant: (Include Full Address of Applicant and Contact Person) 
    Beneficiary: 
    Town of Farragut-Attention (Include staff person's name) 
Farragut Town Hall 
11408 Municipal Center Drive 
Farragut, TN 37934 
    Amount (Include Dollar Amount of Letter of Credit) 
    Expiration (Include Expiration Date of Letter of Credit) 
    We hereby issue in beneficiary's favor this irrevocable standby letter of credit which is available against presentation of beneficiary's draft at sight drawn on (Name of Financial Institution) bearing the clause: "Drawn under credit number (Include Number Assigned) of (Name of Financial Institution)." 
    This letter of credit covers the following: (Include the specific items or measures to be covered under this letter of credit; e.g., erosion control, completion of landscaping, maintenance of streets, maintenance of landscaping, etc.) associated with (Include the name and specific location of the project or development; e.g., name and phase of the Subdivision, name of the business and associated street address, etc.). 
    We hereby engage with you that drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit will be duly honored on presentation. 
    This letter of credit is subject to the International Standby Practices (ISP98) International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 590 which is effective as of January 1, 1999 (or most recent). 
    In the event of a draw under this letter of credit, the beneficiary is required to present to (Name and full address of financial institution where documents are to be presented) the following: 
1.  The original letter of credit and any amendments thereto; and 
2.  A sight draft bearing the clause: "Drawn under credit number (Include Number Assigned) of (Name of Financial Institution).["] 
    Include Authorized Signature of Financial Institution Representative. 
(Res. No. PC-09-01, § 1, 1-15-2009) 
APPENDIX C. - GUIDE TO STREET NAMING AND SUFFIXING 
    Names. Streets within a subdivision or other general area should be named somewhat systematically, for example: 
Subdivision Theme for Street Naming Country Manor Trees native to the region Sugar Wood Estates Names of States Confederate Hills Southern Generals Valley View Mountains of the Smokies London Town Estates Names of English Towns  
    Names should be simple, easy to spell and pronounce, and sufficiently dissimilar to others in the urban area to avoid confusion. 
    Arteries should be named, if after a town or other area to which they lead, after a place sufficiently distant that the artery will not have two names within the urban area. Collectors are appropriately named after the subdivision itself, the general area in which located, or other name denoting generality. Minor streets are best named with specific examples of the general name of the collector which they intersect. 
    Suffixes -Street suffixes should conform generally with the common understanding of their meaning and should relate to the classification of the street to which applied and the nature of the area through which they pass, as follows: 
    Avenue -A major street, especially a wide one with a landscaped, divided roadway. 
    Circle -A loop street (or cul-de-sac with landscaped center in its turnaround) or other street on the perimeter of a small circular park. 
    Court -A cul-de-sac (or P-shaped loop street). 
    Drive -A (usually scenic) way for leisurely driving; hence, a minor residential street or U-shaped loop street of significant length. 
    Highway -An artery usually built and maintained with state or federal participation. 
    Lane -A narrow street not intended for through traffic; hence, a loop street. 
    Parkway -An expressway or freeway through a large park or other scenic area or a broad, landscaped artery or collector, especially one with a wide, park-like center strip. 
    Pike -An artery, usually with some historical significance because of widespread use of private toll roads in the past. A turnpike in modern use connotes payment of a toll. 
    Place -A narrow, short street or residential alley, especially applicable to a rear service drive which serves as the principal means of access to residential lots otherwise abutting an artery. 
    Plaza -A street around the periphery of a square, usually a busy or paved one or a park. 
    Road -Any rural street, especially one of considerable length; hence, a collector or long minor residential street abutted by large lots. 
    Street -Best used to refer to a minor residential, commercial, or industrial street capable for use by but not designed for through traffic; and urban road. 
    Terrace -A land service street, especially a loop street, which follows a hillside contour. 
    Way -Although the most general term of all, modern usage frequently applies this term to a specialized street such as a market or pedestrian street or a monumental artery or parkway. 
(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
APPENDIX D. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION DETAILS 



(Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 2-2006) 
APPENDIX E. - GUIDE TO RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION STREET LIGHTING 
A.  Purpose. 
    The purpose of these guidelines is to provide for the consistent review of applications for permits for the installation of privately owned and maintained outdoor lighting units within the right-of-way or adjacent dedicated utility easement of roadways under the control of the Town. 
    The application of these guidelines is not intended to and will not ensure lighting of a quality which meets the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) roadway lighting standards. Rather, the guidelines have been selected to ensure that such installations will not present a significant safety problem to the public, will not infringe on the rights of adjacent property owners, and will be capable of being maintained at a reasonable cost to those who are ultimately responsible for those costs. These guidelines are intended to supplement, not supersede or waive, any applicable electric codes, Lenoir City Utilities Board (LCUB) location or installation requirements, or other standard outdoor electric wiring practices. 
B.  Construction. Luminaires shall be UL approved for outdoor application. A photo control utilizing a standard NEMA twist lock connector shall be provided on each luminaire. 
C.  Support Location and Design. 
    Except where mounted in the median of a divided roadway, all supports shall be installed at least ten feet from the edge of the pavement either within the dedicated street right-of-way or within the adjacent dedicated utility easement. Supports located in medians shall be located in the middle third of the width of the median. 
    All supports shall be designed to yield when struck by a vehicle thereby minimizing occupancy injury, vehicle damage, and damage to the underground components of the lighting installation. Designs which are typical of those meeting the breakaway or frangible support design objectives include: 
  An aluminum shaft with a slip or cast aluminum connection to a concrete foundation; 
  A reinforced fiberglass shaft with a metal base plate mating to a screw anchor base; and 
  A fiberglass reinforced polyester shaft with a metal base plate mating to a screw anchor base. 
    Requests for approval of other shaft/foundation configurations should include documentation of breakaway performance under impact. 
D.  Light Distribution. No lights shall cause glare directly onto adjacent properties, rights-of-way, or access easements. Glare shall be defined as any brightness within the field of vision of such a character as to cause annoyance, discomfort, interference with vision, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
E.  Light Source and Pole Height-Decorative. 
    If a decorative globe is used, the globe glass shall be frosted. Internal or external shielding to minimize uplight shall also be used if the fixture style does not have a cover on top of the globe. 
    The maximum pole height, including the globe, for decorative fixtures shall be 16 feet. A maximum of a 50-watt high pressure sodium bulb, or light emitting diode (LED) equivalent, shall be used. 
F.  Light Source and Pole Height-Non-decorative. 
    If a non-decorative fixture is used, all luminaires shall utilize a high pressure sodium (HPS) light source of either 70, 100, or 150 watts, or a LED source of either 67 or 110 watts. Minimum luminaire mounting heights shall be 11 feet for 70-watt HPS lamps, 14 feet for 100 watt HPS and 67-watt LED lamps, and 16 feet for 150-watt HPS and 110-watt LED lamps. The maximum mounting height shall be 18 feet. 
G.  Responsibility for the System. The responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the system shall remain the responsibility of the developer, applicant, or the homeowner's association. 
(Res. PC-14-03, § 1, 5-15-2014) 
Appendix C - COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this appendix are ordinance amendments to the comprehensive land use plan. 
State Law reference- Municipal plans, T.C.A. § 13-4-201 et seq. 

Sec. I. - Mixed use town center. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  Increase Farragut's long-term economic sustainability by diversifying the retail tax base through the creation of a traditional downtown with a variety of shops, restaurants, businesses and residences, in a pedestrian-oriented setting. 
2.  Integrate high-density residential development to help support retail and other commercial uses. 
3.  Consider the creation of an entertainment district that draws people to the area. This could include subsidies for galleries or a resident artist elected each year. This would require a planning process to establish a vision, governance structure, and secure seed money. 
4.  Create public gathering spaces. 
5.  Provide extended (evening) hours of operation that will cater to shopping, dining, and entertainment to increase the vitality of the area. 
B.  Uses. 
1.  A mix of uses, including employment, commercial, retail, services, civic, and residential. 
2.  Substantial residential use: primarily multi-family residences, but some attached units (townhomes, duplexes) for transitions to adjacent single-family neighborhoods. 
3.  Retail-oriented commercial uses, including "one off" establishments (local businesses) as well as chain establishments that utilize small footprints (such as coffee shops, small footprint versions of big box stores). 
4.  Offices and personal services such as doctor, dentists, bookkeeping, or studios. 
5.  Also encourage: 
a.  Public service providers (law enforcement, fire protection) and new schools. 
b.  Entertainment options such as theater or performing arts. 
6.  Residential density: Eight to 15 dwelling units per acre. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Within a general one-mile radius of Kingston Pike and Campbell Station Road. 
D.  Character. 
1.  Connected building facades, with minor setback variations close to the sidewalk, on both sides of a street, that form a continuous shopping experience, with individual buildings adequately differentiated (to avoid strip appearance). 
2.  High degree of ground floor transparency (glass) for visual interest to pedestrians. 
3.  Comfortable bike and pedestrian connections to surrounding neighborhoods, with adequate bike parking. 
4.  Pedestrian-focused amenities, places for gathering (pocket parks and plazas), wide sidewalks, outdoor dining, street trees, benches, consolidated newspaper racks, planters, and paving. 
5.  Pedestrian scale signage. 
6.  On-street parking to separate pedestrians from traffic and provide convenient parking; Major parking behind buildings, out of sight of pedestrians. 
7.  Gridded or semi-gridded street network. 
a.  A block pattern that includes a "figure 8" pedestrian circulation pattern that wraps around corners (as opposed to a single street). 
E.  Other. 
1.  Require consistent hours of operation (See Chapter 2: Eight Key Strategies Strategy 1 Bring About a Downtown and Chapter 5: Extended Implementation Tools for more information). 
( Ord. No. 14-22, § 1, 1-22-2015 ) 
Appendix D - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this appendix is Ord. No. 15-03, adopted March 12, 2015. Amendments are indicated in parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Authority to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, T.C.A. § 6-2-201. 

Farragut Architectural Design Standards 

INTRODUCTION 
    The Town of Farragut seeks to enhance community image while protecting the unique qualities that make Farragut a special place. This document provides design guidelines to support community objectives by promoting high quality design in new construction and redevelopment. 
    Town staff, the Visual Resources Review Board and the Municipal Planning Commission use the guidelines to review development projects throughout Farragut. Property owners, developers and citizens use the design guidelines to better understand community design expectations. The design guidelines accommodate the need of property owners to make improvements, while protecting Farragut's special design traditions. 
    The guidelines seek to: 
1.  Promote high-quality design throughout Farragut to enhance community image, support livability and help attract/retain quality employers. 
2.  Assist in retaining the unique qualities that make Farragut special through application of consistent design principles to help differentiate Farragut from surrounding areas and foster a unique sense of place. 
3.  Encourage redevelopment of existing properties to reduce vacancy, provide opportunities for sustainable expansion and create links between neighborhoods and commercial areas 
4.  Implement Adopted Town Plans and Policies, including those summarized in "Policy and Regulatory Foundation" on page 2 [sic]. 
5.  Assist with the implementation and interpretation of the Zoning Code by illustrating and interpreting design standards within the Town's zoning regulations. 
6.  Retain flexibility for property owners to ensure that they are able to maintain and expand their businesses or buildings using creative design solutions. 
    Tennessee Code Annotated provides for the creation of a design review commission (DRC) having the authority to develop general guidelines for the exterior appearance of nonresidential property, multiple family residential property, and any entrance to a nonresidential development within the municipality. 
    In accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 6-54-133 [T.C.A. § 6-54-133], the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission shall be recognized as the Design Review Commission and the Farragut Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall be recognized as the appellate body for decisions rendered by the Design Review Commission. 
    Community Participation 
    The initial public participation process for the design guidelines project included opportunities for community participation and comment in a variety of formats, including: 
 Meetings to discuss concerns and objectives with specific stake-holder groups, including property owners, developers and residents 
 Interactive workshop activities to identify desirable community design features 
 Computer modeling activities to identify design alternatives 
    Future Land Use Map 
    The Town of Farragut 2025 Comprehensive Land Use Plan includes a Future Land Use Map that designates the desired future character and uses for subareas throughout Farragut. See page vi (following the Table of contents) [sic] for a complete version of the Future Land Use Map. 
    The design guidelines in this document help implement Future Land Use Map objectives. 
POLICY AND REGULATORY FOUNDATION 
    The design guidelines are intended to help implement adopted Town plans and policies and work with established regulations, including those summarized below. 
    Town of Farragut 2025 Comprehensive Land Use Plan. The Comprehensive Plan outlines Farragut's overall community vision and provides specific implementation strategies, including a recommendation to adopt design guidelines. 
    The plan identifies eight key strategies: 
1.  Bring About a Downtown. 
2.  Repair Aging Shopping Centers. 
3.  Allow/Encourage Greater Housing Choice. 
4.  Increase Connectivity. 
5.  Capitalize on Our Heritage. 
6.  Expand Our Borders. 
7.  Enhance Our Identity. 
8.  Plan for Remaining Vacant Parcels. 
See Town Approved Documents at townoffarragut.org for more information. 
    Town of Farragut Strategic Plan. The Strategic Plan builds on the Comprehensive Plan vision with more specific year-by-year implementation actions and responsibilities. See Town Approved Documents at townoffarragut.org for more information. 
    Town of Farragut Zoning Ordinance. 
    The Zoning Ordinance provides the basic regulations for development on all properties in Farragut. Projects subject to design review with these guidelines must also meet zoning regulations. The Zoning Ordinance provides quantitative standards, such as maximum height and minimum setbacks, that outline the basic shape of development, while the guidelines provide qualitative standards that address design character and context sensitivity. The Zoning Ordinance and design guidelines work together to ensure that development promotes community objectives. 
    See "Topics Addressed by the Zoning Ordinance" on page 8 [sic] and the Planning Division page at townoffarragut.org for more information. 
    Town of Farragut Stormwater Ordinance. 
    The Stormwater Ordinance provides regulations to address the discharge of pollutants to the Town's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow. 
    Projects subject to design review with these guidelines must also comply with the Stormwater Ordinance. In some cases, the design guidelines describe and illustrate strategies for meeting stormwater regulations while also promoting other community objectives. 
    See the Town of Farragut's Stormwater Matters page at townoffarragut.org/stormwater for more information. 
APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES 
    The design guidelines provide the foundation for a design review process that ensures that new construction and redevelopment projects include high-quality design and promote Farragut's community objectives. 
    Projects subject to review using the design guidelines include: 
  New commercial, office or public construction, additions and other exterior improvements. 
  New multi-family residential construction, additions and other exterior improvements. 
  Redevelopment projects as defined within these guidelines. 
  Tree removal, land disturbance or landscaping projects on commercial, office, multi-family or public properties. 
    All projects subject to review are required to meet the intent of the guidelines. See "Design Guidelines Interpretation" on page 8 [sic] for more information. 
    Types of projects for which the guidelines do not apply, include: 
  Interior improvements and remodeling. 
  Projects that include only single-family or two-family residential uses. 
    The design review process using these guidelines will be conducted by Town staff, the Farragut Visual Resources Review Board (VRRB) and the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission, as summarized in "Design Review Roles" on page 4 [sic]. 
    Design Guidelines Users 
    The guidelines in this document inform a design review process administered by Town staff, the Farragut Visual Resources Review Board (VRRB) and the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission. They also provide an educational tool to help property owners, business owners, developers, architects and others plan and design projects that promote Farragut's community objectives. 
    See the Visual Resources Review Board and the Municipal Planning Commission pages at townoffarragut.org for information and meeting agendas. 
    Landscape Plan Requirement 
    The Farragut Zoning Ordinance requires a landscape plan in association with development or redevelopment that includes commercial, office, multi-family or public uses. A landscape plan is also required for recreational amenities associated with subdivisions and development where a landscape buffer and detention basin is required. 
    Design Review Roles. 
    Town staff, the Visual Resources Review Board (VRRB), and the Farragut Municipal Planning Commission (FMPC) each play a role in the design review process. Town staff review and approve minor projects and the VRRB and FMPC review and approve all other projects as summarized in the chart below. 

    Design Review Process Chart. This chart illustrates the overall design review process from application to obtaining permit. 

ORGANIZATION, FORMAT AND INTERPRETATION 
    The design guidelines are organized and formatted to support consistent design review. See "Document Organization" below for more information about the organizational structure of the document and "Standard Design Guidelines Format" on page 7 [sic] for more information about the format of the design guidelines within this document. "Design Guidelines interpretation" on page 8 [sic] provides additional information on using the guidelines. 
    Document Organization. Following the introduction, the design guidelines are organized into four separate chapters by design topic, as summarized below. For some smaller projects, all relevant design guidelines may be in one chapter (i.e., a project to expand and re-landscape a parking area would be subject only to the guidelines in Chapter 1). For larger projects, several chapters may apply (i.e., a new commercial or mixed-use project in the Town Center District may be subject to design guidelines in Chapters 1-4). 

    Standard Design Guidelines Format. To facilitate ease-of-use, the individual design guidelines in this document use a standard format. The format includes topic headings, intent statements related to the topic, numbered design guidelines, and additional information about appropriate strategies and illustrations or diagrams. The diagram below uses a sample design guideline from Chapter 2 to illustrate each key element. 

    Design Guidelines Interpretation. 
    The design guidelines are intended to shape development that is consistent with community objectives. Although they offer some flexibility in interpretation, compliance with the intent of applicable guidelines is expected, to the greatest extent feasible. However, not all guidelines will apply to every project. Guidelines that refer to features that are not part of a development or redevelopment project are not applicable. Flexibility in the application of some design guidelines may also be available for redevelopment, minor projects or other projects as noted throughout the document. Where a project includes a new or innovative approach that is not addressed by the guidelines, it may be necessary to use the intent statement for the topic/subtopic (see page 7 [sic]), or the overall objectives for the design guidelines (see page 1 [sic]), to determine whether the approach is appropriate. 
    In some cases, the design guidelines may also be used to help interpret and illustrate design standards within the Farragut Zoning Ordinance. As illustrated below, the Zoning Ordinance and design guidelines work together to ensure that development promotes community objectives. 

1.0 - SITE DESIGN GUIDELINES 
    New construction and redevelopment in Farragut should incorporate high-quality site design to enhance community image and help create more pedestrian-oriented spaces with a unique sense of place. 
    This chapter provides guidelines for the site design portion of a new construction, improvement or redevelopment project, including the street character, arrangement of buildings, open space, pedestrian connections and landscaping. It begins with case studies that illustrate how the guidelines combine to promote high-quality site design in Farragut, followed by specific guidelines for site design. 
    The guidelines in this chapter apply to land disturbance and landscaping projects, as well as site design associated with new buildings and expansion to or improvement of existing buildings as described in "Application of The Guidelines" on page 3 [sic]. The design guidelines do not apply to single-family or two-family properties. Flexibility in the application of some design guidelines may also be available for redevelopment, minor projects or other projects as noted throughout the chapter. 
    Note that Chapter 2 on page 33 [sic] provides guidelines for the visual and functional character of individual buildings on the site and Chapter 3 on page 53 [sic] provides additional context-sensitive design guidelines for projects located in specific subareas such as the Town Center or along Kingston Pike. 


Site design case study: Town Center redevelopment. 
    The case study below illustrates redevelopment of existing properties at the intersection of Kinston Pike and North Campbell Station Road. The design meets the intent of the site design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a large site that is designated as Mixed Use Town Center on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Town Center subarea starting on page 54 [sic]. 
    Note that the case study assumes application of the Town Center Zoning District (TCD) to the site. It is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles when applied in a Town Center setting and does not represent a specific development proposal. See "Phased Redevelopment of an Existing Site" on page 30 [sic] for a description of how redevelopment of this site could be phased over time. 

Site design case study: Lakefront/Concord Gateway development. 
    The case study below illustrates development and redevelopment of existing properties where Concord Road enters Farragut from the south. The design meets the intent of the site design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a site that is primarily designated as Commercial on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Lakefront/Concord Road subarea on page 63 [sic]. 
    This case study is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles and does not represent a specific development proposal. The illustrated development helps create a welcoming gateway to Farragut while maintaining compatibility with the natural and very low-scale residential surroundings and creating a neighborhood-serving retail center. The case study incorporates a widened Concord Road as described in "Concord Road Widening Project" on page 64 [sic]. 

Site design case study: Outlet Drive development. 
    The case study below illustrates development on an existing property located between Outlet Drive and Interstate 75 near the northern boundary of Farragut. The design meets the intent of the site design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a site that is primarily designated as Office/Light Industrial on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Outlet Drive subarea on page 66 [sic]. 
    This case study is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles and does not represent a specific development proposal. The illustrated development provides space for office, light industrial and other employment uses and incorporates high-quality open space and low-impact development principles for stormwater management. 

Sustainable design principles. 
    New construction and redevelopment throughout Farragut should incorporate sustainable design principles whenever possible to reduce the environmental impacts of new development and provide cost savings. Several specific sustainability principles and features that relate to both site and building design are summarized below. 

Streetscape. 
    The streetscape includes the public and semi-public area between the edge of the street and parking areas or building frontage. Elements include sidewalks, walking trails, bump outs, street trees and lawns, street furniture and lighting. Streetscape features should be functional and durable while helping to affirm or establish the identity of a neighborhood, district or development. Additional context-sensitive guidelines are provided in Chapter 3. 
1.1  Integrate functional pedestrian improvements into the streetscape. 
a.  Provide unobstructed sidewalks at least five feet wide on public frontages surrounding a development and along internal streets and lanes. 
b.  Provide a wide walking path (at least eight feet wide), rather than a conventional sidewalk, along collector or arterial streets surrounding a development, whenever possible. 
c.  Provide a landscaped area, or trees in grates, between streets or parking areas and sidewalks or walking paths. 
d.  See "Connectivity" on page 18 [sic] for additional guidelines related to the pedestrian network. 
1.2  Coordinate streetscape elements along public frontages surrounding a development. 
a.  Coordinate streetscape elements with elements provided by the Town (such as street lights or other public improvements), whenever possible. See "The Interface Between Public Streets and Private Development" on page 15 [sic] for more information. 
b.  Install decorative streetlights or other coordinated improvements where they are not provided as a public improvement. See "Site Lighting" on page 25 [sic] for more information. 
c.  Consider reserving space for future streetscape improvements, rather than immediate installation, to provide flexibility for redevelopment or minor projects. 
1.3  Coordinate streetscape elements on internal streets and lanes within a development. 
a.  Coordinate streetscape improvements within a development with streetscape improvements on surrounding streets, whenever possible. 
b.  Use decorative street lights and other street furnishings that help establish a sense of identity within the development. See "Outdoor Open Space" on page 20 [sic] and "Site Lighting" on page 25 [sic] for more information. 
1.4  Use streetscape elements that invite a high level of activity along a commercial street frontage. 
    These include: 
a.  Street trees with grates, located in paved pedestrian areas. 
b.  Benches and planters of finished, highly durable materials. 
c.  Decorative paving, such as scored concrete or unit pavers to define special areas. 
1.5  Use streetscape elements that invite passive pedestrian and recreational activity along a residential street frontage. 
    These include: 
a.  Landscaped "tree lawn" areas between the sidewalk and the street. 
b.  Benches or other furnishings located in landscaped areas. 

The interface between public streets and private development. 
    Although the design guidelines primarily address the character of development on privately-owned property, it is important to understand the typical progression of spaces between buildings and an adjacent public street. 
    In many cases, a new development will not be responsible for improvements within the public area between the property and the street. However, new development should have a strong relationship to public areas, which may include incorporating amenities, paths or other features in a semi-public interface area. New development should also accommodate existing facilities or planned improvements in adjacent public areas. 
    The typical progression of public and private spaces along the street edge are illustrated below in a Town Center context. 

Building setbacks and frontage. 
    Building setbacks address the distance between buildings and the street or sidewalk edge while building frontage relates to the alignment of buildings at the setback, and whether parking or extensive landscape areas are located in setback areas. Whenever possible, buildings should be aligned along the street to hide parking and promote active sidewalks. A uniform alignment of buildings helps to define a "street wall," which provides a sense of enclosure and a comfortable scale for pedestrians. Additional context-sensitive guidelines for building frontages are provided in Chapter 3. 
    Note that the Farragut Zoning Ordinance allows reduced setbacks where parking areas are located behind buildings. See "Farragut Zoning Ordinance Setback Requirements" on page 17 [sic] for additional information. 
1.6  Design the street frontage to promote pedestrian activity. 
    Appropriate strategies for a new development include: 
a.  Locating new buildings between the street and a parking area to minimize vehicular impacts on pedestrians. 
b.  Aligning new buildings along streets and lanes that are internal to a development. 
c.  Locating a new building to the side (preferred) or rear of a parking area to provide flexibility for a small project. 
    Appropriate strategies for a redevelopment include: 
d.  Expanding buildings to extend closer to the street. 
e.  Improving pedestrian connections between buildings and the street. 
    See Guideline 1.8 on page 18 [sic] and Guideline 1.39 on page 29 [sic] for more information. 
    Appropriate strategies for a redevelopment where existing buildings are located behind a surface parking lot include: 
f.  Locating new liner buildings between the street and a parking area. 
g.  Providing improved pedestrian connections through a surface parking area to the street when renovating an existing building. 
1.7  Design the street frontage to be compatible with the surrounding context. 
a.  Provide a landscaped front setback area between buildings or parking areas and the street where development will be oriented primarily towards internal parking areas, or where residential development with a landscaped setback is located across the street. 
b.  Align buildings near the sidewalk edge in the Town Center District, or where development seeks to provide a more urban, pedestrian-oriented street edge. See "Front Setback Alternatives Through Design Review" on page 17 [sic] and "Town Center Subarea" on page 54 [sic] for more information. 

    Community Feedback on Building Frontages 
    Participants in meetings and workshops for the design guidelines noted that placing buildings to promote an attractive, pedestrian-friendly streetscape was one of the most important design objectives for the guidelines to address. 
Farragut Zoning Ordinance setback requirements. 
    The Farragut Zoning Ordinance provides setback requirements that address the placement of buildings in relation to the edges of a property. Side and rear setbacks ensure that building locations are compatible with surrounding properties, while front setbacks address the relationship of buildings to the street and sidewalk. 
    As described below, setback regulations vary by zone district. In some cases, a minimum front setback required by the Farragut Zoning Ordinance may be adjusted through the design review process where an alternative design would allow for a more active, pedestrian-oriented, street frontage. 
    See "Town of Farragut Zoning Ordinance" on page 2 [sic] for more information on the relationship between zoning requirements and design guidelines. 

Connectivity. 
    Connectivity refers to the network of sidewalks, paths, lanes and streets that provide pedestrian and vehicle routes within and between properties or neighborhoods. A lack of connectivity, and a focus on site-by-site development, currently makes many parts of Farragut unfriendly to pedestrians. This is especially true for the town's commercial corridors, making it difficult to walk between shops, or to walk from residential neighborhoods to work, shop, dine or visit entertainment and recreation venues. 
    Future development should help create a more active, and inter-connected environment throughout Farragut. Initially, individual sites will become more walkable, with better connections between buildings, sidewalks, parking areas and buildings. As additional sites redevelop, a network of connections between sites, and to adjacent neighborhoods, should emerge. See "Strategies for Pedestrian Connections" on page 19 [sic] for additional information and illustrations. 
1.8  Provide pedestrian and bicycle connections into and between properties. 
a.  Create an internal circulation system that will link those of adjacent properties, when feasible. 
b.  Provide a clearly defined, direct connection to adjoining public sidewalks. Note that the Farragut Zoning Ordinance requires sidewalk connections. See "Sidewalk Connection Options" on page 19 [sic] for more information. 
c.  Provide mid-block connections for pedestrians, when possible. 
d.  Route pedestrian connections to and through outdoor open spaces, such as courtyards, patios and plazas, when possible. 
e.  Align sidewalks and pedestrian paths to link with potential future development phases. 
f.  Align sidewalks and pedestrian paths to potential future connections on adjoining properties. 
1.9  Provide vehicular connections into and between adjoining properties. 
a.  Ensure that developments have more than one vehicular entrance/exit. 
b.  Provide direct vehicular connections to streets and lanes on adjoining properties to reduce traffic and pedestrian impacts on surrounding streets. 
c.  Align internal drive aisles to allow for future connections to adjoining properties. 

Strategies for pedestrian connections. 
    Future development should help create a more active, and inter-connected environment throughout Farragut. As illustrated below, this may include mid-block pedestrian connections, and pedestrian connections that are routed to and through outdoor open spaces such as courtyards, patios and plazas. 

Outdoor open space. 
    Outdoor space includes public and semi-public areas such as plazas, courtyards, patios, small park spaces or landscaped features that is visible from surrounding streets. New development should incorporate outdoor open space that projects a vibrant image and invites pedestrian activity with durable furnishings and visual elements such as public art to add interest. 
    Open Space Location. Outdoor open space should be located to encourage active use. In large developments, an outdoor space can become a focal point on the site. Outdoor open space may be provided as an accent within a small project. 
1.10  Locate outdoor open space to provide a focal point. 
a.  Locate outdoor open space to highlight key building features. 
b.  Position outdoor open space to facilitate sharing between adjoining buildings, when possible. 
c.  For a small project, such as a new single-story building, consider incorporating simple outdoor open spaces such as a courtyard area at a building entry. 
d.  Consider using public art to add interest to an outdoor open space. See "Public Art" on page 22 [sic] for more information. 
1.11  Locate and orient outdoor open space to be actively used. 
a.  Orient outdoor open space to pedestrian activities, views, cultural resources, and natural features. 
b.  Provide clear connections between outdoor open space areas, pedestrian circulation routes and building entrances. 
c.  Orient outdoor open space to views of activities or architectural landmarks to provide visual interest. 
d.  Create a sense of enclosure for an outdoor open space area by positioning buildings to frame the space or define it with landscaping. 


    Open Space Design Elements. Outdoor open space should be designed and furnished to provide a pedestrian amenity. Where possible, it may also be integrated into the on-site stormwater management system to maximize the usable portion of a property. 
1.12  Furnish outdoor open spaces to encourage active use. 
a.  Furnish outdoor open space with benches, tables, shelters, and landscape features. 
b.  Ensure that furnishings are durable and suitable for outdoor conditions. 
c.  Locate furnishings near actively used pedestrian areas, such as major pedestrian routes, building entrances and outdoor gathering places. 
d.  Locate furnishings so they will not impede the primary pedestrian way. 
e.  For a small project, such as a new single-story building, consider using simple outdoor furnishings, such as a bench, near a building entry. 
1.13  Design outdoor open space to incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) principles for stormwater management. 
a.  Design and locate larger stormwater management systems such as bioretention areas to serve as usable open space or site amenities. 
b.  Use permeable surfaces and paving systems to assist with stormwater drainage. 
c.  See "Stormwater Management and Low-Impact Development" on page 28 [sic] for more information. 


    Public Art. 
    Public art includes both decorative and functional features that are accessible or visible to the public. Such features may include sculptures, murals, mosaics, street furniture (benches, bike racks or other functional features with an original design), or other features that add interest, communicate a message or generate dialog. 
    Public art is encouraged as a way of bringing visual interest and special identity to individual sites and neighborhoods. The guideline provided below is voluntary and is not meant to imply a requirement for inclusion of public art. 
1.14  Use public art to add interest to an outdoor open space. Consider art that: 
a.  Is durable and accessible to the public. 
b.  Provides a focal point for an open space. 
c.  Is stand-alone, or integrated into the design of a building. 
d.  Relates to functional site features such as gates, entries, sitting areas, and walkways. 
e.  Reflects an awareness of the site and surrounding context, both existing and planned. 
f.  Reflects the historic and cultural values of the community. 


Landscape and parking. 
    Landscape and parking areas are a prominent feature of most properties in Farragut. Landscaping, surface parking and associated site lighting should work together to project a cohesive image. 
    Landscaping. Landscaping addresses the basic aesthetics of a site, including trees, shrubs and other plantings, as well as ornamental features and site contours. Sites should be landscaped to enhance community image, invite pedestrian activity, preserve mature trees and highlight distinctive topographic or other site features. In general, indigenous or well-acclimated and noninvasive species should be used. Landscape design within a site should also help to establish a sense of visual continuity. The guidelines below are intended to complement landscaping requirements in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance. 
1.15  Design sites to highlight landscape areas. 
a.  Cluster buildings to consolidate landscape areas. 
b.  Avoid site development patterns that leave small patches of uncoordinated open space. 
1.16  Use a coordinated landscape palette to establish a sense of visual continuity. 
a.  Use patterns of similar tree and shrub species to establish visual consistency across a larger development. 
b.  Use subtle variations in the landscape palette to highlight different uses or character areas within a larger development. 
1.17  Preserve and maintain mature trees and significant vegetation. 
a.  Include existing vegetation as a part of a landscape design scheme where appropriate. 
b.  Identify healthy trees and vegetation clusters for preservation. Special consideration should be given to mature trees, six inches or greater in diameter, and to vegetation clusters with significant visual impacts. 
1.18  Use hardy plant and tree species. 
a.  Incorporate native tree and plant species in landscape design, whenever possible. 
b.  Reserve the use of high-maintenance plants, if necessary, for small accent areas in the landscape. 
1.19  Use landscaping to enhance pedestrian improvements. 
a.  Use plantings to define the edges of sidewalks, pedestrian paths and outdoor open space. 
b.  Use plantings to highlight building entries. 
c.  Use shade trees to create a canopy over pedestrian areas, including sidewalks, paths along the street and paths through surface parking areas. 
1.20  Integrate landscaping and stormwater management systems. 
a.  Use stormwater management facilities, such as ponds, swales and bioretention areas, as landscape amenities. 
b.  See the guidelines for stormwater management on page 28 [sic] for more information. 

    Surface Parking. Site design considerations for parking include the location of surface lots, their visual impact and relationship to pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems. Surface parking lots should not be a visually prominent feature of sites in Farragut, especially those along high-traffic corridors, such as Kingston Pike, or in locations intended for strong pedestrian orientation such as the Town Center District. 
1.21  Minimize the visual impact of surface parking. 
a.  Locate a parking area to the interior of a new development site. This is especially important on a corner property where the street wall should have a sense of enclosure. 
b.  Divide a large parking area into small "pods" that maintain the traditional sense of smaller parking areas within a green landscape. 
c.  Soften the view of parked cars from a public sidewalk or street using a planted buffer of trees, shrubs and ground cover, or a low wall constructed from materials compatible with the surrounding context and street frontage. 
d.  For a small project, such as a new single-story building, consider locating up to two bays of parking (one drive aisle with parking spaces on either side) to the side (preferred) or in front of the building. 
1.22  Locate and design parking lots to allow for pedestrian access. 
a.  Provide landscaped islands with paths to promote pedestrian circulation across larger parking areas. 
b.  Avoid locating a new surface parking area directly in front of primary pedestrian entries. 
1.23  Design parking access to minimize potential negative impacts on pedestrians. 
a.  Use shared drives to access surface parking areas, whenever possible to minimize the number of curb cuts along a block. 
b.  Provide cross-property easements to share driveways and reduce the need for additional curb-cuts, when feasible. 
    Farragut Zoning Ordinance Landscaping Requirements 
    The Farragut Zoning Ordinance provides base landscaping regulations for commercial, office, public and multi-family properties. 
    The ordinance also outlines requirements for submittal of a landscape plan to ensure that landscaping regulations have been met. 
    See "Town of Farragut Zoning Ordinance" on page 2 [sic] for more information on the relationship between zoning requirements and design guidelines. 

    Site Lighting. Site lighting includes streetlights, light fixtures in parking lots, pedestrian lighting and lighting to accent landscaping or building facades. The character and level of site lighting should help establish a sense of identity and cohesion. Site lighting should help create a sense of place, highlight distinctive architectural details, and reinforce the overall form, massing, and spatial characteristics of the building or site. Note that street lights are an important feature of the overall streetscape as addressed on page 14 [sic]. 
1.24  Scale site lighting to its purpose. 
a.  Use small scale fixtures with down-lighting, or light bollards within landscaping to illuminate pedestrian walkways, whenever possible. 
b.  Use fixtures that provide even lighting for a plaza, courtyard or patio area. 
c.  Use modest lighting to illuminate building entrances and entries into parking areas. 
d.  Do not provide greater illumination in parking areas than at building entrances or for pedestrian walkways. 
e.  Design street lighting to minimize light spill onto adjacent properties and the sky. 
1.25  Shield site lighting to minimize off-site glare. 
a.  Orient fixtures to provide down-lighting. 
b.  Incorporate cut-off shields into fixtures to direct light downward. 
c.  Avoid orienting fixtures to cast light upwards onto building facades and into sky. 

    Farragut Zoning Ordinance Outdoor Lighting Standards 
    The Farragut Zoning Ordinance includes base outdoor site lighting requirements for all properties in Farragut, including maximum footcandles for lighting, and maximum light pole height. See "Town of Farragut Zoning Ordinance" on page 2 [sic] for more information. 
Working with topography. 
    Many sites in Farragut include topological features such as slopes and ravines, or geological issues such as potential sinkholes or soil problems that influence the way that they may be developed. Where possible, site design should preserve and work within existing topography. Any re-grading should maintain pedestrian and vehicular connectivity while minimizing potential negative visual impacts of large retaining walls. 
1.26  Design a site to take advantage of existing topography. 
a.  Incorporate topographic features as natural or open space amenities. 
b.  Maintain pedestrian connections when re-grading a site. 
c.  Divide large grade changes into a series of benches and terraces, where feasible. 
d.  Re-grade the site as a stable, "natural" slope, when necessary. 
e.  Terrace parking lots on steep slopes, following site contours. 
1.27  Design a retaining wall to minimize impacts on the natural character of the site. 
a.  Terrace retaining walls on steeper slopes to minimize height of individual walls-test what happens. 
b.  Use high quality materials such as brick and stone in the design of a retaining wall. 
c.  Integrate landscaping into the design of a retaining wall. 
1.28  Design a building foundation to conform to the existing topography. 
a.  Step the foundation of a building to follow site contours, when feasible. 
b.  If stepping the foundation is not possible, disguise the cut with building placement and/or building walls, and provide a landscape buffer system at the top of a cut. 
1.29  Design a site to minimize vulnerability to sinkholes. 
a.  Ensure that stormwater is directed away from building foundations and not allowed to permeate into known unstable soils. 
b.  Install underground barrier systems to protect building foundations where sinkhole risk is high. 
c.  Do not locate buildings on site areas prone to sinkhole development. 

Service areas and utilities. 
    Service areas and utilities include loading docks, trash areas, electrical stations and other necessary functions. They should be located and designed to be visually unobtrusive and integrated with the design of the site and the building. Service areas are typically most appropriate when located to the rear of a building and not visible from the public right-of-way. 
1.30  Locate a utility or service area to minimize visual impacts from the street and sidewalk. 
a.  Locate a utility or service area to the side or rear of a building. 
b.  Orient a service area toward a service lane or alley. 
c.  Integrate mechanical equipment into the design of a building. 
d.  Consider integrating a service or utility area into a gap in a side or rear building wall. 
e.  Locate a utility or service area away from residential areas or outdoor open space. 
1.31  Locate and design a utility building or shed to minimize the visual impacts from the street and sidewalk. 
a.  Locate a utility building or shed to the rear of a primary structure. 
b.  If a shed is unenclosed, use wood or other high quality material with proven durability in the Farragut climate. 
1.32  Locate buildings and other site improvements to allow for potential future undergrounding of utility lines. 
a.  Install new utility service systems underground, and bury all existing above ground services when renovating. 
1.33  Enclose a free-standing utility or service area. 
a.  When not integrated into a building wall, enclose a utility or service area with an opaque wall of decorative block, brick, stone, cast-stone, split-faced block, stucco or other high-quality material with proven durability in the Farragut climate. 
b.  Screen the entrance to a utility or service area with a solid gate made from painted metal, wood or other high quality, non-reflective material that is detailed for visual interest. 
c.  Do not use chain link fencing in the design of a service area gate. 

Stormwater management and low-impact development. 
    Stormwater management addresses the conveyance and treatment of rainfall and other water entering a site. Low Impact Development (LID) is a specific development strategy to address stormwater in a way that closely mimics the natural, pre-development, hydrologic system. The guidelines below are intended to complement landscaping requirements in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance by promoting the use of low-impact development principles to meet those requirements while also providing site amenities that help enhance community image. 
1.34  Maintain pre-development hydrologic features to minimize stormwater impacts. 
a.  Incorporate a natural drainage way as an amenity into the site plan. 
b.  Avoid altering or obscuring natural drainage ways. 
1.35  Incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) principles to address stormwater as close to the source as possible. 
    Appropriate LID management systems include: 
a.  Permeable surfaces and paving systems. 
b.  Bioretention and other planted drainage areas. 
c.  Green roofs, rain barrels/cisterns and other building systems. 
d.  Development clustering. 
1.36  Incorporate stormwater management systems to maximize water quality. 
    Consider management systems that: 
a.  Infiltrate stormwater into the ground to mimic the natural water cycle. 
b.  Remove pollutants from stormwater through uptake by plants and trees in rain gardens. 
c.  Provide flows through vegetative buffers to remove nutrients and pollutants. 
1.37  Use stormwater management systems as site amenities. 
a.  Use rainwater as an amenity by directing stormwater to planted islands and other landscaping. 
b.  Include a detention area as part of the open space scheme for the site when feasible. 
c.  Incorporate plazas, courtyards and patios into and around stormwater management systems whenever feasible. 
d.  Consider incorporating a green roof to help a development integrate into a forested area while also helping to address stormwater impacts. 
e.  Minimize the use of rip rap and other devices that do not appear natural in character. 

See the Stormwater Matters page at www.townoffarragut.org/index.aspx?nid=171 for more information. 
Incremental site design improvements. 
    Many redevelopment projects will involve incremental improvements to existing development on a site, such as modest additions, new buildings or expanded parking areas. While improvements should consider long term objectives for the area and site, flexibility in the application of the design guidelines is appropriate for such projects to ensure that development is able to respond to current market conditions. 
    The design guidelines below address the location of incremental improvements and associated site design. See "Incremental Building Design Improvements" on page 50 [sic] for additional information on incremental improvements. 
1.38  Locate incremental improvements to anticipate future development. 
a.  Locate small-scale improvements to increase compliance with zoning standards and the intent of the design guidelines. 
b.  Locate small-scale improvements to accommodate future vehicular and pedestrian connections. For example, parking areas and drive aisles may be set up to accommodate future redevelopment. 
1.39  Locate and design incremental improvements to enhance the pedestrian environment of an existing development. 
a.  Site new buildings to maximize street frontage and minimize the visual impact of parking areas. 
b.  Place improvements to enhance the pedestrian environment. For example, new buildings and public open space areas may be located to create a pedestrian gateway into the site. 
c.  Plan for later pedestrian improvements, such as connections between the street and interior buildings, or to an adjacent neighborhood, when locating a new building or addition. 

    Community Feedback on Redevelopment 
    Participants in meetings and workshops for the design guidelines noted that encouraging redevelopment of under-utilized properties is one of the most important objectives for the guidelines to address. 
Phased redevelopment of an existing site. 
    In some cases, redevelopment of a site may be phased so that incremental improvements build towards long term objectives for the area and site. In the example illustrated below, an existing auto-oriented shopping center site in the Town Center subarea is redeveloped in a series of phases. Each phase builds on previous phases, ultimately producing a long-term redevelopment scenario that promotes the vision for the Town Center as a traditional downtown with a variety of shops, restaurants, businesses and residences in a pedestrian-oriented setting. 

Neighborhood site design transitions. 
    Neighborhood transitions address the relationship between new or redeveloping commercial, office, mixed-use or multi-family residential uses and adjacent low-scale residential neighborhoods. 
    Site design adjacent to an existing or future residential neighborhood should provide a compatible transition that minimizes potential negative impacts while promoting positive connections. Designs that incorporate compatible uses and designs, and which link commercial and mixed-use areas with the adjacent residential neighborhoods are generally preferred as illustrated in "Strategies to Promote a Compatible Transition to Adjacent Neighborhood/Agricultural Land" on page 32 [sic]. Note that guidelines for scale transitions related to building design are provided in "Neighborhood Building Design Transitions" on page 52 [sic]. 
1.40  Design a commercial or mixed-use site to be compatible with adjacent neighborhoods. 
a.  Place and orient buildings to minimize potential negative impacts on an adjacent residential neighborhood. 
b.  Avoid orienting the rear of buildings toward an adjacent residential neighborhood. 
c.  Avoid creating an impassible barrier between a commercial or mixed-use site and an adjacent neighborhood. 
d.  Avoid orienting blank rear walls towards an adjacent residential neighborhood. 
e.  Do not locate mechanical or service areas directly adjacent to a residential neighborhood. 
f.  See "Strategies to Promote a Compatible Transition to Adjacent Neighborhood/Agricultural Land" on page 32 [sic] for more information. 
1.41  Design landscape buffer areas to provide shared amenities. Amenities shared between a commercial or mixed-use development and an adjacent residential neighborhood may include: 
a.  Picnic areas. 
b.  Exercise areas. 
c.  Playgrounds. 
d.  Water features, including landscaped stormwater management facilities. 
e.  Other landscape features. 
1.42  Provide pedestrian, bike and vehicular connections to adjacent neighborhoods. 
a.  Where possible, extend paths or small vehicular lanes to connect with streets and paths in an adjacent neighborhood. 
b.  Design pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems to consider potential future connections to adjacent neighborhoods. 
c.  Incorporate breaks in a landscape buffer to allow for pedestrian and bicycle connections. 
d.  Do not incorporate continuous walls, fences or landscaping that prevents pedestrian or bicycle connections across a landscaped buffer area. 

Strategies to promote a compatible transition to adjacent neighborhood/agricultural land. 
    Where new development in Farragut adjoins an existing neighborhood or agricultural land, it has typically incorporated a landscape buffer area to minimize potential negative impacts. In some cases, however, other strategies may provide a compatible transition while encouraging pedestrian and bicycle connections between neighborhoods and adjacent shops, services or employment centers. Three such strategies are illustrated below. 
    Note that the edges of a new development may incorporate a variety of strategies, including a typical landscape buffer or some combination of the strategies illustrated below. Where a landscape buffer is used, it should incorporate breaks for pedestrian and bicycle connections. 

2.0 - BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES 
    New construction and redevelopment in Farragut should work with the surrounding landscape and site design to enhance community identity, help differentiate the Town from surrounding areas and foster a unique sense of place. 
    This chapter provides design guidelines for the visual and functional character of buildings throughout Farragut. It begins with a case study that illustrates how the guidelines combine to promote high-quality building design in Farragut, followed by specific guidelines for building design. 
    The guidelines in this chapter apply to new buildings and expansion or improvement of existing buildings as described in "Application of The Guidelines" on page 3 [sic]. The design guidelines do not apply to single-family or two-family properties. Flexibility in the application of some design guidelines may also be available for redevelopment, minor projects or other projects as noted throughout the chapter. 
    Note that Chapter 1 on page 9 [sic] provides guidelines for the site design portion of a new construction, improvement or redevelopment project and Chapter 3 on page 53 [sic] provides additional context-sensitive design guidelines for projects located in specific subareas such as the Town Center or along Kingston Pike. 

    Building Design Case Study: Town Center Redevelopment. 
    The case study below illustrates redevelopment of existing properties at the intersection of Kingston Pike and North Campbell Station Road. The design meets the intent of the building design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a large site that is designated as Mixed Use Town Center on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Town Center subarea starting on page 54 [sic]. 
    Note that the case study assumes application of the Town Center Zoning District (TCD) to the site. It is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles when applied in a Town Center setting and does not represent a specific development proposal. See "Phased Redevelopment of an Existing Site" on page 30 [sic] for a description of how redevelopment of this site could be phased over time. 

    Building Design Case Study: Lakefront/Concord Road Gateway. 
    The case study below illustrates development and redevelopment of existing properties where Concord Road enters Farragut from the south. The design meets the intent of the building design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a site that is primarily designated as Commercial on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Lakefront/Concord Road subarea on page 63 [sic]. 
    This case study is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles and does not represent a specific development proposal. The illustrated development helps create a welcoming gateway to Farragut while maintaining compatibility with the natural and very low-scale residential surroundings. It also includes design features that reference the nearby historic Concord Village. The case study incorporates a widened Concord Road as described in "Concord Road Widening Project" on page 64 [sic]. 

    Building Design Case Study: Outlet Drive Development. 
    The case study below illustrates development on an existing property located between Outlet Drive and Interstate 75 near the northern boundary of Farragut. The design meets the intent of the building design guidelines in this chapter, as applied to a site that is primarily designated as Office/Light Industrial on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. It also meets the intent of the design guidelines for the Outlet Drive subarea on page 66 [sic]. 
    This case study is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles and does not represent a specific development proposal. The illustrated development is intended to enhance community image through high-quality design on a key site and signal arrival into Farragut for motorists on the Interstate. 


Building scale. 
    The overall size, height and form of a building help determine how large it appears, and whether it is compatible with the surrounding context. Although a new building may be larger than adjacent buildings, it should not be monolithic in scale or create a jarring contrast. Recognizing existing patterns such as varied heights, smaller building masses and articulated facades, will help a new building fit with its neighbors and the overall context of Farragut. 
    Building Height. Maximum overall building height is addressed by the Farragut zoning code. New development should meet zoning requirements while recognizing traditional height variations in Farragut and stepping down towards adjacent lower-scale buildings. 
2.1  Provide variation in building heights. 
a.  Use variation in building and parapet heights to add visual interest and reduce boxy or monolithic building masses. 
b.  Incorporate height variations that are similar to the heights of adjacent buildings. 
2.2  Position taller building elements to minimize visual impacts. 
a.  Step back a larger building mass from the street when possible to reduce looming effects. 
b.  Use lower scale buildings or building elements to transition the scale of a taller building towards lower-scale buildings on adjacent properties. 
2.3  Design floor-to-floor heights to establish a sense of scale and reflect Farragut traditions. 
a.  While overall building heights may vary along a block, design a building to appear similar in height when perceived at the street level. 
b.  Design the first floor height to be taller than any upper floors and to appear similar in dimension to those seen traditionally. 

    Building Articulation. Building articulation includes vertical or horizontal changes in materials, texture or wall plane that influence perceived building scale. New development in Farragut should incorporate articulation techniques that promote a sense of human scale and divide the mass and scale of a larger building into smaller parts that relate to traditionally-scaled buildings. 
2.4  Use vertical articulation techniques to add visual interest and express traditional facade widths. 
    Appropriate vertical articulation techniques include: 
a.  Wall plane offsets such as notches or varied facade setbacks. 
b.  Wall projections such as columns, moldings or pilasters. 
c.  Vertical variations in material. 
2.5  Use horizontal articulation techniques to establish a sense of human scale in the design of a larger building. 
    Appropriate horizontal articulation techniques include: 
a.  Stepping back taller building elements. 
b.  Belt courses, expression lines or other techniques that provide horizontal expression. 
c.  Awnings, canopies or other features that help define the ground floor of a building. 
d.  Varied roof forms. See "Roof Form" on page 40 [sic] for more information. 
e.  Horizontal variations in material. 
f.  Horizontally dividing the facade into a distinctive base, middle and cap. See "5. Base, Middle, Cap Design" on page 39 [sic] for more information. 

    Options for Building Articulation. The design options described and illustrated below may be used individually, or in combination, to meet the intent of the design guidelines for building articulation on page 38 [sic]. Note that other creative building articulation strategies may also be appropriate. 

Architectural features. 
    A building's architectural features help establish its design quality and convey a unique community image. Such features include iconic design that fosters a unique sense of place, facade features that add visual interest and ground floor design elements that encourage pedestrian activity. 
    Iconic Design Features. Iconic design features include those that help define a building, convey a unique appearance, or make an area more memorable and interesting to visitors. New development in a highly-visible location, such as the intersection of arterial roads, should incorporate iconic design features to foster a unique sense of place, add visual interest and help differentiate Farragut from surrounding areas. In most cases, large-scale new development projects in any location should also incorporate iconic design features. 
2.6  Use iconic design features to foster a unique sense of place. 
a.  Incorporate iconic design features such as well-defined entries or tower elements into the design of a new development that is large-scale or located in a highly visible location. See "Options for Conveying Iconic Design" on page 41 [sic] for additional information. 
b.  Consider incorporating scaled-down versions of iconic features, such as a modest tower element above an entry, on a smaller building. 
2.7  Locate iconic design features to maximize their visibility and impact. 
    Appropriate locations include: 
a.  At primary building entries. 
b.  Adjacent, or at the entrance to, outdoor public spaces. 
c.  At the corner of a building (especially when the building itself is at the intersection of two streets or lanes). 
d.  At the termination of a view or vista (i.e., located to be highly visible when looking down a street or path). 
    Roof Form. Roof form addresses the visible characteristics of a building's roof. New development should incorporate roof forms that convey compatible mass and scale, add visual interest and are appropriate to a building's use. 
2.8  Create a sense of visual interest by using a variety of roof forms along the street. 
a.  Use a combination of gable, hip and flat roof forms to provide visual interest. See "4. Varied Roof Forms" on page 41 [sic] for illustrations. 
b.  Vary the roof profile by steeping down some parts of the facade. 
2.9  Consider incorporating a roof form that provides a "cap." 
a.  Define a flat roof form with a distinct parapet or cornice line. This can help reinforce a vertical base, middle and cap building articulation, and contribute to a sense of iconic design. 
b.  Use an overhang on sloped roof forms on multi-family buildings. This helps to define the roof as a building cap. 
c.  See "5. Base, Middle, Cap Design" on page 39 [sic] for more information. 

    Options for Conveying Iconic Design. Several options for conveying iconic building design are illustrated below on a one-story commercial building, a three-story multi-family building and a two-story mixed-use building. They may be used individually, or in combination, to meet the intent of the design guidelines for iconic design on page 40 [sic]. Note that one feature may sometimes meet the definition of more than one option (i.e., a tower element may be rounded and help define a building entry). Other creative strategies may also be appropriate. 

    Overall Facade Character. 
    Visible building facades that incorporate high-quality design features enhance Farragut's community image and convey an active and vibrant appearance to passing vehicles and pedestrians. The design guidelines for overall facade character below apply to visible facade areas that face public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian areas or parking lots. They are especially important for visible facades along a major commercial corridor such as Kingston Pike or Campbell Station Road. 
    Note that the guidelines for "Iconic Design Features" on page 40 [sic] and "Building Materials and Colors" on page 46 [sic] provide additional strategies and options to promote high-quality facade character. 
2.10  Design a building facade to enhance community image. 
a.  Use high-quality building materials on visible facades. See page 46 [sic] for more information. 
b.  Incorporate design features that add depth and detail, such as deep roof eaves and changes in the facade plane that create patterns of light and shadow. See "Building Articulation" on page 38 [sic] for additional information. 
2.11  Design a building facade to be compatible with its context. 
a.  When possible, match the alignment of facade features, such as canopies, windows and roof cornices or parapets, on adjacent buildings. 
b.  Consider using materials that are similar in appearance to those used on adjacent buildings where those materials are consistent with the guidelines on page 46 [sic]. 
c.  Do not use materials or other facade features that contrast sharply with materials and other features on adjacent buildings. 
2.12  Design a building facade to convey visual interest. 
a.  Incorporate facade features such as pergolas, arcades or awnings to add visual interest. Note that the "Design Options for Addressing Windowless Facade Areas" on page 43 [sic] may also be used to add visual interest to a building facade. 
b.  Consider using simple features, such as an awning, to convey visual interest as part of a minor project or small project, such as a new single-story building. 
2.13  Design a building facade to promote an active appearance. 
a.  Use transparent building elements, such as windows, whenever possible. 
b.  Where it is not possible to incorporate transparent building elements, use other design features to add visual interest. See "Design Options for Addressing Windowless Facade Areas" on page 43 [sic] for additional information. 

    Design Options for Addressing Windowless Facade Areas. 
    In some cases, a larger building may have windowless facade areas where the interior of the building contains parking, retail shelving, storage or other inactive uses. The design options illustrated below are appropriate to meet the intent of Guideline 2.13 on page 42 [sic] by promoting an active appearance on a windowless facade area facing a sidewalk, parking area or other public frontage. 
    Note that other creative strategies are also appropriate to address windowless facade areas, including the "Design Options for a Pedestrian-Friendly Commercial Ground Floor" on page 45 [sic]. 

    Ground Floor Design. Ground floor building design should incorporate features that help create a pedestrian-friendly street level. In a commercial area, it is especially important to incorporate active features such as ground floor storefront windows. In a multi-family residential area, the ground floor may incorporate other design features, such as porches and stoops, to engage the sidewalk and street. 
2.14  Design the ground floor of a building facade to engage the public realm and promote pedestrian activity. 
a.  Clearly define a primary entry and orient it towards the street. 
b.  Incorporate recessed entries, courtyards or other indentations in the ground floor facade. 
c.  Use design features such as windows, display areas and awnings to engage the street and add pedestrian interest. See "Design Options for a Pedestrian-Friendly Commercial Ground Floor" on page 45 [sic] for additional information. 
d.  Avoid long blank wall areas that will diminish pedestrian interest. See "Design Options for Addressing Windowless Facade Areas" on page 43 [sic] for additional information. 
2.15  Use high quality, durable materials to define the ground floor and add visual interest. 
a.  Employ materials at the ground level to withstand on-going contact with the public, sustaining impacts without compromising the appearance. 
b.  Use changes in material to add ground-floor interest. 
c.  See "Building Materials and Colors" on page 46 [sic] for additional guidance on the application of materials. 

    Design Options for a Pedestrian-Friendly Commercial Ground Floor. The design options described and illustrated below may be used individually, or in combination, to meet the intent of the design guidelines for ground floor design on page 44 [sic]. In most cases, the street level of a building should incorporate windows and other pedestrian-friendly features. Where windows are not possible, other features may be used, including those described in "Design Options for Addressing Windowless Facade Areas" on page 43 [sic]. 

Building materials and colors. 
    Exterior building materials and colors provide a sense of scale and texture and are used to convey design quality and visual interest. Building facades should use high-quality, durable, materials that contribute to the visual continuity of the context and convey high quality in design and detail. Masonry should be used as a significant facade element on new construction. 
    Note that Chapter 3 includes additional context-specific guidance on building materials for some specific subareas. The guidelines for "Overall Facade Character" on page 42 [sic] also provide additional strategies and options related to use of building materials and colors. 
2.16  Use compatible materials to enhance community image. 
a.  Ensure that facade materials have proven durability in the Farragut climate. 
b.  Incorporate using high-quality, durable, stone veneer if it is detailed to have the appearance of authentic stone. At a building corner, the veneer should wrap around the corner and should, at a minimum, extend to a depth of traditional stone. Samples of the materials shall be submitted with the application to ensure compliance with these adopted guidelines. 
c.  Incorporate maintaining existing facade materials as part of a redevelopment or adaptive reuse project while using high-quality materials for new facade accents. 
d.  Do not use fabricated metal panels or vinyl siding. 
e.  Do not use highly reflective materials. 
f.  Do not use synthetic stucco (EIFS), concrete masonry units (CMU), fiber cement siding (hardie-board) or panelized brick as a primary facade material, except on less visible upper-floor facades, or to allow for flexibility in materials on the facade of a minor project. 

2.17  Use masonry materials to promote a cohesive community image. 
a.  For new construction, use masonry as the primary material on at least 75 percent of the net facade area. See Guideline 3.15 on page 58 [sic] for additional masonry requirements in the Town Center District. 
b.  Ensure that synthetic masonry materials convey an authenticity identical to that of genuine masonry. 

2.18  Use accent materials to enhance visual interest. 
a.  Use accent materials to highlight major facade components, iconic building elements, windows and entries. 
b.  Consider using metal, stone, concrete and other contrasting accent materials for window headers and sills, belt courses, lintels, and cornices. 
2.19  Use materials to convey a sense of human scale and visual interest to pedestrians. 
a.  Add visual interest through texture, finish and detailing. 
b.  Use changes in material to add visual interest while assuring that the overall composition of the building design remains intact and does not appear overly busy. 
c.  Apply materials in units, panels or modules that help convey a sense of scale, and provide visual interest through patterns and shadow lines. 
d.  Do not use large panelized products or other materials that produce extensive featureless surfaces. 
2.20  Use exterior material, paint and roof colors that are compatible with the surrounding context. 
a.  Use earth tones or other muted colors on the majority of the building facade and roof area. 
b.  Consider maintaining the existing facade color as part of a redevelopment project. 
c.  Use of bright or contrasting colors for building accents and entry areas will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
d.  Do not use unpainted metal roofing. 
e.  Color bands used as building trims and accent colors may feature any color reflected in Appendix B of the Architectural Standards, provided that they are limited to ten percent of the facade segment on which they are proposed and have a height of no more than 18 inches. 


(Ord. No. 16-28, § 2, 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 4-13-2017) 
Illustrated building materials. 
    A number of building materials are illustrated below. As noted, they may be used individually, or in combination, to meet the intent of the design guidelines for building materials on page 46 [sic]. 

Incremental building design improvements. 
    Many projects will involve improvements to existing development, such as facade renovations or adaptive reuse of existing buildings. Incremental improvements may also include the addition of new buildings to existing developments. While such improvements should consider long term objectives for the area and site, flexibility in the application of the design guidelines is appropriate to ensure that development is able to respond to current market conditions. 
    The design guidelines below address incremental building design improvements. See "Incremental Site Design Improvements" on page 29 [sic] for additional information on incremental improvements. 
    Facade Renovation. Facade renovation is encouraged to enhance community image and help attract tenants to aging commercial or office buildings. Renovation may include ground floor improvements to attract pedestrian activity, the addition of iconic design features or complete replacement of an existing facade. When possible, such incremental improvements should anticipate future phases of development that may include new buildings, parking areas and pedestrian paths. 
2.21  When possible, renovate an aging commercial or office facade to enhance community image. 
    Features to consider include: 
a.  The addition of iconic building features or improved building materials to enhance community image. 
b.  Improved ground floor design or the addition of small ground floor uses, such as a cafe or bank, to a large-format retail building to encourage pedestrian activity. 
2.22  Anticipate future phases of development when renovating a facade. 
a.  Consider relocating a primary building entrance to provide more direct pedestrian access to planned buildings or parking areas. 
b.  Consider existing and future view corridors when locating iconic design features on a renovated facade. 

    Adaptive Reuse. Adaptive reuse is the process of reusing an old site or building for a purpose other than which it was built or designed for. Preserving and adapting a structure to a new use has environmental benefits and may help preserve the existing character of an area. Re-using a building preserves the energy and resources invested in its construction, and removes the need for producing new construction materials. Adaptive reuse projects are encouraged. 
2.23  Adapt an existing structure to a new use as an alternative to demolition whenever possible. 
a.  Consider the environmental benefits of adaptive reuse when planning improvements. 
b.  Consider the potential economic benefits of adaptive reuse when planning improvements. 
2.24  Consider future objectives for the site when adapting an existing structure to a new use. 
a.  Provide building improvements to enhance community image. 
b.  Consider the relationship of the existing building to potential future development and improved pedestrian connections. 
c.  Maintain building features, such as roof forms or details, that relate to the existing character of the area. 

Neighborhood building design transitions. 
    Neighborhood transitions address the relationship between new or redeveloping commercial, office, mixed-use or multi-family residential uses and adjacent low-scale residential neighborhoods. The design of buildings adjacent to an existing or future residential neighborhood should provide a compatible transition that minimizes potential negative impacts while promoting visual connections. Where possible, buildings located near an adjacent neighborhood should have a lower-scale residential character to provide a compatible transition. Such buildings could include town houses or small village-scale commercial, office or retail buildings that incorporate residential building design features including pitched roofs and high levels of facade articulation. 
    Note that guidelines for scale transitions related to site design are provided in "Neighborhood Site Design Transitions" on page 31 [sic]. Also see "Farragut Zoning Ordinance Buffer Requirements" on page 31 [sic] for information on zoning regulations related to neighborhood transitions. 
2.25  Provide a compatible scale transition adjacent to a residential neighborhood. 
a.  Step down building heights adjacent to a residential neighborhood. 
b.  Provide a high level of facade articulation. 
c.  Consider breaking a larger building into a series of smaller buildings that better relate to the scale of the adjacent residential neighborhood. 
2.26  Incorporate residential design features adjacent to a residential neighborhood. 
    Such features may include: 
a.  Pitched roof forms. 
b.  Front porches. 
c.  Balconies. 
d.  Small groupings of vertical windows. 

3.0 - GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC SUBAREAS 
    New construction and redevelopment in Farragut should incorporate context-sensitive design features that respond to the community's subareas to foster a unique sense of place. 
    This chapter provides design guidelines for several specific subareas within Farragut. Most of the subareas comprise all or part of subareas identified in Farragut's Comprehensive Plan (see "Town of Farragut 2025 Comprehensive Land Use Plan" on page 2 [sic] for more information). However, some subareas, such as "Outlet Drive" are not specifically identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    The guidelines in this chapter build on the guidelines in Chapters 1-3 to add additional context sensitivity. The guidelines only address subareas that are envisioned to include commercial, mixed-use or higher-density residential development and redevelopment. Guidelines for additional subareas may be added in the future. 
    Farragut Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map 
    The subarea guidelines build on concepts identified on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map. A map showing Future Land Use designations is provided for each subarea. 
    See "Future Land Use Map" on page 2 [sic] for more information. 


Town Center subarea. 
    Farragut's Comprehensive Plan envisions the creation of a traditional downtown with a variety of shops, restaurants, businesses and residences in a pedestrian-oriented setting. The guidelines provided here apply primarily to the area designated as Mixed Use Town Center on the Future Land Use Map around Kingston Pike and Campbell Station Road. 
    New development and redevelopment in the Town Center should help facilitate its transformation into a pedestrian-oriented mixed-use center with a variety of civic, retail and entertainment uses alongside high-quality outdoor open spaces and pedestrian amenities. The design guidelines below build on Zoning Ordinance requirements for the Town Center District (TCD) to encourage development of a downtown for Farragut. 
    Site Design in the Town Center District. New construction and redevelopment should incorporate site design features that are consistent with the vision for a pedestrian-oriented Town Center. Note that the site design case study on page 10 [sic] illustrates a redevelopment concept that is consistent with this vision. 
3.1  Design streets to promote safe bicycle and pedestrian activity in the Town Center. 
a.  Design street widths to encourage low vehicle speeds and limit pedestrian crossing distance. 
b.  Provide pedestrian crossings at regular intervals. 
c.  Limit curb cuts for vehicular access to avoid pedestrian-vehicle conflicts. 
d.  Do not include features, such as a continuous raised median, that inhibit pedestrian crossings or activity. 
3.2  Coordinate streetscape elements throughout a Town Center development. 
a.  Plant street trees at regular intervals along primary and secondary streets. 
b.  Use decorative street lights and other street furnishings that help establish a sense of identity within the development. 
3.3  Design the street frontage to promote pedestrian activity throughout a Town Center development. 
a.  Align buildings near the sidewalk edge to provide a more urban, pedestrian-oriented street edge. Note that minimum setbacks provided in the Farragut Zoning Ordinance require buildings to be located near the sidewalk edge. 
b.  Locate buildings between the street and parking areas to minimize vehicular impacts on pedestrians. 
3.4  Provide high-quality pedestrian and bicycle connections throughout a Town Center development. 
a.  Provide pedestrian connections to all buildings, parking lots, adjacent developments, and adjacent vacant properties. 
b.  Provide regular direct pedestrian connections between parking areas and primary streets. 
c.  Provide pedestrian crosswalks with direct curb-ramp connections at all intersections. 
d.  Provide mid-block pedestrian crosswalks, when possible. 
e.  Route pedestrian connections to and through outdoor open spaces, such as courtyards, patios and plazas. 

3.5  Provide a highly-active pedestrian area between buildings and streets classified as "primary" in the Town Center. 
    The pedestrian area along a primary street should include: 
a.  A "furnishing zone," at least five feet wide, between the street or parking area and sidewalk to provide space for benches, trees and planters, as well as access to cars parked along the street. 
b.  An unobstructed sidewalk at least ten feet in width. 
c.  A "maintenance strip," at least five feet wide, between the sidewalk and building facade to provide space for outdoor seating, planters, canopy overhangs and other features. 
3.6  Provide a landscaped pedestrian area between buildings and streets classified as "secondary" in the Town Center. 
    The landscaped pedestrian area along a secondary street should include: 
a.  A tree lawn or grass strip, at least eight feet wide, between the street or parking area and sidewalk to provide a landscaped edge. 
b.  An unobstructed sidewalk or path at least eight feet in width. 
c.  An additional area, at least two feet wide, between the sidewalk and building facade to provide space for utilities and allow maintenance access. 
3.7  Locate and furnish outdoor open spaces to encourage pedestrian activity in the Town Center. 
a.  Locate outdoor open spaces near building entries or other focal points. 
b.  Furnish outdoor open spaces with durable and functional elements that are designed for active use. 
c.  Locate furnishings so they will not impede pedestrian access to buildings or parking areas. 
d.  Design and locate stormwater management systems such as bioretention areas to serve as usable open space or site amenities. 


3.8  Locate and design surface parking areas to minimize visual impacts on the Town Center. 
a.  Locate a parking area to the rear of buildings. 
b.  Do not locate a parking area adjacent to a primary street. 
c.  Where a parking area will be located adjacent to a secondary street, use a planted buffer of trees, shrubs and ground cover, and/or a low landscape wall to soften the view of parked cars. 
d.  Divide all parking drive aisles with landscaped islands. 
3.9  Design parking lots to promote pedestrian access in the Town Center. 
a.  Include a functional path or sidewalk to provide direct pedestrian access along all landscaped islands that run perpendicular to buildings. 
b.  Include regular functional paths and crosswalks across parking lots where parking drive aisles are located parallel to buildings. 

    Building Design in the Town Center District. New construction and redevelopment should incorporate building design features that are consistent with the vision for a Town Center that creates a more urban downtown for Farragut. Note that the building design case study on page 34 [sic] illustrates a redevelopment concept that is consistent with this vision. 
3.10  Scale buildings to help create an "urban" street edge in the Town Center. 
a.  Scale buildings to provide a two to three-story street wall that provides a sense of activity and enclosure along primary streets. 
b.  Where building heights vary by more than one story, provide a stepped transition. 
c.  Use one-story elements only where buildings are adjacent to natural areas, low-scale residential neighborhoods or automobile-oriented streets at the edge of a Town Center development. 
d.  Use vertical articulation techniques that convey a sense of varied facade widths along the sidewalk edge that emulates a traditional "Main Street" context. See "Building Articulation" on page 38 [sic] for more information. 
3.11  Articulate buildings into a base, middle and cap. 
a.  Clearly define the base level (ground floor storefront) with a tall floor-to-floor height, canopies/awnings and other techniques. See Guideline 3.13 for more information. 
b.  Provide architectural details and regularly spaced windows on the middle portion of the building (upper facade). 
c.  Clearly define a decorative building cap (building cornice) with a substantial cornice or other cap element made of high quality materials such as metal or wood. 
d.  See "5. Base, Middle, Cap Design" on page 39 [sic] for more information. 
3.12  Incorporate architectural features that promote the Town Center as a memorable downtown destination. 
a.  Incorporate iconic design elements into all buildings at key intersections or open space focal points. See "Iconic Design Features" on page 40 [sic] for more information. 
b.  Use a variety of roof forms to provide visual interest while maintaining cornice alignment among adjacent buildings. 
3.13  Design a storefront to engage the public realm and promote pedestrian activity. 
    A storefront should include: 
a.  A tall street level height 
b.  A high level of transparent glass 
c.  A clearly defined entry (preferably recessed) 
d.  Canopies, awnings or other features to define the pedestrian area. See "Ground Floor Design" on page 44 [sic] for more information. 

3.14  Minimize the visual impacts of a parking structure on nearby pedestrian areas or major streets. 
a.  Wrap the majority of the ground floor of a parking structure with active uses adjacent to pedestrian areas. 
b.  Use decorative architectural screens with durable materials and finishes that reflect traditional window patterns to hide parked cars from the street where a parking structure is not wrapped with other uses. 
c.  Provide interesting details and materials to avoid presenting a "back side" to neighborhood properties and the street. For example, the sides of the building should incorporate durable architectural screens, art wall surfaces and/or articulation. 
d.  Do not locate parking on the ground level if the structure fronts a primary or secondary street. 
3.15  Use compatible, high-quality facade materials in the Town Center. 
a.  Use of face brick on at least 75 percent of the net facade area. 
b.  Use complementary materials on adjoining building facades. 
c.  See "Building Materials and Colors" on page 46 [sic] for more information. 

3.16  Preserve significant historic resources, such as the Campbell Station Inn, in the Town Center. 
a.  Maintain integrity of historic building forms, features and materials, whenever possible. 
b.  Repair, rather than replace, damaged historic features and materials, whenever possible. 
c.  If repair is not possible, replace damaged historic features and materials "in kind." 
d.  Ensure that any additions to an historic building are located on a non-primary facade and designed to be subordinate in scale. 
3.17  Integrate historic resources, such as the Campbell Station Inn, into the design of a new Town Center development. 
a.  Locate outdoor open space or landscape areas between historic resources and new buildings to highlight the historic resource. 
b.  Scale adjacent buildings to be compatible with an historic resource. A large new building should step down in scale where it adjoins an historic resource. 

    Computer Visualization of Town Center Improvements. 
    The computer visualizations below illustrate existing conditions and potential improvements on a specific site in the Town Center District. The illustrated improvements meet the intent of the design guidelines, as applied to a site that is designated as Mixed Use Town Center on Farragut's Future Land Use Map. The improvements are intended to enhance community image through high-quality design on a key site adjacent to a major intersection. New buildings are aligned at the sidewalk edge to provide a more urban, pedestrian-oriented street edge with parking located to the rear. The storefront incorporates a tall street level height and level of transparency that help define an active pedestrian level. 
    Note that the computer visualization assumes application of the Town Center Zoning District (TCD) to the site. It is provided to illustrate design guidelines principles when applied in a Town Center setting and does not represent a specific development proposal. See page 10 [sic] and page 34 [sic] for additional illustrations of potential development in the Town Center District. 

Kingston Pike subareas. 
    Farragut's Comprehensive Plan describes three distinct subareas along Kingston Pike (in addition to the Town Center subarea described on page 54 [sic]). The guidelines provided here apply to the areas described as Kingston Pike/Watt Road, Central Kingston Pike and Kingston Pike/Lovell Road in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    New development and redevelopment in the Kingston Pike/Watt Road subarea should support additional medium density residential development while remaining compatible with existing neighborhoods. It should also incorporate design elements that preserve natural vistas and provide a welcoming gateway for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians entering Farragut on Watt Road or Kingston Pike. 
    New development and redevelopment in the Central Kingston Pike subarea should increase residential density to bring residents into areas that were once exclusively commercial. New residents will support development of small-scale offices and neighborhood-serving retail in low multi-story buildings along new pedestrian-oriented side streets. Note that this area is referenced as "Kingston Pike" in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Although new development and redevelopment in the Kingston Pike/Lovell Road subarea will continue to be primarily automobile-oriented, it should incorporate design features that enhance community image and provide a welcoming gateway into Farragut. 
3.18  Provide high quality streetscape and landscape features along Kingston Pike. 
a.  Coordinate streetscape elements with elements along the Kingston Pike frontage whenever possible. See Guideline 1.2 on page 14 [sic] for more information. 
b.  Coordinate landscape features along the Kingston Pike frontage whenever possible. See Guideline 1.16 on page 23 [sic] for more information. 
3.19  Design the street frontage to promote pedestrian activity along Kingston Pike. 
a.  Locate parking areas behind buildings, whenever possible. 
b.  Locate buildings near the street and sidewalk where a reduced front setback would be compatible with the surrounding context. See "Front Setback Alternatives Through Design Review" on page 17 [sic] for additional information. 
c.  See Guideline 1.6 on page 16 [sic] for additional strategies. 

3.20  Incorporate design elements that provide a welcoming community gateway in the Kingston Pike/Watt Road and Kingston Pike/Lovell Road areas. 
    Appropriate "gateway" design elements for properties near the entry to Farragut include: 
a.  Plazas and outdoor patio areas that signal a sense of activity to motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians entering Farragut. 
b.  Enhanced landscaping, such as native flowering trees, large native ornamental plants and stone landscape walls, that is highly visible to motorists entering Farragut. 
c.  Landscaped space for municipal welcome signage. 
d.  Large-scale public art that is highly-visible to motorists entering Farragut-See "Public Art" on page 22 [sic] for additional information. 
e.  Building placement that preserves existing natural vistas, especially in the Kingston Pike/Watt Road subarea. 
3.21  Provide a high-quality, interconnected pedestrian environment in the Central Kingston Pike subarea. 
a.  Design new mixed-use developments along a gridded, or semi-gridded, network of streets to provide connectivity. 
b.  Provide comfortable bike and pedestrian connections to surrounding neighborhoods. 
c.  Incorporate pedestrian-oriented amenities, such as pocket parks, plazas, bike storage and wide sidewalks. 
d.  Use pedestrian-scaled signage, whenever possible. 
3.22  Incorporate a consistent landscape setback along Kingston Pike in the Kingston Pike/Lovell area. 
a.  Provide a landscaped front setback area between buildings or parking areas and the street. 
b.  Provide a wide walking path within the landscaped setback. 
c.  Install decorative streetlights or other coordinated improvements along the street frontage. 

Lakefront/Concord Road subarea. 
    Farragut's Comprehensive Plan describes a "Lakefront" subarea on the northeast side of town near the shore of Fort Loudoun Lake. Although most of this area will remain as very low-density residential, the area near the intersection of Concord Road and Lake Ridge Drive is envisioned as a small activity hub that will provide a gateway to Farragut from the south. The guidelines below apply primarily to the area designated as Commercial on the Future Land Use Map near the intersection of Concord Road and Lake Ridge Drive. 
    New development and redevelopment in the Lakefront/Concord Road subarea should help create a welcoming gateway to Farragut while maintaining compatibility with the natural and very low-scale residential surroundings. New design should also incorporate features that reference the nearby historic Concord Village area, which is outside of the town boundary to the north of the Lakefront/Concord Road subarea. Note that the case study on page 11 [sic] and page 35 [sic] illustrates a redevelopment concept that is consistent with this vision. 
3.23  Ensure that new development in the Lakefront/Concord Road subarea is compatible with the existing, predominantly very low-scale residential character. 
a.  Locate low-scale residential buildings near the perimeter of a new development to provide a density transition to adjacent development. 
b.  Provide a forested buffer area around the perimeter of a new development. 
3.24  Maintain the existing naturalistic feel along the Concord Road frontage in the Lakefront/Concord subarea. 
a.  Maintain dense vegetation along the Concord Road frontage, except where such vegetation would block the visibility of new neighborhood-serving commercial development. 
b.  Maintain clusters of native trees and landscaping between buildings and the street. 
3.25  Incorporate design elements that provide a welcoming community gateway near Concord Road and Lake Ridge Drive in the Concord/Lakefront subarea. 
    Appropriate "gateway" design elements for properties near the entry to Farragut include: 
a.  Plazas and outdoor patio areas that signal a sense of activity and arrival to motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians entering Farragut. 
b.  Enhanced landscaping, such as native flowering trees, large native ornamental plants and stone landscape walls, that is highly visible to motorists entering Farragut. 
c.  Landscaped space for municipal welcome signage. 
d.  Building placement that preserves existing natural vistas. 

3.26  Incorporate design elements that reference the adjacent historic Concord Village in the Concord/Lakefront subarea. 
    Design elements that could be used to reference the historic Concord Village area include: 
a.  Varied landscape setbacks. 
b.  Stone landscape walls. 
c.  "Village scale" design that breaks commercial and mixed use buildings into small modules. 
d.  A variety of roof forms, including flat, pitched and front-facing gables. 

McFee Park roundabout subarea. 
    Farragut's Comprehensive Plan describes the southwestern part of town as the "McFee/Boyd Station" subarea. Although most of this area will remain as residential and recreational, the area around the new McFee Park roundabout provides an opportunity for a small mixed-use neighborhood center. 
    New development and redevelopment in the McFee Park Roundabout subarea should help create a pedestrian-oriented center while maintaining compatibility with the residential surroundings. 
3.27  Incorporate design elements that promote development of a pedestrian-oriented mixed-use neighborhood center in the McFee Park Roundabout subarea. 
a.  Provide connections to existing pedestrian networks in neighborhoods adjacent to the McFee Park Roundabout. 
b.  Incorporate pedestrian-oriented amenities, such as pocket parks, courtyards and wide sidewalks. 
c.  Incorporate "village scale" design that breaks commercial and mixed use buildings into small modules. 
d.  Use residential roof forms on commercial or mixed-use buildings. 
3.28  Incorporate design elements that relate to existing recreational amenities in the McFee Park Roundabout subarea. 
a.  Provide comfortable bike and pedestrian connections to surrounding neighborhoods, such as Pryse Farm. 
b.  Provide comfortable bike and pedestrian connections to surrounding recreational opportunities, such as McFee Park. 
c.  Incorporate amenities, such as a small dog park, to encourage pedestrian access from surrounding neighborhoods, whenever possible. 

Outlet Drive subarea. 
    Farragut's Comprehensive Plan outlines objectives for the overall "I-40" subarea around the interchange between Interstate 40 and North Campbell Station Road. Much of this area will remain as a regional commercial center. However, the area north of the Interstate along Outlet Drive provides an opportunity for a new light industrial and employment center. 
    New development and redevelopment in the Outlet Drive subarea should help raise the design quality of the area and incorporate iconic features that enhance community image as viewed from the Interstate and surrounding areas. Note that the case study on page 12 [sic] and page 36 [sic] illustrates a redevelopment concept that is consistent with this vision. 
3.29  Design a larger office or light industrial building in the Outlet Drive subarea to enhance community image. 
a.  Incorporate "four-sided design," such as high-quality materials on all facades, into buildings that will be visible from the interstate or other vantage points. 
b.  Vertically articulate a taller building (over two stories) into distinct base, middle and cap elements with a well-defined ground floor and a distinct roof, or upper story design. See "5. Base, Middle, Cap Design" on page 39 [sic] and Guideline 2.9 on page 40 [sic] for more information. 
c.  Use materials, such as masonry, that convey a high-quality appearance when viewed from a distance. See "Building Materials and Colors" on page 46 [sic] for more information on materials. 
3.30  Design a larger office or light industrial building in the Outlet Drive subarea to incorporate iconic features. 
a.  Incorporate tower elements and varied roof forms into the design of a larger building. 
b.  Locate iconic features where they will be visible from the interstate, and/or Outlet Drive. 
c.  See "Iconic Design Features" on page 40 [sic] for additional strategies. 

4.0 - GUIDELINES FOR SIGNS 

Signs are important elements in Farragut. 
    Balancing the functional requirements for signs with the objectives for the overall character of the area is a key consideration. The Town seeks to convey the commercial health of the community with signage that is in character with the community's landscape and buildings. 
    A new or modified sign should exhibit qualities of style, permanence and compatibility with the natural and built environment. It should also reflect the overall context of the building and surrounding area. 
    This chapter provides design guidelines for signs throughout Farragut including design guidelines for specific sign types and sign illumination. It also addresses signage in the Town Center. 

General sign guidelines. 
    A sign should be in character with the materials, colors and details of the building. Its content should be visually interesting and clearly legible. Illumination sources should be shielded to minimize glare and light pollution. 
4.1  Locate and design a sign to be subordinate to the overall site and building design. 
a.  Design a sign to be simple in character. 
b.  Locate and design a sign to emphasize rather than overshadow building features. 
c.  Do not locate or design a sign to be the most prominent feature of a site or building. 
4.2  Use sign materials that are compatible with the architectural character and materials of the building. 
a.  Use permanent, durable materials that reflect the Farragut context. Such materials may include painted or carved wood, individual wood or cast metal letters or symbols, stone such as slate, marble or sandstone, and painted, gilded or sandblasted glass. 
b.  Consider using a metal sign if it is appropriate to the architectural character of the building. 
c.  Do not use highly reflective materials on a sign. 
4.3  Use colors for the sign that are compatible with those of the building facade. 
a.  Use sign colors that complement, not clash, with the color of the building facade. 
b.  Limit the number of colors used on a sign. In general, no more than three colors should be used, although accent colors and additional colors for illustrations may be considered. 
c.  Use dark backgrounds with light colored lettering. Examples of preferred background colors are burgundy, red, forest green, chocolate brown, black, charcoal, and navy blue. Preferred lettering colors are ivory, white, or gold. 
d.  Avoid using "day glow" colors. 
4.4  Use simple, legible characters that enhance the visibility of sign content. 
a.  Use a typeface that is similar to traditional typefaces in the area when possible. 
b.  Traditional block and curvilinear styles that are easy to read are preferred. 
c.  Avoid hard-to-read or overly intricate typeface styles. 
d.  Use no more than two or three distinct typefaces on a sign. 

Guidelines for specific sign types. 
    The guidelines below supplement the general design guidelines with additional information regarding the use of several specific sign types. Sign types are defined and illustrated on page 70 [sic]. 
4.5  Locate and design a wall sign to promote design compatibility among buildings. 
a.  Place a wall sign to align with other signs on nearby buildings. 
b.  Use a consistent design scheme or colors for wall signs related to neighboring businesses in the same building or center. 
c.  Design a wall sign to minimize the depth of a sign panel or letters. 
d.  Design a wall sign to fit within, rather than forward of, the fascia or other architectural details of a building. 
4.6  Locate and design a ground-mounted sign to be in character with its setting. 
a.  When using a ground-mounted sign, locate it in a landscaped area near the primary vehicular or pedestrian entrance to the site. 
b.  Integrate a ground-mounted sign into the overall landscape design. 
c.  Coordinate design and materials between ground-mounted signs and buildings on the same site whenever possible. 
4.7  Locate and design a directional parking sign to be subordinate to other on-site signage. 
a.  Coordinate design and materials with other on-site ground-mounted signage. 
b.  Use a simple design that clearly assists with on-site wayfinding. 
4.8  Locate and design an address sign to clearly indicate the property address. 
a.  Locate an address sign on the top portion of a ground-mounted sign when it is located at the primary entry to a site. 
b.  Locate coordinated address signs above or near each individual entrance to a business in a center when possible. 
c.  Design an address sign to be simple and subordinate in character. 

Illustrated sign types. 
    A number of typical sign types are defined and illustrated below for reference. These sign types relate to the general design guidelines for signs on page 62 [sic], as well as the guidelines for specific sign types on page 63 [sic]. Although some of the sign types illustrated below may be appropriate in the Town Center District (TCD), a different scale and design is often appropriate as illustrated on page 75 [sic]. 


Sign illumination. 
    Illumination should occur in a manner that is subordinate to the overall building, its site, and neighborhood while meeting the functional needs of the business. Within this framework, the creative use of lighting to add accent and interest to the street for pedestrians is encouraged. 
4.9  Use a compatible shielded light source to illuminate a sign. 
a.  Direct lighting towards a sign from an external, shielded lamp. 
b.  Do not overpower the building or street edge with lighting. 
c.  Use a warm light, similar to daylight. 
d.  If halo lighting is used to accentuate a sign or building, locate the light source so that it is not visible. 
4.10  If internal illumination is used, design it to be subordinate to the overall building composition. 
a.  If internal illumination is used, use a system that backlights sign text only whenever possible. 
b.  Ensure that the light source is not visible. 
c.  Avoid internal illumination of an entire sign panel. 
d.  Do not use internal illumination for a sign in the Town Center. 

Sign guidelines for the Town Center. 
    Signs that are scaled to the pedestrian are especially encouraged. Signs that appear to be custom-designed and fabricated and convey visual interest in the urban setting are preferred. 
4.11  Locate and design a sign to coordinate with facade design in the Town Center. 
a.  Locate a sign to fit within a specially designed area on the building facade. 
b.  Design signs to use durable materials that are coordinated with architectural or other materials on the building facade. 
4.12  Design a sign to convey visual interest to pedestrians in the Town Center. 
a.  Locate signs to be clearly visible to pedestrians. 
b.  Locate signs to highlight primary pedestrian entries. 
4.13  Locate and design a perpendicular wall sign to relate to building entries and convey visual interest in the Town Center. 
a.  Locate a small perpendicular wall sign near the business entrance, just above or to the side of the door. 
b.  Mount a larger perpendicular wall sign higher on the building, centered on the facade or positioned at the corner. 
c.  Use dynamic, sculptural shapes where possible to convey visual interest in the design of a perpendicular wall sign. 

4.14  Use a directory sign to consolidate small individual signs on a larger building in the Town Center. 
a.  Use a consolidated tenant panel or directory sign to help users find building tenants. 
b.  Locate a consolidated tenant panel or directory sign near a primary entrance on the first floor wall of a building. 
4.15  Locate and design an under canopy sign to highlight building entries in the Town Center. 
a.  When using an under canopy sign, locate it beneath a canopy and directly above a building entrance. 
b.  Coordinate the design and materials of an under canopy sign with those of the canopy. 
c.  Use a very simple design for an under canopy sign. 
4.16  If necessary use an external light source to illuminate a sign in the Town Center. 
a.  Where a light source is necessary, use a shielded external light source that is integrated into the sign design. 
b.  Note that the Farragut Zoning Ordinance prohibits most sign illumination in the Town Center. 

Illustrated sign types in the Town Center. 
    A number of sign types that are typical in a Town Center context are defined and illustrated below for reference. See page 70 [sic] for sign types in a townwide context. 


APPENDIX A: GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
    Adaptive Reuse. The process of reusing an old site or building for a purpose other than which it was built or designed for, such as a residence converted into an office. 
    Addition. Construction that expands the square footage of an existing building. 
    Alignment. The linear relationship of structures or parts of structures to each other. 
    Appropriate. Suitable or compatible. 
    Arcade. A covered passageway with arches along one or both sides. 
    Arch. A curved construction that spans an opening and supports the weight above it. 
    Architectural Screen. A fabricated metal component that is fastened to a building wall, or over an opening to provide an ornamental or mesh screen that adds visual interest or limits the visibility of parked cars, utility areas or other visual intrusions. 
    Articulation. Design elements, including both horizontal and vertical changes in materials, texture or wall plane that add interest to the face of a building. Massing articulation is the way in which a building is broken down into modules, sub-parts, or major elements, that provide a sense of human scale. 
    Attic. The upper level of a building, usually not of full ceiling height, directly beneath the roof. 
    Awning. A roof-like cover that is temporary or portable in nature that projects from the wall of a building and is supported primarily from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Base, Middle, Cap Design. A traditional building facade composition with well-defined ground or lower floors and a distinctive "cap" element framing middle building floors. 
    Batten. A board attached to the back or front of two other parallel boards, usually to hold them together. 
    Bay. The horizontal divisions of a building, defined by windows, columns, pilasters, etc. 
    Bay Window. A projecting window that forms an extension to the floor space of the internal room. 
    Block Face. See "Street Face." 
    Board and Batten. Siding fashioned of boards set vertically and covered where their edges join by narrow strips called battens. 
    Bond. A term used to describe the various patterns in which brick (or stone) is laid, such as "common bond" or "Flemish bond." 
    Bracket. A supporting member of wood, stone, or metal often used for both decorative and structural purposes and generally found under projecting features such as eaves or cornices. Also, brackets are used as supports for a balcony. 
    Building. Anything attached to the ground having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. See the Town of Farragut Zoning Ordinance. 
    Building Module. A sub-part of a larger building that appears as a single facade plane. One large building can incorporate several modules. 
    Bulkhead. The structural panels just below display windows on storefronts. Bulkheads can be both supportive and decorative in design. 
    Buttress. A pier of masonry placed against a wall for additional support. 
    Canopy. A roofed structure placed so as to extend outward from a building, to provide a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings. Canopies are usually supported by the building with additional support extending to the ground directly under the canopy edge. 
    Cantilevered. A projecting element, anchored in the body of the building, as in the case of a cantilevered balcony. 
    Casement Window. A window with one or two sashes which are hinged at the sides and usually open outward. 
    Character. The qualities and attributes of any structure, site, street or district. 
    Cinder Block. A concrete masonry unit block made from cinders (fly ash or bottom ash). 
    Clapboards. Horizontal wooden boards, thinner at the top edge, which are overlapped to provide a weatherproof exterior wall surface. 
    Clerestory. A section of a wall pierced with windows projecting above the aisles of a church. 
    Colonnade. A range of columns. 
    Column. A circular or square vertical structural member. 
    Compatible. Existing or performing in harmonious, agreeable combination with its surroundings. 
    Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU). A large rectangular brick made from cast concrete. A cinder block is a type of CMU. 
    Configuration. The arrangement of elements and details on a building or structure that help to define the character. 
    Construction. The act of adding an addition to an existing building or structure, or the erection of a new principle or accessory building or structure on a lot or property. 
    Context. The setting in which a site, structure, street or district exists. 
    Cornice. A projecting element that tops a wall. 
    Course. A horizontal layer or row of stones or bricks in a wall. 
    Cresting. A decorated ornamental finish along the top of a wall or roof, often made of ornamental metal. 
    Cupola. A dome placed on a circular or polygonal base crowning a roof or turret. 
    Design Guideline. A statement describing an intent or desired outcome to help guide development toward a desired level of quality through the design of the physical environment. Guidelines are applied on a discretionary basis relative to the context of development. 
    Design Review. A system for evaluating development to ensure that it is consistent with community objectives. 
    Dormer. A roofed structure that contains one or more windows and projects from a sloped roof. 
    Double-Hung Window. A window with two sashes, one sliding vertically over the other. 
    Eave. The edge of a roof that projects beyond the face of a wall. 
    Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS). "See Synthetic Stucco." 
    Element. A material part or detail of a site, structure, street, or district. 
    Elevation. Any one of the external face or facades of a building; the straight-on view of a building wall. 
    Fabric. The physical material of a building, structure, or community; an interweaving of component parts. 
    Facade. The exterior walls of a building. 
    Face block. A series of structures placed parallel to a street along one side of a city block. 
    Fascia. A flat horizontal member of molding; forms the trim of a flat roof or pitched roof. 
    Fenestration. The arrangement of windows on a building. 
    Fiber Cement Siding. A composite material made of sand, cement and cellulose fibers that is used as an exterior building material. Hardie-board is a type of fiber cement siding. 
    Flashing. Thin metal sheets used to prevent moisture infiltration at joints of roof planes and between the roof and vertical surfaces. 
    Form. The shape and structure of a building. 
    Foundation. The lowest exposed portion of the building wall, which supports the structure above. 
    Frame. The exposed trim around a window or door opening; also called a casing. 
    Gable. A triangular shape roof formed by two intersecting roof planes; also the triangular shape wall at the end of the roof. 
    Glazing. Window glass. 
    Hardie-board. See "Fiber Cement Siding." 
    Harmony. Pleasing or congruent arrangement. 
    Head. Upper horizontal framing member of a window or door. 
    Hip. A roof with four planes all sloping toward the center of the structure. 
    Horizontal Alignment. Design elements such as moldings, belt courses, parapets and cornices or changes in material and color that produce horizontal lines along a building facade. A block face may have buildings with coordinated elements of horizontal alignment. 
    Infill. New construction where there had been vacant land before, such as a new building between two older structures. 
    Landscape. The totality of the built or human influenced habitat experienced at any one place. Dominant features are topography, plant cover, buildings or other structures and their patterns. 
    Lattice. An openwork grill of interlacing wood strips used as screening. 
    Low-Impact Development (LID). A stormwater management approach to manage rainfall in a way which more closely mimics the natural hydrologic system at the site prior to any development. Techniques include those which infiltrate, store, filter, evaporate and detain stormwater close to the location where the rain fell. 
    Masonry. Construction of brick, stone, or other material requiring mortar, as well as concrete that has been detailed to resemble traditional masonry panels. Masonry does not include synthetic stucco (EIFS), concrete masonry units (CMU), fiber cement siding (hardie-board) or panelized brick. 
    Massing. The overall composition of the exterior of the major volumes of a building, especially when the structure has major and minor elements. 
    Materials. The physical elements that were combined or deposited in a particular pattern or configuration to form a property. 
    Metal Standing Seam Roof. A roof composed of overlapping sections of metal such as copper-bearing steel or iron coated with terne alloy of lead and tin. These roofs were attached or crimped together in various raised seams for which the roof is named. 
    Minor Project. Limited improvements to an existing site without new construction (except accessory buildings). Minor projects include replacement of existing landscaping, modification of existing parking lots, changes to utilities, mechanical equipment or service areas, renovation or improvements to an existing facade or new/modified accessory buildings. 
    Molding or Moulding. A construction or decorative element that has a variety of contours or outlines. 
    Mortar. A mixture of sand, lime, cement and water, used as a binding agent in masonry construction. 
    Net Facade Area. The surface area of a building facade without including the surface area occupied by windows and doors. 
    Offset. See "Wall Offset." 
    Orientation. The relationship of a structure to the compass points or a site feature; may refer to the direction a facade faces, such as the south elevation, or the direction of a main axis, as in an east-west orientation. 
    Parapet. A low wall at the edge of a roof, balcony, or deck. 
    Parapet Block. A block of buildings with a roof profile that results from being built directly against each other such as along a traditional main street. 
    Pediment. A triangular crowning element forming the gable of a roof; any similar triangular element used over windows, doors, etc. 
    Pergola. A functional or ornamental shade structure of vertical posts or pillars that usually support cross-beams and a sturdy open lattice. 
    Perpendicular Wall Sign. A sign that projects in a perpendicular direction from a building wall or hangs from a bracket that projects from a building wall above pedestrian height. 
    Pilaster. A square pillar attached, but projecting from a wall, resembling a classical column. 
    Pitch. The degree of the slope of a roof. 
    Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole. 
    Porch. A structure attached to a building to shelter an entrance. 
    Primary Facade. The main building face; the side of a building that faces the street. 
    Primary Structure. The main structure on a property. 
    Proportion. The relationship of the size, shape, and location of one building element to all the other elements; each architectural style typically has its own rules of proportion. 
    Redevelopment. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement, excluding additions as defined herein, to an existing structure where the costs of which is less than 50 percent of the total replacement cost of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State inventory of Historic Places. 
    Rhythm. Regular occurrence of elements or features, such as spacing between buildings. 
    Ridge. The top horizontal member of a roof where the sloping surfaces meet; the peak of the roof. 
    Rusticated. Roughening of stonework or concrete blocks to give greater articulation to each block. 
    Scale. Proportional elements that demonstrate the size, materials and style of buildings. The proportions of the elements of a building to one another and the whole, and to adjacent buildings. 
    Secondary Structure. A smaller or lesser structure associated with a primary structure on a property. 
    Setback. A line demarcating that portion of the lot specified must remain devoted to a yard, and the buildable portion of the lot. Building setbacks and "yard" are considered one and the same. See the Farragut Zoning Ordinance for more information (on the web via the Planning Division page at townoffarragut.org). 
    Setting. The sum of attributes of a locality, neighborhood or property that defines its character. 
    Shed roof. A pitched roof with a single plane. 
    Siding. The exterior wall covering or sheathing of a structure. 
    Site feature. A component of the property surrounding the structure, such as a fence, walkway, or landscaping. 
    Site wall. A low wall along the edge of a property; may also serve as a retaining wall. 
    Siting. The placement of a building, structure, or object on a site in relation to natural features, boundaries, and other parts of the built environment. 
    Small Project. A project with limited floor area that is generally less than 1,500 square feet. 
    Stormwater Management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. See the Farragut Stormwater Ordinance. 
    Street Face. That portion of a block with frontage on a street; there are generally two block faces with frontage on either side of a street. 
    Streetscape. The relationship of the street, landscaping, and buildings as seen by the eye in one view. 
    Structure. Anything built, constructed or erected, or established or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. Swimming pools, tennis courts, dog houses, and outdoor fenced animal runs are considered structures. Tents, vehicles, trailers and play equipment attached to the ground in some permanent or temporary way are considered structures. A structure may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground. See the Farragut Zoning Ordinance. 
    Style. A type of architecture distinguished by special characteristics of structure and ornament and often related in time; also a general quality of a distinctive manner. 
    Synthetic Stucco (EIFS). A non-load bearing exterior wall cladding system that consists of an insulation board attached adhesively or mechanically to a building facade. Note that synthetic stucco is also frequently referred to as EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finish System). 
    Transom. A horizontal window opening over a door or window, often with a hinged window. 
    Transparency. The relationship of solid building wall to open or glass areas. 
    Tree-lawn. The landscaped area between the street and sidewalk. 
    Trellis. A framework of light wooden or metal bars used as a support for trees or climbing plants. 
    Trim. The decorative framing of openings and other features on a facade. 
    Turret. A small slender tower. 
    Under Canopy Sign. A sign that is hung perpendicular to a building under a canopy which projects over the public entrances into a building. 
    Veranda. A covered porch or balcony on a building's exterior. 
    Vernacular. A regional form or adaptation of an architectural style. 
    Wall Offset. A notch or break in the facade of a building. 
    Wall Sign. A sign attached parallel to, and not projecting significantly from, the wall of a building. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1985 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the new Code of sections of the 1985 Code. 
1985 Code 
Section Section 

in Code 1-101 2-19 1-102 2-20 1-103 2-21 1-201 2-72 1-202 2-73 1-203 2-74 1-204 2-75 1-205 2-76 1-206 2-77 1-301 2-98 1-302 2-99 1-303 2-100 1-304 2-101 1-305 2-102 1-306 2-103 1-401 2-122 1-402 2-123 1-403 2-124 1-404 2-125 1-501 12-1 1-502 12-2 1-503(modified) 12-3 1-504 12-4 1-505 12-5 1-506 12-6 1-507 12-7 1-508 12-8 1-509 12-9 1-510 12-10 1-511 12-11 1-801 2-207 1-802 2-208 1-803 2-209 1-804 2-210 1-805 2-211 1-806 2-212 1-807 2-213 1-1101 2-48 2-101 4-21 2-102 4-23 2-103 4-58 2-104 4-63 2-106 4-59 2-107 4-61 2-109 4-62 2-111 4-65 2-116 4-67 2-119 4-26 2-124 4-24 2-125 4-1 2-133 4-22 2-136 4-60 3-201 6-1 3-202 6-35 3-203 6-36 3-204 6-37 3-205 6-8 3-206 6-7 3-207 6-2 3-208 6-6 3-209 6-64 3-210 6-5 3-211 6-4 3-212 6-63 3-213 6-3 4-304 105-114 4-601 113-3 4-602 113-1 4-603 113-4 4-604 113-60 4-605 113-61 4-606 113-62 4-607 113-63 4-608 113-64 4-609 113-65 6-101 2-266 7-101 10-52 7-102 10-53 7-103 10-54 7-104 10-55 8-201 14-60 8-202 14-61 8-203 14-81 8-204 14-82 8-206 14-84 8-207 14-85 8-208 14-86 8-209 14-87 8-210 14-88 8-211 14-89 8-212 14-90 9-101 24-3 9-102 24-29 9-103 24-49 9-104 24-1 9-105 24-4 9-106 24-50 9-107 24-51 9-108 24-30 9-109 24-52 9-110 24-110 9-111 24-111 9-112 24-5 9-112.1 24-53 9-113 24-2 9-201 24-136 9-202 24-137 9-203 24-137 9-204 24-138 9-205 24-139 10-201 16-1 10-202 16-2 11-101 101-23 11-102 101-24 11-103 101-25 12-201 22-50 12-202 22-51 12-203 22-52 12-204 22-53 12-205 22-21 12-206 22-22 12-207 22-54 12-208 22-55 12-209 22-23 12-301 22-84 12-302 22-85 12-303 22-86 12-304 22-87 12-305 22-88 12-401 22-120 12-402 22-121 12-403 22-122 12-404 22-123 12-601 18-2 12-602 18-3 12-603 18-4 12-604 18-1 13-101 22-1 13-201 22-179 13-202 22-178 13-203 22-180 13-204 22-201 13-205 22-202 13-206 22-203 13-207 22-181 13-208 22-177  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2007 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the new Code of sections of the 2007 Code, as supplemented through January 22, 2015. 
2007 Code 
Section Section 

in Code 1-101 2-19 1-102 2-20 1-103 2-21 1-104 2-22 1-201 2-72 1-202 2-73 1-203 2-74 1-204 2-75 1-205 2-76 1-206 2-77 1-301 2-98 1-302 2-99 1-303 2-100 1-304 2-101 1-305 2-102 1-306 2-103 1-307 2-104 1-307(attach.) 2-104 1-401 2-122 1-402 2-123 1-403 2-124 1-404 2-125 1-501 2-149 1-502 2-150 1-503 2-151 1-504 2-152 1-505 2-153 1-506 2-154 1-507 2-155 1-508 2-156 1-509 2-157 1-510 2-158 2-101 101-23 2-102 101-24 2-103 101-25 3-101 12-1 3-102 12-2 3-103 12-3 3-104 12-4 3-105 12-5 3-106 12-6 3-107 12-7 3-108 12-8 3-109 12-9 3-110 12-10 3-111 12-11 4-201 2-48 4-202 2-49 4-301 2-207 4-302 2-208 4-303 2-209 4-304 2-210 4-305 2-211 4-306 2-212 4-307 2-213 5-101 2-266 5-102 2-267 5-201 2-298 5-202 2-299 5-301 8-19 5-302 8-20 5-305 8-21 5-306 8-22 5-307 8-23 5-308 8-24 5-309 8-25 5-310 8-26 5-311 8-27 5-312 8-28 5-313 8-29 5-314 8-30 7-101 10-19 7-102 10-20 7-103 10-21 7-104 10-22 7-105 10-23 7-106 10-24 7-201 10-52 7-202 10-53 7-203 10-54 7-204 10-55 8-101 4-21 8-102 4-23 8-103 4-58 8-104 4-63 8-105 4-59 8-106 4-61 8-107 4-62 8-108 4-64 8-109 4-65 8-110 4-66 8-111 4-67 8-112 4-25 8-114 4-26 8-115 4-24 8-116 4-1 8-117 4-22 8-118 4-60 8-201 4-121 8-202 4-122 8-203 4-123 8-204 4-124 8-205 4-125 8-206 4-93 8-207 4-149 8-208 4-151 8-209 4-95 8-210 4-153 8-211 4-152 8-213 4-154 8-214 4-159 8-215 4-160 8-216 4-155 8-217 4-156 8-218 4-150 8-219 4-96 8-220 4-158 8-222 4-157 8-223 4-162 8-224 4-94 9-401 109-2 9-402 109-3 9-403 109-4 9-404 109-1 9-405 109-10 9-406 109-11 9-407 109-9 9-408 109-5 9-409 109-6 9-410 109-7 9-411 109-8 10-101 6-1 10-102 6-35 10-103 6-36 10-104 6-37 10-105 6-8 10-106 6-7 10-107 6-2 10-108 6-6 10-109 6-64 10-110 6-5 10-111 6-4 10-112 6-63 10-113 6-3 11-101 16-1 11-102 16-2 12-101 105-19 12-102 105-20 12-103 105-21 12-104 105-22 12-105 105-23 12-106 105-24 12-201 105-230 12-202 105-231 12-203 105-232 12-204 105-233 12-205 105-234 12-206 105-235 12-301 105-111 12-302 105-112 12-303 105-113 12-304 105-114 12-305 105-115 12-401 105-167 12-402 105-168 12-403 105-169 12-404 105-170 12-405 105-171 12-406 105-172 12-501 105-264 12-502 105-265 12-503 105-266 12-504 105-267 12-601 105-144 12-602 105-145 12-603 105-146 12-604 105-147 12-605 105-148 12-606 105-149 12-701 105-325 12-702 105-326 12-703 105-327 12-704 105-328 12-801 105-298 12-802 105-299 12-803 105-300 12-804 105-301 12-805 105-302 12-806 105-303 12-901 105-88 12-902 105-89 12-903 105-90 12-904 105-91 12-1001 105-198 12-1002 105-199 12-1003 105-200 12-1004 105-201 12-1005 105-202 12-1006 105-203 12-1101 105-52 12-1102 105-53 12-1103 105-54 12-1104 105-55 12-1105 105-56 12-1106 105-57 12-1201 105-360 12-1202 105-361 12-1203 105-362 12-1204 105-363 12-1205 105-364 12-1206 105-365 12-1207 105-366 12-1208 105-367 12-1209 105-368 12-1210 105-369 12-1211 105-370 13-101 14-60 13-102 14-61 13-103 14-81 13-104 14-82 13-105 14-83 13-106 14-84 13-107 14-85 13-108 14-86 13-109 14-87 13-110 14-88 13-111 14-89 13-112 14-90 13-201 14-19 13-202 14-20 13-203 14-21 13-204 14-22 13-205 14-23 13-206 14-24 13-207 14-25 13-208 14-26 13-209 14-27 13-210 14-28 13-301 14-109 13-302 14-110 13-303 14-111 13-304 14-112 13-305 14-113 13-306 14-114 14-101 113-3 14-102 113-1 14-103 113-4 14-104 113-60 14-105 113-61 14-106 113-62 14-107 113-63 14-108 113-64 14-109 113-65 14-110 113-66 14-111 113-67 14-112 113-68 14-113 113-69 14-114 113-27 14-115 113-28 14-116 113-2 14-201 103-3 14-202 103-1 14-203 103-4 14-204 103-5 14-205 103-6 14-206 103-7 14-207 103-2 14-208 103-11 14-209 103-12 14-210 103-13 14-211 103-14 14-212 103-10 14-213 103-9 14-214 103-8 14-301 107-20 14-302 107-19 14-303 107-24 14-304 107-25 14-305 107-26 14-306 107-27 14-307 107-28 14-308 107-22 14-309 107-23 14-310 107-21 14-401 107-62 14-402 107-60 14-403 107-63 14-404 107-64 14-405 107-61 14-406 107-68 14-407 107-67 14-408 107-65 14-409 107-66 14-501 111-2 14-502 111-3 14-503 111-1 14-504 111-111 14-505 111-91 14-506 111-112 14-507 111-113 14-508 111-114 14-509 111-115 14-510 111-116 14-511 111-5 14-512 111-6 14-513 111-148 14-514 111-117 14-515 111-149 14-516 111-150 14-517 111-151 14-518 111-152 14-519 111-153 14-520 111-154 14-521 111-155 14-522 111-156 14-523 111-157 14-524 111-158 14-525 111-159 14-526 111-160 14-527 111-161 14-528 111-162 14-529 111-163 14-530 111-164 14-531 111-165 14-532 111-166 14-533 111-167 14-534 111-168 14-535 111-169 14-536 111-32 14-537 111-33 14-538 111-31 14-539 111-34 14-540 111-4 14-541 111-57 14-542 111-58 14-543 111-59 14-544 111-60 14-545 111-61 14-546 111-62 14-547 111-63 14-548 111-64 14-549 111-65 14-550 111-66 15-101 24-3 15-102 24-29 15-103 24-49 15-104 24-1 15-105 24-4 15-106 24-50 15-107 24-51 15-108 24-30 15-109 24-52 15-110 24-110 15-111 24-111 15-112 24-5 15-113 24-53 15-114(1) 24-2 15-201 24-136 15-202 24-137 15-203 24-137 15-204 24-138 15-205 24-139 15-301 24-80 15-302 24-81 15-303 24-82 15-304 24-83 16-101 22-50 16-102 22-51 16-103 22-52 16-104 22-53 16-105 22-21 16-106 22-22 16-107 22-54 16-108 22-55 16-109 22-23 16-201 22-84 16-202 22-85 16-203 22-86 16-204 22-87 16-205 22-88 16-301 22-120 16-302 22-121 16-303 22-122 16-304 22-123 16-401 22-145 16-402 22-146 16-403 22-147 16-404 22-148 16-405 22-149 16-406 22-150 16-407 22-151 16-408 22-152 16-410 22-153 16-411 22-154 16-501 22-179 16-502 22-178 16-503 22-180 16-504 22-201 16-505 22-202 16-506 22-203 16-507 22-181 16-508 22-177 16-601 101-87 16-602 101-88 16-603 101-89 16-604 101-86 16-605 101-95 16-606 101-90 16-607 101-91 16-608 101-92 16-609 101-93 16-610 101-94 16-610, exh. A 101-96 16-610, exh. B 101-97 19-101 22-1 20-101 18-2 20-102 18-3 20-103 18-4 20-104 18-1 20-201 16-24 20-202 16-25 20-203 16-26 20-204 16-23 20-205 16-47 20-206 16-27 20-207 16-48 20-208 16-29 20-209 16-49 20-210 16-50 20-211 16-51 20-212 16-28 20-213 16-52 20-301 2-235 20-302 2-236  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2007 CODE-ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location of ordinances within the 2007 Code as supplemented through January 22, 2015. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
2007 Code 06-01  4-13-2006 1 App. A, ch. 4, § XXIII 06-02  2- 2-2006 1 App. A, ch. 3, § IX 06-04  3- 9-2006 1 9-406 06-03  3- 9-2006 1 9-406 06-04  3- 9-2006 1 9-406(4)(g) 06-05  3-23-2006 1 App. A, ch. 3, § IV 06-08  5-11-2006 1       Added App. A, ch. 3, § XXVI 06-09  5-11-2006 1, 2 App. A, ch. 4, § XX 06-10  5-25-2006 1 App. A, ch. 4, § VII 2 App. A, ch. 4, § XX 06-11  4-20-2006 1 9-406 06-22  7-27-2006 1 App. A, ch. 4, § XXVII 06-23  8-10-2006 1 App. A, ch. 4, § XX 06-24  9-14-2006 1, 2 App. A, ch. 4, § XIII 06-27 10-26-2006 1       Rpld 12-501-12-505       Added 12-501-12-505 06-28 10-26-2006 1       Rpld 12-1101-12-1103       Added 12-1101-12-1107 06-30 12-14-2006 1 App. A, ch. 3, § XVI 06-31 11- 2-2006 1 9-405 2-5 9-406 06-32  1-11-2007 1 9-406 06-34  1-11-2007 1 App. A, ch. 2 2 App. A, ch. 3, § III 3, 4 App. A, ch. 3, §§ V, VI 5-7 App. A, ch. 3, §§ VIII-X 06-35  2- 8-2007 1, 2 9-406 06-36  1-11-2007 1 12-1102 07-01  2- 8-2007 1       Added 1-501-1-510 07-02  1-18-2007 1 9-406 07-04  3- 1-2007 1 9-406 PC-07-02(Res.)  3-15-2007 1, 2 App. B, Art. II, § C 3 App. B, Art. II, § D 4 App. B, Art. III, § B 5-7 App. B, Art. IV, § B 07-03  5-10-2007 1-3 8-104, 8-105 4 8-109 PC-07-07(Res.)  4- 5-2007 1-3 App. B, Art. II, § B 07-05  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 12-201-12-206       Added 12-201-12-207 07-06  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 12-401-12-406       Added 12-401-12-407 07-07  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 12-1001-12-1006       Added 12-1001-12-1007 07-08  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 12-601-12-604       Rpld 12-901-12-904 07-09  5-10-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2       Rpld App. A, Ch. 3, § XIII 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 4       Rpld App. A, Ch. 3, § XVI 07-12  5-10-2007 1 12-702 07-13  5-10-2007 1 12-301 2       Added 12-306 07-14  5-10-2007 1 12-801 2 12-805 3       Added 12-807 07-15  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 12-101-12-107       Added 12-101-12-108 07-16  5-10-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXI 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § VIII 07-17  5-10-2007 1       Rpld 7-101-7-106       Added 7-101-7-106 07-20  5-24-2007 1-4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 5-8 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 9-12 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 07-21  5-24-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI 07-22  6-28-2007 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XIII 07-23  5-17-2007 1, 2 14-104, 14-105 3, 4 14-108, 14-109 07-27  7-26-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 2 07-29 10-25-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 2 07-30  9-27-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 07-31 10-25-2007 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII 07-32 10-25-2007 1       Added 14-301-14-311 07-33  1-10-2008 1       Added 15-301-15-304 07-36 12-13-2007 1 5-102 07-39  1-10-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 3 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX PC-08-04(Res.)  2-21-2008 1 App. B, Art. III, § F, 2. PC-08-05(Res.)  2-21-2008 1 App. B, Art. II, § C, 11. 08-01  2-28-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII PC-08-07(Res.)  3-20-2008 1 App. B, Art. II, § C, 4. 08-02  3-28-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII 08-03  3-27-2008 1, 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII 08-04  4-24-2008 1-3 9-406 08-07  5-22-2008 1       Rpld 1-307       Added 1-307 08-09  6-26-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XII, F.5. 08-11  6-26-2008 1       Added 8-207.1 08-12  7-24-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.3. 08-13  7-24-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVI, B. 08-18  1- 8-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.2.[3.] PC-09-01(Res.)  1-15-2009 1 App. B, Art. IV, App. A 09-01  2-26-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.3. 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.5.b. 09-02  3-12-2009 1 1-206(13) 2       Added 1-601-1-604 09-03  3-26-2009 1 9-406(3)(r) PC-09-05(Res.)  4-16-2009 1 App. B, Art. III, § B, 2. 2 App. B, Art. III, § B, 4. PC-09-08(Res.)  5-21-2009 1 App. B, Art. II, § C, 6.d.(4) 2 App. B, Art. III, § A, 15. 3 App. B, Art. IV, § A, 3. 09-04  5-28-2009 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 4, § V, A.       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § V, A. 09-08  6-25-2009 1       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XII, E.5. 09-09  6-25-2009 1       Added 14-523(1)(d) 09-10  6-25-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 2 09-11  6-25-2009 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII, (intro.)       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII, (intro.) 09-13  7- 9-2009 1       Rpld 1-101       Added 1-101 09-14  8-27-2009 1       Rpld 16-406(2)(a)       Added 16-406(2)(a) 09-15  7- 9-2009 1       Rpld 4-301       Added 4-301 09-16  8-27-2009 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 4, § VII, I. 09-17  8-27-2009 1       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII, D. 09-18  8-13-2009 1       Rpld 15-301-15-304       Added 15-301-15-304 09-19  8-27-2009 1       Rpld 4-306, 4-307       Added 4-306(tit.), 4-307 09-20  8-27-2009 1       Rpld 1-205       Added 1-205 09-23  9-24-2009 1       Added 13-301-13-306 09-24  1-14-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX, C.11. 09-25  1-14-2010 1 3-104 2 3-108 3 3-110 4 3-111 09-27  1-14-2010 1 9-404 2 9-406(1)(c) 09-29  1-14-2010 1 1-307(tit.) 10-01  9- 9-2010 1       Rpld 4-101-4-109 10-02  2-25-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXIV 10-03  3-25-2010 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVII, C. 10-06  4-22-2010 1 14-502 10-08  5-27-2010 1 14-536 14-537 14-547 14-549 14-550(tit.) 10-09  5-27-2010 1       Added 20-105-20-113 10-11  8-26-2010 1, 2 9-406(3)(r) 3 9-406(4)(o) 10-13  8-26-2010 1       Added 1-104 10-14 10-28-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII, G.3. 10-15 10-28-2010 1       Added 12-102(16) 2       Rpld 12-102(8)       Rnbd 12-102(9)-(16)       as 12-102(8)-(15) 10-16 10-28-2010 1 12-1102(10) 10-18  1-13-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII(tit.) PC-11-01(Res.)  1-20-2011 1 App. B, Art. II, § B, 1.r. 2       Added App. B, Art. II, § B, 7. 3       Added App. B, Art. II, § C, 6.k.       Rnbd App. B, Art. II, § C, 6.k.-o.       as App. B, Art. II, § C, 6.l.-p. 4       Added App. B, Art. II, § C, 13.       Rnbd App. B, Art. II, § C, 13.-15.       as App. B, Art. II, § C, 14.-16. 5 App. B, Art. II, § D, 1. 6       Added App. B, Art. II, § D, 9.j.       Rnbd App. B, Art. II, § D, 9.j.-o.       as App. B, Art. II, § D, 9.k.-p. 10-19  1-27-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.3. PC-11-03(Res.)  2-17-2011 1 App. B, Art. IV, 
§ A (intro.) 2 App. B, Art. IV, 
§ A, 2. 3 App. B, Art. IV, 
§ A, 6.a. 4 App. B, Art. IV, 
§ A, 7.b. 5 App. B, Art. IV, 
§ A, 8.a. 11-02  3-10-2011 1       Rpld 5-201-5-218       Added 5-201, 5-202 11-03  4-28-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, 
§ XX, A.3. 11-05  6-23-2011 1 9-404 11-10  7-28-2011 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.23.       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.23.-25.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.24.-26. 11-14  9-22-2011 1       Rpld 7-102(1)       Rnbd 7-102(2)-(16)       as 7-102(1)-(15) 2 7-106(tit.) 11-15  9-22-2011 1 12-102(1) 2       Rpld 12-102(2)       Rnbd 12-102(3)-(15)       as 12-102(2)-(14) 3 12-106(tit.) 11-16  9-22-2011 1 12-206(tit.) 11-17  9-22-2011 1 12-406 11-18  9-22-2011 1 12-805 11-19  9-22-2011 1       Rpld 12-1002(3) 2 12-1006 11-20  9-22-2011 1       Rpld 12-1102(4)       Rnbd 12-1102(5), (6), (8)-(10)       as 12-1102(4)-(8) 2 12-1106(tit.) 11-21 11-15-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.10.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.10.-23.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.11.-24. 3       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.10.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.10.-26.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.11.-27. 4       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII, B.5.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII, B.5.-11.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII, B.6.-12. 5       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII, C.5.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII, C.5.-18.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII, C.6.-19. 11-23 12- 8-2011 1 14-406(2) 2 14-407(5) 3 14-408(1) 11-24 11-15-2011 1       Rpld 8-201-8-217       Added 8-201-8-225 PC-11-09(Res.)  6-16-2011 1 App. B, Art. III, § B, 4. 2 App. B, Art. IV, § A, 11. 3 App. B, Art. IV, § A, 12. 4 App. B, Art. IV, § B 11-22 12- 8-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV 11-26  1-12-2012 1 9-406(3)(l) 11-27  1-26-2012 1, 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.3. 12-02  2-23-2012 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.13.d.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.13.d.-i.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.13.e.-j. 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.23. 3       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.14.d.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.14.d.-g.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.14.e.-h. 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, B.25 12-03  2-23-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § III, D.1. 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § IV, E.1.e. 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § V, D.1. 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § VI, D.1. 5 App. A, Ch. 3, § VII, E.1.e. 6 App. A, Ch. 3, § VIII, D.1.f. 7 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX, D.1.f. 8 App. A, Ch. 3, § X, D.1.f. 9 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI, D.1.c. 12-04  2-23-2012 1       Rpld 20-105-20-113       Added 20-201-20-213 PC-12-04(Res.)  5-17-2012 1 App. B, Art. IV, § A, 10. 12-05  7-12-2012 1       Added 5-301, 5-302, 5-305-5-314 12-08  7-12-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVIII(tit.) 12-13  9-27-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.1. 2       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.8.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.8.-24.       as App. A, Ch. 3, § XII, B.9.-25. 12-14  9-27-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII, A. 2       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII, C.3.       Rnbd App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII, C.3.-5.       as App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII, C.4.-6. 12-18  1-10-2013 1       Added 20-301, 20-302 12-19  1-24-2013 1       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIX 12-20  1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII, A.4. 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII, A.5. 12-21  1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § I(tit.) 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § I(intro. ¶) 3 App. A, Ch. 4, § I, B.1. 4 App. A, Ch. 4, § I, B.2. 12-22  1-24-2013 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XVI 13-03  4-25-2013 1       Rpld 12-101-12-108       Added 12-101-12-107 13-04  4-25-2013 1       Rpld 12-201-12-207       Added 12-201-12-207 13-05  4-25-2013 1 12-301 13-06  4-25-2013 1       Rpld 12-401-12-407       Added 12-401-12-407 13-07  4-25-2013 1       Rpld 12-501-12-505       Added 12-501-12-505 13-08  4-25-2013 1       Added 12-601-12-607 13-09  4-25-2013 1 Tit. 12, Ch. 8(tit.)       Rpld 12-801-12-807       Added 12-801-12-807 13-10  4-25-2013 1       Added 12-901-12-905 13-11  4-25-2013 1 Tit. 12, Ch. 10(tit.)       Rpld 12-1001- 
12-1007       Added 12-1001- 
12-1007 13-12  4-25-2013 1 Tit. 12, Ch. 11(tit.)       Rpld 12-1101- 
12-1107       Added 12-1101- 
12-1107 13-13  4-25-2013 1 12-1208(6) 13-14  4-25-2013 1 Tit. 7, Ch. 1(tit.)       Rpld 7-101-7-107       Added 7-101-7-107 13-15  5-23-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, 
§ XIII, A.5. PC-13-07(Res.)  6-20-2013 1 App. B, Art. III, 
§ F, 2.e.(1) 13-18  6-27-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, 
§ VIII 13-22 11-19-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, 
§ IV, A.2. 13-25  1- 9-2014 1       Rpld 4-308 PC-14-03(Res.)  5-15-2014 1       Added App. B, App. E 14-05  5-22-2014 1       Rpld 8-201-8-225       Added 8-201-8-224 14-08  7-24-2014 1       Rpld 4-308 14-11 10- 9-2014 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI 14-12 10- 9-2014 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVIII 14-13 10- 9-2014 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.2.c. 2       Added App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.2.f. App. A, Ch. 4, § XX, A.3. 14-07  8-14-2014 1 9-406(4)(p) 14-18 12-11-2014 2 16-402 3 16-403(1)-(4) 14-19  1- 8-2015 1       Added Tit. 16, Ch. 6, §§ 16-601-16-610 14-21  1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 14-22  1-22-2015 1       Added App. C, § I 14-23  1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVIII N.6. 14-24  1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXIII, C.1. 14-25  1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - NEW CODE-LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those ordinances included herein. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
in Code Ord. No. 86-16 4-1986 - App. A, Ch. 1, § I - App. A, Ch. 1, § II - App. A, Ch. 1, § III - App. A, Ch. 2 - App. A, Ch. 3, § I- 
App. A, Ch. 3, § III - App. A, Ch. 3, § V- 
App. A, Ch. 3, § XII - App. A, Ch. 3, § XIV, 
App. A, Ch. 3, § XV - App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII- 
App. A, Ch. 3, § XXV - App. A, Ch. 4, § I- 
App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII - App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV- 
App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVIII Ord. of 10-1987 10-1987 - App. B, Art. I, § A- 
App. B, Art. I, § D - App. B, Art. II, § A- 
App. B, Art. II, § D - App. B, Art. III, § A- 
App. B, Art. III, § F - App. B, Art. IV, § A, 
App. B, Art. IV, § B - App. B, Art. V, § A, 
App. B, Art. V, § B - App. B, Art. VI - App. B (App. C) - App. B (App. D) Ord. No. 96-05 3-1996 - 2-49 Ord. No. 96-07 5-1996 - 22-122 Ord. No. 96-12 5-1996 - 4-66 Ord. No. 96-14 6-1996 - 4-25 Ord. No. 96-17 6-1996 - 105-111-105-113 Ord. No. 96-22 6-1996 - 105-325-105-328 Ord. No. 96-24 6-1996 - 14-61 - 14-83 Ord. No. 96-26 10-1996 - 14-60 - 14-61 Ord. No. 96-30 1-1997 - 22-145-22-154 Ord. No. 98-06 4-1998 - 109-1-109-11 Ord. No. 99-13 5-1999 - 105-360-105-370 Ord. No. 99-33 7-1999 - 4-1 - 4-21-4-26 - 4-58-4-67 Ord. No. 99-37 10-1999 - 109-11 Ord. No. 99-38 10-1999 - 109-8 Ord. No. 99-39 10-1999 - 113-1-113-4 - 113-27, 113-28 - 113-60-113-69 Ord. No. 00-02 1-2000 - 2-267 Ord. No. 00-09 4-2000 - 105-113 - 105-115 Ord. No. 00-22 6-2000 - 109-1 - 109-11 Ord. No. 00-30 6-2000 - 2-207 Ord. No. 01-14 8-2001 - 113-1 - 113-60-113-62 - 113-64 Ord. No. 02-03 2-2002 - 18-2 Ord. No. 02-04 3-2002 - 2-104 Ord. No. 02-06 5-2002 - 109-11 Ord. No. 02-11 8-2002 - 105-366 Ord. No. 02-13 9-2002 - 109-1 - 109-9 Ord. No. 02-19 12-2002 - 109-11 Ord. No. 03-02 2-2003 - 22-88 Ord. No. 03-04 3-2003 - 6-1-6-8 - 6-35 - 6-36 - 6-37 - 6-63, 6-64 Ord. No. 03-06 5-2003 - 109-1 - 109-11 Ord. No. 04-08 1-2004 - 24-4 - 24-110 Ord. No. 04-13 3-2004 - 22-88 Ord. No. 05-04 3-2005 - 14-19-14-28 Ord. No. 05-05 3-2005 - 105-365, 105-366 Ord. No. 05-15 3-2005 - 103-1-103-14 Ord. No. 05-07 4-2005 - 109-1 - 109-11 Ord. No. 05-13 7-2005 - 107-60-107-68 Ord. No. 05-16 10-2005 - 111-1-111-6 - 111-31-111-34 - 111-57-111-66 - 111-91 - 111-111-111-117 - 111-148-111-169 Ord. No. 05-24 1-2006 - 109-10 Ord. of 2-2006 2-2006 - App. A, Ch. 1, § I- 
App. A, Ch. 1, § III - App. A, Ch. 2 - App. A, Ch. 3, § I- 
App. A, Ch. 3, § III - App. A, Ch. 3, § V- 
App. A, Ch. 3, § XII - App. A, Ch. 3, § XIV, 
App. A, Ch. 3, § XV - App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII- 
App. A, Ch. 3,§ XXV - App. A, Ch. 4, § I- 
App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII - App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV- 
App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVIII - App. B, Art. I, § A- 
App. B, Art. I, § D - App. B, Art. II, § A- 
App. B, Art. II, § D - App. B, Art. III, § A- 
App. B, Art. III, § J - App. B, Art. IV, § A 
App. B, Art. IV, § B - App. B, Art. V, § A, 
App. B, Art. V, § B - App. B, Art. VI - App. B (App. C) - App. B (App. D) Res. No. PC-06-02 1-19-2006 1 App. B, Art. II, § A Ord. No. 06-02 2-2-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX Res. No. PC-06-08 3-2-2006 1 App. B, Art. II, § A Ord. No. 06-03 3-9-2006 1 109-11 Ord. No. 06-04 3-9-2006 1 109-11 109-11 Ord. No. 06-05 3-23-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § IV Ord. No. 06-11 4-20-2006 1 109-11 Ord. No. 06-08 5-11-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI Ord. No. 06-09 5-11-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 06-10 5-25-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Res. No. PC-06-25 7-20-2006 1 App. B, Art. II, § D Ord. No. 06-22 7-27-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVII Ord. No. 06-23 8-10-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 06-24 9-14-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII Ord. No. 06-26 10-26-2006 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII Ord. No. 06-31 11-2-2006 1 109-10 2 109-11 3 109-11 4 109-11 5 109-11 Ord. No. 06-32 1-11-2007 1 109-11 Ord. No. 06-34 1-11-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § III 5 App. A, Ch. 3, § VIII 6 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX 7 App. A, Ch. 3, § X - App. A, Ch. 3, § XI Ord. No. 07-02 1-18-2007 1 109-11 Ord. No. 06-35 2-8-2007 1 109-11 2 109-11 Ord. No. 07-01 2-8-2007 1 2-149-2-158 Ord. No. 07-04 3-1-2007 1 109-11 Res. No. PC-07-02 3-15-2007 1 App. B, Art. II, § C 2 App. B, Art. II, § C 3 App. B, Art. II, § D 4 App. B, Art. III, § B 5 App. B, Art. IV, § A 6 App. B, Art. IV, § A 7 App. B, Art. IV, § A Res. No. PC-07-07 4-5-2007 1 App. B, Art. II, § B 2 App. B, Art. II, § C 3 App. B, Art. II, § D Ord. No. 07-03 5-10-2007 1 4-63 2 4-63 3 4-59 4 4-65 Ord. No. 07-09 5-10-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV Ord. No. 07-12 5-10-2007 1 105-326 Ord. No. 07-13 5-10-2007 1 105-111 Ord. No. 07-16 5-10-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XX - App. A, Ch. 3, § XXI 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § VIII Ord. No. 07-20 5-24-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 5 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 6 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 7 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 8 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 9 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 10 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 11 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 12 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII Ord. No. 07-23 5-17-2007 1 113-60 2 113-61 3 113-64 4 113-65 Ord. No. 07-21 5-24-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI Ord. No. 07-22 6-28-2007 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XIII Ord. No. 07-27 7-26-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 2 Ord. No. 07-29 10-25-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 2 - App. A, Ch. 3, § III Ord. No. 07-30 9-27-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV Ord. No. 07-31 10-25-2007 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII Ord. No. 07-32 10-25-2007 1 107-19-107-28 Ord. No. 07-36 12-13-2007 1 2-267 Ord. No. 07-33 1-10-2008 1 24-80-24-83 Ord. No. 07-39 1-10-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 3 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Res. No. PC-08-04 2-21-2008 1 App. B, Art. III, § F Res. No. PC-08-05 2-21-2008 1 App. B, Art. II, § C Ord. No. 08-01 2-28-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Res. No. 08-07 3-20-2008 1 App. B, Art. II, § C Ord. No. 08-02 3-28-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII Ord. No. 08-03 3-27-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII Ord. No. 08-04 4-24-2008 1 109-11 2 109-11 3 109-11 Ord. No. 08-07 5-22-2008 1 2-104 Ord. No. 08-09 6-26-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XII Ord. No. 08-12 7-24-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 08-13 7-24-2008 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVI Ord. No. 08-18 1-8-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Res. No. PC-09-01 1-15-2009 1 App. B (App. A) Ord. No. 09-01 2-26-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 09-02 3-12-2009 1 2-77 Ord. No. 09-03 3-26-2009 1 109-11 Res. No. PC-09-05 4-16-2009 1 App. B, Art. III, § B 2 App. B, Art. III, § B Res. No. PC-09-08 5-21-2009 1 App. B, Art. II, § C 2 App. B, Art. III, § A 3 App. B, Art. IV, § A Ord. No. 09-04 5-28-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § V Ord. No. 09-08 6-25-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XII Ord. No. 09-09 6-25-2009 1 111-157 Ord. No. 09-10 6-25-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 2 Ord. No. 09-11 6-25-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII Ord. No. 09-13 7-9-2009 1 2-19 Ord. No. 09-15 7-9-2009 1 2-207 Ord. No. 09-18 8-13-2009 1 24-80-24-83 Ord. No. 09-14 8-27-2009 1 22-150 Ord. No. 09-16 8-27-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII Ord. No. 09-17 8-27-2009 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII Ord. No. 09-19 8-27-2009 1 2-212, 2-213 Ord. No. 09-20 8-27-2009 1 2-76 Ord. No. 09-23 9-24-2009 1 14-109-14-114 Ord. No. 09-24 1-14-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX Ord. No. 09-25 1-14-2010 1 12-4 2 12-8 3 12-10 4 12-11 Ord. No. 09-27 1-14-2010 1 109-1 2 109-11 Ord. No. 09-29 1-14-2010 1 2-104 Ord. No. 10-02 2-25-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXIV Ord. No. 10-03 3-25-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVII Ord. No. 10-06 4-22-2010 1 111-3 Ord. No. 10-08 5-27-2010 1 111-32, 111-33 - 111-63 - 111-65, 111-66 Ord. No. 10-11 8-26-2010 1 109-11 2 109-11 3 109-11 Ord. No. 10-13 8-26-2010 1 2-22 Ord. No. 10-14 10-28-2010 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII Ord. No. 10-18 1-13-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII Res. No. PC-11-01 1-20-2011 1 App. B, Art. II, § B 2 App. B, Art. II, § B 3 App. B, Art. II, § C 4 App. B, Art. II, § C 5 App. B, Art. II, § D 6 App. B, Art. II, § D Ord. No. 10-19 1-27-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Res. No. PC-11-03 2-17-2011 1 App. B, Art. IV, § A 2 App. B, Art. IV, § A 3 App. B, Art. IV, § A 4 App. B, Art. IV, § A 5 App. B, Art. IV, § A Ord. No. 11-02 3-10-2011 1 2-298, 2-299 Ord. No. 11-03 4-28-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Res. No. PC-11-09 6-16-2011 1 App. B, Art. III, § B 2 App. B, Art. IV, § A 3 App. B, Art. IV, § A 4 App. B, Art. IV, § B Ord. No. 11-05 6-23-2011 1 109-1 Ord. No. 11-10 7-28-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV Ord. No. 11-21 11-15-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 5 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII Ord. No. 11-22 12-8-2011 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV Ord. No. 11-23 12-8-2011 1 107-68 2 107-67 3 107-65 Ord. No. 11-26 1-12-2012 1 109-11 Ord. No. 11-27 1-26-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 12-02 2-23-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV Ord. No. 12-03 2-23-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § III 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § IV 3 App. A, Ch. 3, § V 4 App. A, Ch. 3, § VI 5 App. A, Ch. 3, § VII 6 App. A, Ch. 3, § VIII 7 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX 8 App. A, Ch. 3, § X 9 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI Ord. No. 12-04 2-23-2012 1 16-23-16-29 - 16-47-16-52 Res. No. PC-12-04 5-17-2012 1 App. B, Art. IV, § A Ord. No. 12-05 7-12-2012 1 8-19-8-30 Ord. No. 12-08 7-12-2012 - App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVIII Ord. No. 12-13 9-27-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 12-14 9-27-2012 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII - App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV Ord. No. 12-18 1-10-2013 1 2-235, 2-236 Ord. No. 12-19 1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIX Ord. no. 12-20 1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII Ord. No. 12-21 1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § I 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § I 3 App. A, Ch. 4, § I 4 App. A, Ch. 4, § I Ord. No. 12-22 1-24-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVI Ord. No. 13-03 4-25-2013 1 105-19-105-24 Ord. No. 13-04 4-25-2013 1 105-230-105-235 Ord. No. 13-05 4-25-2013 1 105-111 Ord. No. 13-06 4-25-2013 1 105-167-105-172 Ord. No. 13-07 4-25-2013 1 105-264-105-267 Ord. No. 13-08 4-25-2013 1 105-144-105-149 Ord. No. 13-09 4-25-2013 1 105-298-105-303 Ord. No. 13-10 4-25-2013 1 105-88-105-91 Ord. No. 13-11 4-25-2013 1 105-198-105-203 Ord. No. 13-12 4-25-2013 1 105-52-105-57 Ord. No. 13-13 4-25-2013 1 105-367 Ord. No. 13-14 4-25-2013 1 10-19-10-24 Ord. No. 13-15 5-23-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XIII Res. No. PC-13-07 6-20-2013 1 App. B, Art. III, § F Ord. No. 13-18 6-27-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VIII Ord. No. 13-22 11-19-2013 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § IV Res. No. PC-14-03 5-15-2014 1 App. B (App. E) Ord. No. 14-05 5-22-2014 1 4-93-4-96 - 4-121-4-125 - 4-149-4-160 - 4-162 Ord. No. 14-07 8-14-2014 1 109-11 Ord. No. 14-11 9-9-2014 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI Ord. No. 14-13 9-9-2014 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 14-12 10-9-2014 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVIII Ord. No. 14-18 12-11-2014 2 22-146 3 22-147 Ord. No. 14-19 1-8-2015 1 101-86-101-97 Ord. No. 14-21 1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 14-22 1-22-2015 1 App. C, § I Ord. No. 14-23 1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII Ord. No. 14-24 1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXIII Ord. No. 14-25 1-22-2015 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI Ord. No. 15-02 3-26-2015 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 15-09 9-27-2015 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVII Ord. No. 15-10 9-27-2015 1 107-25 2 107-25 Ord. No. 15-17 11-12-2015 1(14-701) 101-54 1(14-702) 101-55 1(14-703) 101-56 Ord. No. 15-18 11-12-2015 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII Ord. No. 16-04 3-24-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 2 2 App. A, Ch. 2 3 App. A, Ch. 2 Ord. No. 16-05 3-24-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XX 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI 3 App. A, Ch. 4, § XVIII Ord. No. 16-06 3-24-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § VII 2 App. A, Ch. 4, § X 4 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX 5 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 16-09 4-28-2016 1(9-101) 20-1 1(9-102) 20-3 1(9-103) 20-33 1(9-104) 20-34 1(9-105) 20-4 1(9-106) 20-5 1(9-107) 20-35 1(9-108) 20-37 1(9-109) 20-36 1(9-110) 20-6 1(9-111) 20-2 1(9-112) 20-7 Ord. No. 16-13 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 16-14 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XV Ord. No. 16-15 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § XVII Ord. No. 16-16 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 16-17 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 16-18 7-28-2016 1 109-11 Ord. No. 16-19 7-28-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 16-20 8-11-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX Ord. No. 16-22 10-13-2016 1 105-53 2 105-53 Ord. No. 16-23 12-8-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX 2 App. A, Ch. 3, § IX Ord. No. 16-25 12-22-2016 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 17-01 2-9-2017 1(8-101) 4-21 1(8-102) 4-23 1(8-206) 4-93 1(8-218) 4-150 Ord. No. 16-27 3-9-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX Ord. No. 16-28 3-23-2017 2 App. D, 2.0(2.20) Ord. No. 17-02 4-13-2017 1 App. D, 2.0(2.17) Ord. No. 17-03 4-27-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVI Ord. No. 17-04 4-27-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XI Ord. No. 17-05 4-27-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XXVIII Ord. No. 17-06 4-27-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIV Ord. No. 17-08 4-27-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § III Res. PC-17-01  2-16-2017 1 App. B, Art. III, A(1) Ord. No. 17-11  8-10-2017 1 App. A, Ch. 3, § XII Ord. No. 17-13  9-28-2017 Adopting Ordinance Ord. No. 17-15 11- 9-2017 1 107-60-107-68 Ord. No. 17-19  1-11-2018 1 2-267 Ord. No. 18-01  3-22-2018 1 App. A, Ch. 2 Res. PC-18-03  1-18-2018 1 App. B, Art. II, § 1 Res. PC-18-04  1-18-2018 A App. B, Art. III, § A(13) 2       Added App. B, Art. III, § A(18) 3 App. B, Art. III, § B(2) 4 App. B, Art. III, § D(1) Ord. No. 18-03  6-28-2018 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § XIII Ord. No. 18-05  6-28-2018 1       Added App. A, Ch. 3, § III(E)(3) Ord. No. 18-07  6-28-2018 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 3, § XIII Ord. No. 18-08  6-28-2018 1       Rpld App. A, Ch. 3, § XV, (B)(4) 3       Added App. A, Ch. 3, (B)(4) Ord. No. 19-01  1-24-2019 1 App. A, Ch. 4, § XX(3) Ord. No. 19-02  1-24-2019 1       Rpld 2-207-2-213  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Code of references to the Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.). 
T.C.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 2-3-204 2-22 2-10-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4 2-10-122 Ch. 2, Art. 4 2-10-124 Ch. 2, Art. 4 tit. 6 Ch. 2 (note) 6-1-101 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 6-2-201 et seq. 101-88 6-2-201 Ch. 22 (note) - 22-84 - 22-120 - Ch. 103 (note) - 103-3 - Ch. 107 (note) - 107-62 - Ch. 109 (note) - 109-2 - Ch. 111 (note) - Ch. 113 (note) - App. D (note) 6-2-201(20) Ch. 8 (note) 6-2-201(23) Ch. 14 (note) 6-3-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 2 6-3-101 2-19 6-3-106(4) 2-21 6-3-110 2-22 6-4-101 Ch. 2, Art. 3, 
Div. 2 6-4-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 3 6-4-201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 3, 
Div. 3 6-4-202-6-4-204 2-101 6-4-301 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 6-4-401 2-103 6-4-402 Ch. 2, Art. 6 - 2-267 6-54-107 Ch. 2, Art. 4 6-54-108 Ch. 2, Art. 4 6-54-113 Ch. 14, Art. 4 - 14-109-14-111 6-54-133 App. D (intro.) 6-54-308 1-9 6-54-501-6-54-504 10-21 - 105-21 - 105-54 - 105-89 - 105-146 - 105-169 - 105-200 - 105-232 - 105-266 - 105-300 6-54-501-6-54-506 10-19 - 105-19 - 105-52 - 105-88 - 105-111, 105-112 - 105-144 - 105-167 - 105-198 - 105-230 - 105-264 - 105-298 - 105-325 6-54-502 105-327 6-54-508 et seq. 1-1 6-56-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 6 6-56-301 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 6, 
Div. 2 - 2-299 6-58-101 et seq. Ch. 101 (note) 7-63-101 et seq. 24-3 8-47-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4 8-50-501 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4 10-7-101 et seq. 2-104 10-7-301(6) 2-104 10-7-503(a) 2-104 10-7-503(e) 2-104 10-7-504 2-104 10-7-504(a)(1) 2-104 10-7-504(a)(4)(A) 2-104 10-7-504(a)(14) 2-104 10-7-504(a)(15) 2-104 10-7-504(a)(19) 2-104 10-7-504(d) 2-104 10-7-504(f)(1) 2-104 10-7-506 2-104 12-4-101 Ch. 2, Art. 4 12-4-102 Ch. 2, Art. 4 tit. 13 101-24 13-3-301-13-4-309 App. B, Art. I, § B 13-4-101 et seq. Ch. 101 (note) - Ch. 101, Art. 2 13-4-101 101-23 13-4-103 et seq. 101-24 13-4-104 22-84, 22-85 - 22-120 - 22-179 - App. A, Ch. 4, § XXIII 13-4-201 et seq. App. C (note) 13-4-201-13-4-203 App. B, Art. VI 13-4-201 App. A, Ch. 1, § I 13-4-301 et seq. App. B (note) 13-4-302 App. B, Art. V, § A - App. B, Art. V, § B 13-4-303 App. B, Art. VI 13-4-306 App. B, Art. V, § B 13-4-307 22-85 - App. B, Art. V, § A 13-4-308 App. B, Art. V, § B 13-4-310 101-54, 101-55 13-4-310(e) 101-54 13-4-310(k)(5)(A) 101-55 13-4-310(k)(6) 101-55 13-7-201 et seq. Ch. 101 (note) - App. A (note) 13-7-201-13-7-210 App. A, Ch. 4, § VIII 13-7-201 App. A, Ch. 1, § I 13-7-202 App. A, Ch. 1, § I 13-7-207 App. A, Ch. 3, § I - App. A, Ch. 3, § III - App. A, Ch. 3, § V 13-7-401 et seq. App. A, Ch. 3, § XXII 13-21-201 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. 2 - 14-19 13-21-201 14-20 13-21-202 14-22 13-21-203 14-24 13-21-204- 
13-21-206 14-26 13-21-205 14-25 tit. 16 Ch. 16 (note) 16-18-101 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 16-18-101 12-2 16-18-102 12-2 16-18-301 et seq. 12-11 16-18-302 12-3 16-18-304 12-11 16-18-307 12-10 16-18-308 et seq. 12-2 16-18-309 12-4 - 12-8 27-8-101 et seq. 111-66 29-16-101 et seq. 14-26 29-17-101 et seq. 14-26 29-20-101 et seq. 2-48 39-13-513 16-2 39-13-517 16-2 39-14-202 6-7 39-14-501 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. 3, 
Div. 2 39-16-41 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 4 tit. 44 Ch. 6 (note) 44-8-408 6-35 44-8-410 6-36 44-17-101 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. 2 tit. 55 Ch. 24 (note) - 24-3 55-8-101 et seq. 24-82 55-8-101 24-1 55-8-104-55-8-108 24-4 55-8-109 et seq. 24-50 55-8-110(a)(3)(A) 24-82 55-8-122 24-30 55-8-140 et seq. 24-51 55-8-152-55-8-156 24-49 55-8-158 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. 4, 
Div. 2 55-8-160 Ch. 24, Art. 4 55-8-183 24-52 55-8-198 Ch. 24, Art. 3, 
Div. 2 - 24-81 55-21-101 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. 4 55-21-103 24-137 55-21-104 24-137 55-21-104 24-138 tit. 57 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-21 57-1-101 et seq. 4-23 57-2-101 et seq. 4-23 57-3-101 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. 2 - 4-21 - 4-23 57-3-101 4-93 57-3-208 4-59 - 4-63 57-3-212(a) 4-59 57-3-213 4-59 57-3-301 4-67 57-3-406 4-1 57-3-501 et seq. 4-24 57-4-101 et seq. 4-21 - 4-23 57-4-203 4-1 57-5-101 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. 3 57-5-103 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. 3, 
Div. 3 57-5-103(a)(4) 4-152 57-5-104 4-151 57-5-104(a) 4-151 57-5-106 Ch. 4, Art. 3 - 4-93 57-5-601 et seq. 4-93 - 4-161, 4-162 57-5-606 4-162 57-5-608 4-162 59-8-101 et seq. App. A, Ch. 4, § XVI 62-6-101 et seq. Ch. 105, Art. 13 62-30-101 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) tit. 63 Ch. 8 (note) 67-1-804 8-30 67-4-701 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. 2 67-4-702(a)(2) 8-20 67-4-705 Ch. 8, Art. 2 67-4-710 8-22 67-27-101 et seq. App. A, Ch. 4, § XXVII 68-1-101 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 68-6-106 6-63 68-8-101 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. 3 68-8-104 6-63 68-8-107 6-63 68-8-108 6-63 68-14-801- 
68-14-807 105-299 68-104-101 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. 3 68-120-101 Ch. 105 (note) 68-221-1105 111-2 68-221-1106 111-58 68-221-1106(d) 111-32, 111-33 - 111-63 69-3-101 et seq. 103-3 71-3-501 et seq. App. A, Ch. 2 71-3-501-71-3-533 App. A, Ch. 2  
