Change 4, March 11, 2014 1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. CITY COUNCIL.
2. ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
3. CITY COORDINATOR.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COUNCIL2
SECTION
1-101. Time and place of regular meetings.
1-102. Order of business.
1-103. Rules of order.
1-101. Time and place of regular meetings. The city council shall hold
regular monthly meetings on the first and second Tuesday of each month at the
municipal building or at such other location as the council may designate from
time to time. The time of the regular monthly meetings shall also be designated
by council, and may be changed by council from time to time. (Ord. 1048, as
replaced by Ord. #1208-1, Jan. 2009)
1-102. Order of business. At each meeting of the city council, the
following regular order of business shall be observed, unless dispensed with by
a majority vote of the members present:
(1) Call to order by the mayor.
(2) Roll call by the city clerk.
(3) Reading of minutes of the previous meeting by the city clerk, and
approval or correction.
1Charter references
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, electrical and gas inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
2Charter references
Elections and appointments: Article III.
Executive department: Article II.
Official oaths, penalties and bonds: Article IV.
1-2
(4) 1st meeting of each month: Vote to pay wages and salaries.
2nd meeting of each month: Vote to pay bills from previous month.
(5) Hear delegations/citizen comments.
(6) Old business.
(7) New business.
(8) Adjournment. (Ord. 1048)
1-103. Rules of order. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the
charter or this code, the rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained
in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern and control the conduct
of all city council meetings.
(1) The following rules of order and parliamentary procedure shall be
followed at all city council meetings:
(a) Citizen and delegation comments. Individual citizens and
delegations shall only be allowed to address the city council as follows:
(i) Individual citizens and delegations shall only be
allowed to speak during that time set-aside in Title 1, Chapter 1,
Section 1-102, Order of business, Sub-section (5), Hear
delegations/Citizen comments, and at no other time during a city
council meeting except as otherwise provided hereinbelow.
(ii) The order of addressing city council shall be as
follows:
(A) Delegations.
(B) Citizens.
(iii) Each individual citizen, delegation and delegation
member shall be allowed such time as directed by the mayor in
which to address the city council regardless of whether such
citizen, delegation or delegation member desires to speak to one,
or several, issues or matters presently before the council.
(iv) Each delegation shall identify itself as such and
designate one (1) individual who may speak for the entire
delegation; however, any person who is a member of such
delegation may also be heard in the discretion of the mayor.
(v) Individual citizens, delegation representatives and
delegation members may be allowed to speak to a matter presently
under consideration by the city council at times other than
provided hereinabove as follows:
(A) A member of the city council may yield the
floor to such citizen, delegation representative or delegation
member; however, in so doing, said council member shall
lose his or her right to speak to the matter unless all other
council members have spoken to the issue, in which case
such council member shall be allowed to speak to the
matter.
1-3
(B) A member of the city council may make inquiry
of a citizen, delegation representative or delegation member,
and such inquiries shall be limited to asking questions to
persons qualified to provide information on the topic
presently being considered. This procedure shall not be
used for the purpose of allowing a citizen, delegation
representative, or delegation member to give information,
or express an opinion, which that person could otherwise
have given or made in conformance with the rules
hereinabove provided. However, if such person has
knowledge concerning the topic presently being considered
which is peculiar (other normal sources do not possess the
knowledge or information) and helpful, then he or she may
respond to each inquiry as made to him or her.
(vi) Excluded from the requirements of Title 1, Chapter
1, Section 1-103, Rules of order, Sub-section (1)(a)(i) - (v), Citizen
and delegation comments, is any individual who is an officer,
department head, or employee of the City of Harriman, and who is
not otherwise a member of the city council, while said individual
is speaking in his or her capacity as herein described.
(b) Improper comments. No person, including council members,
shall be allowed to make any derogatory, demeaning, insulting or
threatening comment, or ask any question in such a fashion as to be
considered derogatory, demeaning, insulting or threatening by its clear
implication, to or about any individual during a city council meeting.
If the person making such comment, or asking such question, is not
a council member, then such person shall be immediately warned that
such conduct will not be further tolerated. If this person disregards the
warning and makes another comment, or asks another question, in
violation of this rule, he or she will be immediately removed from the
meeting for the remainder thereof.
If the person making such comment, or asking such question, is a
council member, then such person shall be immediately warned that such
conduct will not be further tolerated. If this person disregards the
warning and makes another comment, or asks another question, in
violation of this rule, the chair shall determine what punishment shall be
imposed; including, but not limited to: censure for the remainder of the
meeting or removal from the meeting for the remainder thereof.
(c) Motions. Each matter coming before the city council shall
only be considered and acted upon by motion properly made and duly
seconded, and in accordance with the following:
(i) When a matter is brought before council for its
consideration, and the matter to be considered will require some
form of action on the part of council, the matter may addressed by
1-4
the mayor, council member or other officer who has caused the
matter to be considered prior to the making of a motion only for
the purpose of giving a brief synopsis of the matter. Once the
synopsis has been given to council, there shall be no further
discussion, and no questions asked, until the matter is brought to
the floor for consideration by a motion properly made and duly
seconded.
(ii) After a motion has been made and seconded, the
maker of the motion shall be the first council member allowed to
speak to the motion. The person who seconded the motion shall be
the second council member allowed to speak to the motion. All
other council members, and the mayor, speaking to the motion,
shall be allowed to speak in any appropriate order or fashion as
determined by the mayor in accordance with Roberts Rules of
Order, Newly Revised.
(iii) All further action on the motion shall be taken in
accordance with Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised.
(iv) Excluded from the requirements of Title 1, Chapter
1, Section 1-103, Rules of order, Sub-sections (1)(c)(i) - (iii),
Motions, are those matters brought before the city council solely
for informational purposes, which matters include, but are not
limited to: committee, council member, department head,
employee, and other officer reports, communications from and to
the mayor, council members, officers, department heads and
employees, and other such information related matters. By way of
further delineation and definition, an informational matter is one
which does not require the action of city council.
(2) The rules of order and parliamentary procedure hereinabove
set-out shall govern the transaction of business by and before the city council at
its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with provisions of the charter or this code. (Ord. 1048, as amended
by Ord. 1050)
1-5
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
SECTION
1-201. City seal.
1-202. Bonds required of certain personnel.
1-201. City seal. The seal provided and used by the city shall be of
circular form with a double rope border enclosing the words "City of Harriman,
Tennessee, Incorporated May 19th 1891." There shall be a ribbon, under the
inner circle of the border at the top, bearing the words: "Prohibition, Peace,
Prosperity." It shall have the device of a distant view of the Emory River and
Gap; the Cincinnati Southern Railroad Bridge and Road; the ETV & G Railroad;
a steamboat on the river; a view of the Rolling Mill; the Harriman Coal and Iron
Railroad with a locomotive and three loaded cars; a pile of pig iron, ore, and coal
in the foreground with a shovel and mining pick. The inscription at the bottom
shall be the Latin motto: "Ex inntilli Utilitas." Such seal shall be two and
three-eights inches in diameter. Such seal is hereby declared to be the common
seal of the city. (1974 code, sec. 1-101)
1-202. Bonds required of certain personnel.1 The city treasurer, city
clerk, and such other positions as the city council may deem shall execute a good
and sufficient bond payable to the city, before entering upon the discharge of
their duties, in an amount as determined by the council. The city shall pay the
cost of the bond.
Such bonds shall be signed by at least two (2) sureties, to be approved by
the city council. They shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of the respective officers; for their paying over to their successors in office,
or to the proper parties, all such sums of money belonging to the city as shall be
in their hands, by virtue of such offices or otherwise; and for their accounting for
and turning over to such successors or other proper persons all city property
which may come into their hands.
The city council shall have the right at any time, by resolution, to require
officers to give such security and bond as it shall deem expedient and for the
best interest of the city. (1974 code, sec. 1-102, modified)
1Charter reference
Bonds: Article IV.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 1-6
CHAPTER 3
CITY COORDINATOR
SECTION
1-301. Qualifications.
1-302. Duties/responsibilities.
1-303. Appointed by city council.
1-301. Qualifications. The city coordinator shall the following
qualifications:
(1) A bachelor's of science degree in business or related fields, with
training in public administration and a minimum of two (2) years experience in
local government administration
(2) An associate's degree in business or related fields, with training in
public administration and a minimum of four (4) years experience in local
government administration
(3) Training in public administration with more than four (4) years
experience in local government administration may be considered in lieu of the
above educational requirements. (as added by Ord. #05-03-A, May 2005)
1-302. Duties/responsibilities. The city coordinator shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Informational:
(a) The coordinator shall act as the informational conduit
between the various departments or officers of the city and the city
council and mayor.
(b) The coordinator shall act as the informational conduit
between the city and the public.
(c) The coordinator shall act as the informational conduit
between the city and other public entities, whether they be federal, state
or local.
(2) Operational:
(a) The coordinator shall develop a working knowledge of each
department or office of the city and shall schedule meetings in
coordination with department heads or city officers for this purpose and
to fulfill the informational responsibilities hereinabove provided.
(b) The coordinator shall be an ex-officio member of all the
various committees of the city, shall render reports as required by said
committees, and shall otherwise provide guidance and assistance to the
various committees and department head of the city as is necessary
warranted or required.
(c) The coordinator shall have input into the constitution of the
agenda for city council meetings and shall coordinate with the various
Change 3, April 10, 2007 1-7
committees, officers, department heads, city council members and mayor
the information to be presented to the city council at its various meetings.
(d) The coordinator shall be responsible for developing all bid
specifications for the various bids let by the city.
(e) The coordinator shall be responsible for all fixed asset
control of the city, including, but not limited to: inventory, disposition and
tracking.
(f) The coordinator shall be responsible for prioritizing
department and officer budget requests and the preparation of the annual
departmental budget requests and all subsequent amendment requests
thereto.
(g) The coordinator, in coordination with the city treasurer,
Shall be responsible for monitoring the expenses and income of the city
in relation to the established budget and provide this information to the
various committees, officers, department heads, city council members and
mayor as is necessary, warranted or required.
(h) The coordinator shall have complete decision-making
authority within the areas of his duties and responsibilities, and within
such other areas as may lawfully be delegated to the coordinator by the
city council and/or mayor; however, all such decision-making authority
shall be subject to mayoral and/or city council review and change. (as
added by Ord. #05-03-A, May 2005)
1-303. Appointed by the city council. The city coordinator shall be
appointed by majority vote of the city council upon the recommendation of the
mayor or a member or members of the city council. The city coordinator shall
serve at the pleasure of the city council. (as added by Ord. #05-03-A, May 2005)
2-1
1Municipal code reference
Creation and establishment of city tree board: § 13-502.
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR HARRIMAN HOSPITAL.
2. CARNEGIE LIBRARY OF HARRIMAN, TENNESSEE.
3. LIBRARY BOARD.
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR HARRIMAN HOSPITAL
SECTION
2-101. Creation and purpose.
2-102. Membership.
2-103. Organization; election of officers; compensation.
2-104. Qualifications of certain members.
2-105. Terms of office.
2-106. Removal from office.
2-107. Powers generally.
2-108. Title to property acquired.
2-109. Conduct and maintenance of hospital to be nonpolitical, etc.
2-110. Rules and regulations.
2-111. Quarterly reports.
2-112. Dissolution of Harriman Hospital Association.
2-113. Negotiation of sale of assets managed by Harriman Hospital Association.
2-114. Tax exempt status.
2-101. Creation and purpose. A board of seven (7) trustees, or agents, all
residents of Roane County, Tennessee, are hereby created and designated and
known as the "Harriman Hospital Association" to act for the city for the purpose
of constructing and maintaining a hospital in the city. (1974 code, sec. 1-801)
2-102. Membership. The board of trustees created by the preceding
section shall be elected by the city council of the city.
One (1) member of the board of trustees shall be nominated by the county
executive of Roane County and confirmed by the city council. At the expiration
of the term of office of the trustee so nominated, his successor shall be
nominated by the county judge so that at all times one (1) member of the board
2-2
of trustees shall have been selected by the county executive. One (1) of the
trustees shall be nominated by the mayor of the city and confirmed by the city
council. This trustee must be a member of the city council at all times and
should he cease to be a member of the city council after his election as trustee,
his term of office as trustee shall automatically expire at the same time he
ceases to be a member of the council, and the mayor shall nominate his
successor, who shall be a member of the city council, it being the intention that
at least one (1) of the trustees shall at all times also be a member of the city
council. The other five (5) trustees shall be elected by the city council of the city.
All seven (7) members of the board of trustees shall be elected by the city council
after the passage of these provisions and thereafter at the respective times as
their terms of office expire. (1974 code, sec. 1-802, modified)
2-103. Organization; election of officers; compensation. The board of
trustees shall organize within ten (10) days after their election and shall elect
the following officers: A chairman or president, a vice-president, a secretary,
and a treasurer, all of whom shall serve without compensation. (1974 code, sec.
1-803)
2-104. Qualifications of certain members. At least two (2) of the
members of the board of trustees shall be well-known full time medical
practitioners of the city, and one (1) or more of such trustees shall be a member
of the city council at the time of election. (1974 code, sec. 1-804, modified)
2-105. Terms of office. Two (2) members of the board of trustees shall be
elected for the term of two (2) years, two (2) for the term of four (4) years, two
(2) for the term of six (6) years, and one (1) for the term of seven (7) years. At
the end of the respective terms, new trustees shall be elected for terms of seven
(7) years. (1974 code, sec. 1-805)
2-106. Removal from office. All of the members of the board of trustees,
after the first election, shall hold office for seven (7) years, as provided by the
preceding section, or during good behavior and until his successor is elected, but
may be removed for cause, after a reasonable notice, by a two-thirds vote of the
city council of the city. (1974 code, sec. 1-806)
2-107. Powers generally. The board of trustees is hereby vested and
clothed with full authority to carry out the purpose for which such board is
elected, including the right to hire or employ any necessary agents, employees,
representatives, or servants. (1974 code, sec. 1-807)
2-108. Title to property acquired. Title to all property acquired by the
Harriman Hospital Association shall be taken and vested in the city as the
2-3
property of the municipality but the control and management of such hospital
is vested in the Harriman Hospital Association. (1974 code, sec. 1-808)
2-109. Conduct and maintenance of hospital to be nonpolitical, etc. The
conduct and maintenance of the Harriman Hospital shall be at all times
nonpolitical and independent of any religious sect or organization. (1974 code,
sec. 1-809)
2-110. Rules and regulations. The board of trustees shall have authority
to draft suitable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may
be necessary and proper for the carrying out of the objects of the Harriman
Hospital Association. (1974 code, sec. 1-810)
2-111. Quarterly reports. The board of trustees shall from time to time
make quarterly reports in writing to the city council of the city. (1974 code, sec.
1-811)
2-112. Dissolution of Harriman Hospital Association. The Harriman
Hospital Association is hereby dissolved and abolished effective June 30, 1999
at midnight or when any and all business to which it is required to attend to
shall have been completed, whichever comes last. (as added by Ord. #98-0011,
March 1999)
2-113. Negotiation of sale of assets managed by Harriman Hospital
Association. The City of Harriman, in accordance with the provisions of § 2-114
of the Harriman Municipal Code, and upon the creation of a private not-forprofit
corporation established for the purpose of controlling and managing the
physical plant and assets known as the Roane Medical Center, and all other
related assets and liabilities presently owned by the City of Harriman and
controlled and managed by the Harriman Hospital Association, shall negotiate
and may contract with said private not-for-profit corporation the lease and/or
purchase of all such assets and payment of liabilities. (as added by
Ord. #98-0011, March 1999)
2-114. Tax exempt status. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
ordinance, The Harriman Hospital Association is organized and operated
exclusively for such purposes as are set forth in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 or any other future corresponding provision. In the event
of dissolution of the Harriman Hospital Association, the residual assets of the
association will be distributed to one or more organizations exempt under
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, to the federal, state, or
local government for exclusively public purposes. (Ord. 814, as amended by
Ord. #98-0011, March 1999)
2-4
CHAPTER 2
CARNEGIE LIBRARY OF HARRIMAN, TENNESSEE
SECTION
2-201. Establishment and maintenance.
2-201. Establishment and maintenance. A free public library and
reading rooms for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the city is hereby
established in accordance with Chapter 105 of the Acts of the Legislature of
Tennessee of 1897, and the amendments thereto.
The library and reading rooms shall be known and designated as the
"Carnegie Library of Harriman, Tennessee."
The offer of Andrew Carnegie to donate or give the sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) to aid in establishing a free public library and reading rooms
in the city on condition that the city council appropriate annually the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000) for the maintenance of such library is hereby accepted.
The city council of the city, in consideration of the gift of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000) from Andrew Carnegie, hereby agrees that the city council, in
its annual appropriation ordinance, shall hereafter appropriate and reserve a
sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) annually for the maintenance
of the free public library and reading rooms, such appropriation to be exclusively
used for the support and maintenance of the free public library and reading
rooms. (1974 code, sec. 1-701)
2-5
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION
2-301. Created, membership, terms, vacancies.
2-302. Organization, by-laws, rules and regulations.
2-303. Function.
2-304. Power to appoint personnel.
2-305. Reports to the city council.
2-301. Created, membership, terms, vacancies. There is hereby
established a library board. This board shall consist of five (5) persons serving
without pay who shall be appointed by the city council. The board shall be
composed of an alderman and six (6) citizens. Five (5) of the citizens shall be
residents of the city. The other citizen shall be one (1) resident of the County of
Roane, but shall reside within an area which is not further than three (3) miles
from the municipal boundaries of the city. Not more than five (5) of said
members shall be of the same sex. The terms of office for the six (6) citizens
shall be on staggered terms with the first board being composed of two (2)
citizens appointed for a one (1) year term, two (2) citizens appointed for two (2)
year terms, and two (2) citizens appointed for three (3) year terms, and their
successors for three (3) year terms. Vacancies in such board occurring otherwise
than by expiration of their term shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired
term.
2-302. Organization, by-laws, rules and regulations. Immediately after
their appointment, they shall meet and organize by electing one of their
members as president and such other officers as may be necessary. The board
shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and regulations, for the proper
organization of the public library for the city.
2-303. Function. The library board shall provide, conduct and supervise
the public library and other related facilities and activities on any of the
properties owned or controlled by the city or on other properties with the
consent of the owners and authorities thereof. It shall provide the state library
agencies such statistics and information as may be required from time to time.
2-304. Power to appoint personnel. The library board shall have the
power to appoint or designate someone to act as librarian who is trained and
properly qualified for the work and such other personnel as the board deems
proper.
2-6
2-305. Reports to the city council. The library board shall make full and
complete annual reports to the city council of the city and all other reports from
time to time as requested.
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER
1. CITY JUDGE.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS.
4. BONDS AND APPEALS.
CHAPTER 1
CITY JUDGE
SECTION
3-101. Appointment.
3-101. Appointment. The officer designated by the charter to handle
judicial matters within the city shall preside over the city court and shall be
known as the city judge. The city judge shall be provided with an office in the
municipal building. (1974 code, sec. 1-801)
3-2
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 8-21-401.
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Maintenance of docket.
3-202. Imposition of fines, penalties, and costs.
3-203. Disposition and report of fines, penalties, and costs.
3-204. Disturbance of proceedings.
3-201. Maintenance of docket. The city judge shall keep a complete
docket of all matters coming before him in his judicial capacity. The docket shall
include for each defendant such information as his name; warrant and/or
summons numbers; alleged offense; disposition; fines, penalties, and costs
imposed and whether collected; whether committed to workhouse; and all other
information which may be relevant.
3-202. Imposition of fines, penalties, and costs. All fines, penalties, and
costs shall be imposed and recorded by the city judge on the city court docket in
open court.
In all cases heard or determined by him, the city judge shall tax in the bill
of costs the same amounts and for the same items allowed in courts of general
sessions1 for similar work in state cases.
3-203. Disposition and report of fines, penalties, and costs. All funds
coming into the hands of the city judge in the form of fines, penalties, costs, and
forfeitures shall be recorded by him and paid over daily to the city. At the end
of each month he shall submit to the city council a report accounting for the
collection or noncollection of all fines, penalties, and costs imposed by his court
during the current month and to date for the current fiscal year.
3-204. Disturbance of proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any person
to create any disturbance of any trial before the city court by making loud or
unusual noises, by using indecorous, profane, or blasphemous language, or by
any distracting conduct whatsoever.
3-3
1State law reference
For authority to issue arrest warrants see Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 40, chapter 6.
CHAPTER 3
WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
SECTION
3-301. Issuance of arrest warrants.
3-302. Issuance of summonses.
3-303. Issuance of subpoenas.
3-301. Issuance of arrest warrants.1 The city judge shall have the power
to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with violating municipal
ordinances.
3-302. Issuance of summonses. When a complaint of an alleged
ordinance violation is made to the city judge, the judge may in his discretion, in
lieu of issuing an arrest warrant, issue a summons ordering the alleged offender
personally to appear before the city court at a time specified therein to answer
to the charges against him. The summons shall contain a brief description of
the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the
municipal code or ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any
person to appear before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully
served on him, the cause may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of
the court shall be valid and binding subject to the defendant's right of appeal.
3-303. Issuance of subpoenas. The city judge may subpoena as witnesses
all persons whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material to matters
coming before his court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served
with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.
3-4
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 27-5-101.
CHAPTER 4
BONDS AND APPEALS
SECTION
3-401. Appearance bonds authorized.
3-402. Appeals.
3-403. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms.
3-401. Appearance bonds authorized. When the city judge is not
available or when an alleged offender requests and has reasonable grounds for
a delay in the trial of his case, he may, in lieu of remaining in jail pending
disposition of his case, be allowed to post an appearance bond with the city
judge or, in the absence of the judge, with the city court clerk, or in the absence
of the city court clerk, with the ranking police officer on duty at the time,
provided such alleged offender is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
3-402. Appeals. Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of
the city court against him may, within ten (10) days1 next after such judgment
is rendered, appeal to the next term of the circuit court upon posting a proper
appeal bond.
3-403. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms. An appearance bond in any
case before the city court shall be in such amount as the city judge shall
prescribe and shall be conditioned that the defendant shall appear for trial
before the city court at the stated time and place. An appeal bond in any case
shall be in such sum as the city judge shall prescribe, not to exceed the sum of
five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall be conditioned that if the circuit court
shall find against the appellant the fine or penalty and all costs of the trial and
appeal shall be promptly paid by the defendant and/or his sureties. An
appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash
deposit or by any corporate surety company authorized to do business in
Tennessee or by two (2) private persons who individually own real property
within the county. No other type bond shall be acceptable.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL1
CHAPTER
1. SOCIAL SECURITY.
2. PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
3. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
4. CODE OF ETHICS.
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage.
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed.
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions.
4-105. Records and reports.
4-106. Exemptions from coverage.
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage. It is hereby declared to be the
policy and purpose of this city to provide for all eligible employees and officials
of the city, whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function, the benefits of the system of federal old age and survivors insurance.
In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action
as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. (1974
code, sec. 1-301)
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed. The mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to execute all the necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the state executive director of old age insurance, as
agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in the
preceding section. (1974 code, sec. 1-302)
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages. Withholdings from the
salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in the first
section of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
1Municipal code reference
Limitation on number of municipal employees: section 1-202.
4-2
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations. (1974 code, sec. 1-303)
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions. There shall be
appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's
contributions, and the same shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations. (1974 code, sec. 1-304)
4-105. Records and reports. The recorder shall keep such records and
make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations. (1974 code, sec. 1-305)
4-106. Exemptions from coverage. There is hereby exempted from this
chapter any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, any
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state and federal
laws or regulations. (1974 code, sec. 1-306)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 4-3
CHAPTER 2
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS1
SECTION
4-201. Personnel rules and regulations.
4-202 through 4-218. [Repealed.]
4-201. Personnel rules and regulations.2 The document styled "Personnel
Rules and Regulations--City of Harriman," as modified by the University of
Tennessee Municipal Technical Advisory Service in 2011, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as
the "Personnel Rules and Regulations." A copy of this policy shall be available
to the general public and all employees of the city at the municipal office, and
each department head of the city, excluding the Harriman Utility Board, shall
be given one (1) copy each of said policy, which copy shall be made available to
each covered employee, and otherwise as required by said policy. (1974 Code,
§ 1-103, as replaced by Ord. #98-0008, July 1998, Ord. #99-02, April 1999, and
Ord. #1011-01, Oct. 2011)
4-202 through 4-218. [Repealed.] These sections were repealed by
Ord. #98-0008, July 1998.
1Charter references
Elections, and appointments: Article III.
Executive department: Article II.
Official oaths, penalties and bonds: Article IV.
2The "Personnel Rules and Regulations--City of Harriman" policy and any
amendments thereto are of record in the office of the recorder.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 4-4
CHAPTER 3
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM1
SECTION
4-301. Title.
4-302. Purpose.
4-303. Coverage.
4-304. Standards authorized.
4-305. Variances from standards authorized.
4-306. Administration.
4-307. Funding the program plan.
4-301. Title. This chapter shall be known as "The Occupational Safety
and Health Program Plan" for the employees of the City of Harriman.2 (as
replaced by Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
4-302. Purpose. The City of Harriman in electing to update the
established program plan will maintain an effective and comprehensive
Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan for its employees and shall:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment
that includes:
(a) Top management commitment and employee involvement;
(b) Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and
potential hazards;
(c) Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling
the existing or potential hazards; and
(d) Train managers, supervisors, and employees to understand
and deal with worksite hazards.
(2) Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment,
personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect
employees.
(3) Record, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner
of Labor and Workforce Development, or persons within the Department of
Labor and Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
1Municipal code reference
Emergency services responders: title 20, ch. 2.
2The "Plan of Operation for the Occupational Safety and Health Program
Plan," including Appendices I through IV are available for review in the office
of the recorder.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 4-5
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.
(4) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records.
(5) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved
under a standard promulgated by the state.
(6) Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees
in the effectuation of the objectives of this program plan, including the
opportunity to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices
injurious to employee safety and health.
(7) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this
program plan. (as replaced by Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
4-303. Coverage. The provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health
Program for the employees of the City of Harriman shall apply to all employees
of each administrative department, commission, board, division, or other agency
whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent. (as replaced by
Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
4-304. Standards authorized. The Occupational Safety and Health
standards adopted by the City of Harriman are the same as, but not limited to,
the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards promulgated,
or which may be promulgated, in accordance with section 6 of the Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.1 (as replaced by Ord. #0413-01,
April 2013)
4-305. Variances from standards authorized. Upon written application
to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of
Tennessee, we may request an order granting a temporary variance from any
approved standards. Applications for variances shall be in accordance with
Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development
Occupational Safety and Health, Variances from Occupational Safety and
Health Standards, chapter 0800-01-02, as authorized by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 50. Prior to requesting such temporary variance, we will notify
or serve notice to our employees, their designated representatives, or interested
parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50, chapter 3.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 4-6
notice on the main bulletin board shall be deemed sufficient notice to employees.
(as added by Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
4-306. Administration. For the purposes of this chapter, building official
is designated as the Safety Director of Occupational Safety and Health to
perform duties and to exercise powers assigned to plan, develop, and administer
this program plan. The safety director shall develop a plan of operation for the
program plan in accordance with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor and
Workforce Development Occupational Safety and Health, Safety and Health
Provisions for the Public Sector, chapter 0800-01-05, as authorized by Tennessee
Code Annotated, title 50. (as added by Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
4-307. Funding the program plan. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program plan pursuant to this chapter shall be made available as
authorized by the City of Harriman. (as added by Ord. #0413-01, April 2013)
Change 3, April 10, 2007 4-7
CHAPTER 4
CODE OF ETHICS1
SECTION
4-401. Applicability.
4-402. Definition of "personal interest."
4-403. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote.
4-404. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
4-405. Acceptance of gratuities, etc.
4-406. Use of information.
4-407. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc.
4-408. Use of position or authority.
4-409. Outside employment.
4-410. Ethics complaints.
4-411. Violations.
1State statutes dictate many of the ethics provisions that apply to
municipal officials and employees. For provisions relative to the following, see
the Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.) sections indicated:
Campaign finance: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 2, ch. 10.
Conflict of interests: Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-107, 108;
12-4-101, 102.
Conflict of interests disclosure statements: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 8-50-501 and the following sections.
Consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal officials: Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 2-10-122, 124.
Crimes involving public officials (bribery, soliciting unlawful
compensation, buying and selling in regard to office): Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 39-16-101 and the following sections.
Crimes of official misconduct, official oppression, misuse of official
information: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 39-16-401 and the following
sections.
Ouster law: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 8-47-101 and the following
sections.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 4-8
4-401. Applicability. This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel of
the municipality. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed
officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any
separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words
"municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. (as added by
Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-402. Definition of "personal interest." (1) For purposes of §§ 4-403 and
4-404, "personal interest" means:
(a) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the
subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state
statutes on conflicts of interests; or
(b) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised; or
(c) Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official’s or employee’s spouse, parent(s), step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or step child(ren).
(2) The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised.
(3) In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-403. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. An official
with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting
at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes,
any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer
that it affects the official’s vote on the measure. In addition, the official may
recuse himself1 from voting on the measure. (as added by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug.
2006)
4-404. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters. An official
or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than
casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that
would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the
discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the
interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the
1Masculine pronouns include the feminine. Only masculine pronouns
have been used for convenience and readability.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 4-9
official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or
policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. (as added
by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-405. Acceptance of gratuities, etc. An official or employee may not
accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration or
favor of any kind from anyone other than the municipality:
(1) For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of
an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the
regular course of his duties; or
(2) That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence
his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business. (as
added by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-406. Use of information. (1) An official or employee may not disclose
any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that
is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law.
(2) An official or employee may not use or disclose information
obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to
result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. (as added by
Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-407. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. (1) An official or employee
may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or
supplies for private gain or advantage to himself.
(2) An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of
municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage
to any private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or
lease that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the
municipality. (as added by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-408. Use of position or authority. (1) An official or employee may not
make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name
of the municipality.
(2) An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position
to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized
by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the municipality. (as added
by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-409. Outside employment. An official or employee may not accept or
continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the
performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with
any provision of the municipality’s charter or any ordinance or policy. (as added
by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
Change 3, April 10, 2007 4-10
4-410. Ethics complaints. (1) The city attorney is designated as the
ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or
employee potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the city attorney
may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter
and other applicable law.
(2) (a) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city
attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed
official or employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may
undertake an investigation on his own initiative when he acquires
information indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations
for action to end or seek retribution for any activity that, in the attorney’s
judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics.
(b) The city attorney may request the governing body to hire
another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer when he has
or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter.
(c) When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this
chapter is lodged against a member of the municipality’s governing body,
the governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit,
determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the
complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the
governing body determines that a complaint warrants further
investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the city attorney or
another individual or entity chosen by the governing body.
(3) The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances
would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
(4) When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation or a civil service policy, rule, or
regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel or
civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics. (as added
by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
4-411. Violations. An elected official or appointed member of a separate
municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
punishment as provided by the municipality’s charter or other applicable law,
and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. An appointed
official or an employee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
disciplinary action. (as added by Ord. #06-08-01, Aug. 2006)
5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER
1. REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
2. PRIVILEGE TAXES.
3. WHOLESALE BEER TAX.
4. HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
5. PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
6. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
SECTION
5-101. When due and payable.
5-102. When delinquent--penalty and interest.
5-101. When due and payable.1 Taxes levied by the city against real and
personal property shall become due and payable annually on the first Monday
in October of the year for which the taxes are assessed.2 (1974 code, sec. 6-101,
modified)
1Charter references
Article I, section 6.
Article VI.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, sections 67-1-701, 67-1-702 and 67-1-801,
read together, permit a municipality to collect its own property taxes
if its charter authorizes it to do so, or to turn over the collection of its
property taxes to the county trustee. Apparently, under those same
provisions, if a municipality collects its own property taxes, tax due
and delinquency dates are as prescribed by the charter; if the county
trustee collects them, the tax due date is the first Monday in October,
and the delinquency date is the following March 1.
2Charter reference
Article VI, section 3.
5-2
5-102. When delinquent--penalty and interest.1 All real property taxes
shall become delinquent on and after the first Tuesday of February next after
they become due and payable and shall thereupon be subject to such penalty and
interest as is authorized and prescribed by the city charter for delinquent taxes.2
(1974 code, sec. 6-102)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 67-1-801(c) provides that if the
county trustee collects the municipality's property taxes, a penalty of
1/2 of 1% and interest of 1% shall be added on the first day of March,
following the tax due date and on the first day of each succeeding
month.
2Charter reference
Article VI, section 3.
5-3
CHAPTER 2
PRIVILEGE TAXES
SECTION
5-201. Tax levied.
5-202. License required.
5-201. Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code,
there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses declared by
the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities, an
annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by state laws. The taxes
provided for in the state's "Business Tax Act" (Tennessee Code Annotated, title
67, chapter 58) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained, and levied on the
businesses, business activities, vocations, and occupations carried on within the
city at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the act. (1974 code, sec. 6-301)
5-202. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the city without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be
issued by the clerk to each applicant therefor upon the applicant's payment of
the appropriate privilege tax. (1974 code, sec. 6-302)
5-4
CHAPTER 3
WHOLESALE BEER TAX
SECTION
5-301. To be collected.
5-301. To be collected. The city treasurer is hereby directed to take
appropriate action to assure payment to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied
by the "Wholesale Beer Tax Act," as set out in Tennessee Code Annotated, title
57, chapter 6.1 (1974 code, sec. 6-401)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 6 provides for a tax of
17% on the sale of beer at wholesale. Every wholesaler is required to
remit to each municipality the amount of the net tax on beer
wholesale sales to retailers and other persons within the corporate
limits of the municipality.
5-5
CHAPTER 4
HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
SECTION
5-401. Definitions.
5-402. Tax levied.
5-403. Billings, refunds and credits.
5-404. Remittance and timing.
5-405. Report required.
5-406. Tax not to be absorbed.
5-407. Delinquency and penalties.
5-408. Preservation of records.
5-409. Treasurer's powers.
5-410. Proceeds to be placed in general fund.
5-411. Use of taxes collected.
5-412. Compliance with state law.
5-413. Adoption of rules and regulations.
5-401. Definitions. As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise
requires:
(1) "Consideration" means the consideration charged, whether or not
received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property
and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever;
provided, however, nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that
consideration is charged when the space provided to the person is
complimentary from the operator and no consideration is charged to or received
from any person;
(2) "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which
is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist
court, tourist cabin, motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings or
accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration;
(3) "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use
or possession, of any room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel;
(4) "Operator" means the person operating the hotel whether as owner,
lessee or otherwise;
(5) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation,
estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination
acting as a unit;
Change 4, March 11, 2014 5-6
(6) "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for
a period of less than ninety (90) continuous days. (Ord. 1044)
5-402. Tax levied. There is hereby levied a privilege tax upon the
privilege of occupancy in any hotel of each transient in the amount of seven
percent (7%) of the consideration charged by the operator. Such tax is a
privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room and is to be collected as
provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1044, as amended by Ord. #0213-01, Feb. 2013)
5-403. Billings, refunds and credits. Such tax shall be added by each and
every operator to each invoice prepared by the operator for the occupancy of the
hotel and given directly or transmitted to the transient. Such tax shall be
collected by such operator from the transient and remitted to the city.
When a person has maintained occupancy for ninety (90) continuous days,
that person shall receive from the operator a refund or credit for the tax
previously collected from or charged to said person, and the operator shall
receive credit for the amount of such tax if previously paid or reported to the
City of Harriman. (Ord. 1044)
5-404. Remittance and timing. Tire tax hereby levied shall be remitted
by all operators who lease, rent or charge for any rooms within the city to the
treasurer, such tax to be remitted to such officer not later than the twentieth
(20th) day of each month for the preceding month. The operator is hereby
required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the presentation of
the invoice for such occupancy whether prior to occupancy or after occupancy or
after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator, and if credit is granted by
the operator to the transient, then the obligation to the city entitled to such tax
shall be that of the operator. (Ord. 1044)
5-405. Report required. The treasurer shall be responsible for the
collection of such tax. A monthly tax return under oath shall be filed with the
treasurer by the operator with such number of copies thereof as the treasurer
may reasonably require for the collection of such tax. The report of the operator
shall include such facts and information as may be deemed reasonable for the
verification of the tax due. The form of such report shall be developed by the
treasurer and approved by the city council prior to use. The treasurer shall
audit each operator in the city at least once per year and shall report on the
audits made on a quarterly basis to the city council. (Ord. 1044)
5-406. Tax not to be absorbed. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or
state in any manner whether directly or indirectly that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added
to the rent, or that if added, any part will be refunded. (Ord. 1044)
5-7
5-407. Delinquency and penalties. Taxes collected by an operator which
are not remitted to the treasurer on or before the due dates are delinquent. An
operator shall be liable for interest on such delinquent taxes from the due date
at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, and is liable for an additional
penalty of one percent (1%) for each month or fraction thereof such taxes are
delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax herein
required to be remitted. Each occurrence of willful refusal of an operator to
collect or remit the tax or willful refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax
or willful refusal of a transient to pay the tax imposed is unlawful and shall be
punishable by a civil penalty not in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1044)
5-408. Preservation of funds. It is the duty of every operator liable for
the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep
and preserve for a period of three (3) years all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as said operator may have been liable for the
collection of the payment to the city, which records the treasurer shall have the
right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1044)
5-409. Treasurer's powers. The treasurer in administering and enforcing
the provisions of this chapter shall have as additional powers, those powers and
duties with respect to collecting taxes as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 67, or otherwise provided by law for the county clerks.
Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the taxpayer has the
remedies provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, title 67, chapter 23, it being
the intent of this chapter that the provisions of law which apply to the recovery
of state taxes illegally assessed and collected shall also apply to the tax levied
under the authority of this chapter. The treasurer shall also possess those
powers and duties as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-1-707, for the
county clerks with respect to the adjustment and refunds of such tax.
With respect to the adjustment and settlement with taxpayers all errors
of taxes collected by the treasurer under authority of this chapter shall be
refunded by the city. The treasurer shall have the authority to direct the
refunding of same. Notice of any tax paid under protest shall be given to the
treasurer. The treasurer is hereby designated as the officer against whom suit
may be brought for recovery of tax illegally assessed and collected. (Ord. 1044)
5-410. Proceeds to be placed in general fund. The treasurer is hereby
charged with the duty of collection of the tax herein authorized and shall place
the proceeds of such tax in the general fund for the City of Harriman. (Ord.
1044)
5-411. Use of taxes collected. The taxes collected hereunder shall be
distributed by the city council, provided at least ten percent (10%) of the taxes
collected shall be applied to promote tourism in the area. (Ord. 1044)
5-8
5-412. Compliance with state law. The tax levied pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall only apply in accordance with the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-4-1425. (Ord. 1044)
5-413. Adoption of rules and regulations. The city council may adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this
chapter by ordinance. (Ord. 1044)
5-9
CHAPTER 5
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
SECTION
5-501. Purchases in excess of $2,000.00--prior council approval.
5-502. Purchases, contracts for services, contracts for lease or rental
equipment--competitive bids.
5-503. Purchasing procedure for estimated expenditure in excess of $2,000.00.
5-504. Procedure for purchases estimated less than $2,000.00.
5-505. Procedure for purchases of less than $750.00.
5-506. Awarding open market bids.
5-507. Preservation of bids.
5-508. Procedure for opening bids.
5-509. Prohibition from purchasing from certain businesses.
5-510. Emergency purchases and non-mechanical repairs.
5-511. Mechanical repairs and routine maintenance excluded.
5-501. Purchases in excess of $2,000.00--prior council approval. All
intended purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services
in excess of $2,000.00 shall receive prior approval by a majority of the city
council. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01, Feb. 2002)
5-502. Purchases, contracts for services, contracts for lease or rental of
equipment--competitive bids. All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment
and contractual services, and all contracts for the lease or rental of equipment,
shall be based wherever possible on competitive bids; but contracts for legal
services, auditing services by public accountants, and similar services by
persons or groups of high ethical standards, shall not be based upon competitive
bids, but shall be awarded on the basis of recognized competence and integrity;
provided further that bids need not be required for services for which the rate
or price is fixed by public authority authorized by law to fix such rates or prices.
(Ord. 852)
5-503. Purchasing procedure for estimated expenditure in excess of
$2,000.00. If the amount of expenditure is estimated to exceed $2,000.00, sealed
bids shall be solicited. The city treasurer shall solicit sealed bids by public
notice inserted at least once in a newspaper of city-wide circulation or other
newspapers when such is deemed necessary or desirable, five days prior to the
final date for submitting bids. The city treasurer shall also, when deemed
necessary or desirable, solicit the sealed bids by sending requests by mail to
prospective suppliers. All such notices shall include a general description of the
commodities or contractual services to be purchased, specifications, and the time
and place of opening bids. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01, Feb. 2002)
5-10
5-504. Procedure for purchases estimated less than $2,000.00. All
purchases of less than $2,000.00 in amount shall be made by the city treasurer
in the open market without newspaper notice, but shall wherever possible be
based upon at least three competitive bids. Requisitions for items estimated to
cost more than $2,000.00 shall not be subdivided to circumvent requirement for
newspaper notice herein provided for. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01,
Feb. 2002)
5-505. Procedure for purchases of less than $750.00. All purchases of less
than $750.00 in amount may be made by the head of the department with the
respective committees's approval, in the open market without newspaper notice,
but shall wherever possible be based upon at least three competitive telephone
quotes from prospective suppliers. The department head shall be responsible
for noting the competitive quotes in writing and preserving the same for a period
of two years. Requisitions for items estimated to cost more than $750.00 shall
not be subdivided in order to circumvent the authority of the city treasurer or
the requirement for competitive bids. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01,
Feb. 2002)
5-506. Awarding open market bids. All open market purchases made by
the city treasurer or the department head shall be awarded to the lowest and
best bidder, taking into consideration the quality of the articles to be supplied,
their conformity with specifications, their suitability of the requirements of the
city government, any delivery terms. Any, and all, bids or quotes may be
rejected for good cause. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01, Feb. 2002)
5-507. Preservation of bids. All bids taken under the requirements of
this chapter and all other documents, including purchase orders, pertaining to
the award of contracts on such bids, shall be preserved for a period of five years.
(Ord. 852)
5-508. Procedure for opening bids. All sealed bids received shall be
opened by the city treasurer in the presence of the mayor and the city clerk at
the time and place fixed in the advertisement. Each bid, with the name and
address of the bidder, shall be entered on a record, and each record with the
names of the bidder, the amounts of their bids, and the name of the successful
order, be open to public inspection. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01,
Feb. 2002)
5-509. Prohibition from purchasing from certain businesses. No
purchase shall be made for tangible personal property or services by city officials
or employees, acting in their official capacity, from any firm or individual whose
local business tax or license is delinquent. (Ord. 852)
5-11
5-510. Emergency purchases and non-mechanical repairs. A department
or agency head of the city government is authorized to purchase in the open
market, without filing requisition or estimate, any non-mechanical repairs,
supplies, materials or equipment for immediate delivery in actual emergencies
arising from unforeseen causes, including, but not fifth working day following
the date of such purchase, by the head of the city department or agency
concerned, together with a full and complete account of the circumstances of
such emergency. Such report shall be kept on file for a period of two years and
shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 852, as amended by Ord. #2002-01, Feb.
2002)
5-511. Mechanical repairs and routine maintenance excluded. Purchases
of goods and services relating to mechanical repairs and routine maintenance
to city vehicles are excluded from the operation of this chapter (Ord. 852)
Change 5, July 5, 2016 5-12
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
5-601. Procedure for selling surplus city personal property.
5-601. Procedure for selling surplus city personal property. (1) The city
manager shall be responsible for the sale and disposal of all surplus personal
property. The sale of any single item estimated to have a value in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be first approved by the mayor and board of
alderman.
(2) Permissible methods to sell or dispose of surplus city property shall
include, but are not limited to:
(a) Public auction, including internet based auction;
(b) Solicitation of written bids;
(c) Negotiated sale to one (1) or more designated buyers;
(d) Transfer to another governmental entity or agency at or
below reasonable market value; and
(e) Transfer to a non-profit organization at or below reasonable
market value.
(3) Prior to the sale, all city logos or other symbols are to be removed
to destroyed from the to be sold. (1974 Code, § 6-501, as replaced by Ord.
#0215-01, Feb. 2015)
Change 3, April 10, 2007 6-1
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15,
chapter 7.
2Municipal code reference
Emergency services responders: title 20, ch. 2.
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT1
CHAPTER
1. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
2. ARREST PROCEDURES.
3. CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND SUMMONSES.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT2
SECTION
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc.
6-103. Police department records.
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders. All policemen shall obey and
comply with such orders and administrative rules and regulations as the police
chief may officially issue.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc. Policemen shall
preserve law and order within the city. They shall patrol the city and shall
assist the city court during the trial of cases. Policemen shall also promptly
serve any legal process issued by the city court.
6-103. Police department records. The police department shall keep a
comprehensive and detailed daily record, in permanent form, showing at a
minimum:
(1) All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits.
(2) All arrests made by policemen.
(3) All police investigations made, funerals, convoyed, fire calls
answered, and other miscellaneous activities of the police department.
(4) Any other records required to be kept by the city council or by law.
The police chief shall be responsible for insuring that the police
department complies with the section.
6-2
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citation in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15, chapter 7.
CHAPTER 2
ARREST PROCEDURES
SECTION
6-201. When policemen to make arrests.
6-202. Disposition of persons arrested.
6-201. When policemen to make arrests.1 Unless otherwise authorized
or directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the person shall be
made by a policeman in the following cases:
(1) Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person.
(2) Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer's presence by the person.
(3) Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
probable cause to believe the person has committed it.
6-202. Disposition of persons arrested. (1) For code or ordinance
violations. Unless otherwise provided by law, a person arrested for a violation
of this code or other city ordinance, shall be brought before the city court.
However, if the city court is not in session, the arrested person shall be allowed
to post bond with the city court clerk, or, if the city court clerk is not available,
with the ranking police officer on duty. If the arrested person is under the
influence of alcohol or drugs when arrested, even if he is arrested for an offense
unrelated to the consumption of alcohol or drugs, the person shall be confined
until he does not pose a danger to himself or to any other person.
(2) Felonies or misdemeanors. A person arrested for a felony or a
misdemeanor shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable federal and
state law and the rules of the court which has jurisdiction over the offender.
6-3
1Municipal code reference
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest in traffic cases: title 15,
chapter 7.
CHAPTER 3
CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND SUMMONSES
SECTION
6-301. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases.
6-302. Summonses in lieu of arrest.
6-301. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases.1 Pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq., the city council appoints the
building/fire inspector a special police officer having the authority to issue
citations in lieu of arrest. The building/fire inspector shall have the authority
to issue citations in lieu of arrest for violations of the fire code adopted in title
7, chapter 2 of this municipal code of ordinances and for violations of the
building, utility and housing codes adopted in title 12 of this municipal code of
ordinances.
The citation in lieu of arrest shall contain the name and address of the
person being cited and such other information necessary to identify and give the
person cited notice of the charges against him, and state a specific date and
place for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him. The
citation shall also contain an agreement to appear, which shall be signed by the
offender. If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to appear, the special
officer in whose presence the offense was committed shall immediately arrest
the offender and dispose of him in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 7-63-104.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his agreement to appear in
court, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation in lieu of
arrest was issued.
6-302. Summonses in lieu of arrest. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-63-201, et seq., which authorizes the city council to designate
certain city enforcement officers the authority to issue ordinance summonses in
the areas of sanitation, litter control and animal control, the council designates
the street superintendent in the street department and the animal control
officer in the animal control department to issue ordinance summonses in those
areas. These enforcement officers may not arrest violators or issue citations in
lieu of arrest, but upon witnessing a violation of any ordinance, law or
regulation in the areas of sanitation, litter control or animal control, may issue
an ordinance summons and give the summons to the offender.
6-4
The ordinance summons shall contain the name and address of the person
being summoned and such other information necessary to identify and give the
person summoned notice of the charge against him, and state a specific date and
place for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him.
The ordinance summons shall also contain an agreement to appear, which
shall be signed by the offender. If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to
appear, the enforcement officer in whose presence the offense occurred may
(1) have a summons issued by the clerk of the city court, or (2) may seek the
assistance of a police officer to witness the violation. The police officer who
witnesses the violation may issue a citation in lieu of arrest for the violation, or
arrest the offender for failure to sign the citation in lieu of arrest. If the police
officer makes an arrest, he shall dispose of the person arrested as provided in
§ 6-301 above.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his agreement to appear in
court, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the ordinance
summons was issued.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS1
CHAPTER
1. FIRE DISTRICT.
2. FIRE CODE.
3. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. FIREWORKS.
5. FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS.
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT2
SECTION
7-101. Fire district described.
7-101. Fire district described. The corporate fire district shall be as
follows: Starting at a point at the midpoint of Carter Avenue where Carter
Avenue intersects Devonia Street and going East on Carter Avenue to the
midpoint of Clinton Street; then going North on Clinton Street to the midpoint
of Crescent Avenue; then going West on Crescent Avenue to the midpoint of an
alley between Trenton Street and Roane Street; then going North on this alley
to the midpoint of Georgia Avenue; then going East on Georgia Avenue following
the Schools property line to the midpoint of Emory Drive where Cumberland
1Charter references
Article II, sec. 18(14) and (8)-(2b)
Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Emergency services responders: title 20, ch. 2.
2Municipal code reference
Zoning ordinance: title 14.
The significance of the fire district is that Chapter III of the Standard Building
Code, applicable to the City of Harriman through title 12 of this code, imposes
certain construction, modification and other requirements peculiar to buildings
located within the fire district, and prohibits Hazardous (Group H) occupancies
within the fire district. Chapter IV, Section 408 of the Standard Building Code
defines Hazardous (Group H) occupancy in both general and specific terms, but
generally it refers to occupancies involving highly combustible, flammable or
explosive materials.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 7-2
Street intersects; then following Emory Street across Roane Street to the
midpoint of the Rail Road right of way; then going South follow the Rail Road
right of way to the midpoint of Crescent Avenue; then going East on Crescent
Avenue to the midpoint of Devonia Street; then travel South on Devonia Street
to the midpoint of Carter Avenue.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 7-3
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE1
SECTION
7-201. Fire code adopted.
7-202. Enforcement.
7-203. Definition of "municipality."
7-204. Modifications.
7-205. Gasoline trucks.
7-206. Variances.
7-207. Violations and penalties.
7-201. Fire code adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on
file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and designated as
the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code as published by the National Fire Prevention
Association2 and International Fire Code,3 2012 edition including Appendices B,
C, D, E, F, G, H, and I as published by the International Code Council, are
hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Harriman, in the State of
Tennessee for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property
from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said fire code on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
§ 7-204 of this chapter. (as replaced by Ord. #06-04-07, May 2006,
Ord. #0111-04, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-05, April 2013)
7-202. Enforcement. The fire prevention code herein adopted by
reference shall be enforced by the fire inspector. He shall have the same powers
as the state fire marshal.
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
2Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Prevention
Association, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02210.
3Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 7-4
7-203. Definition of "municipality." Whenever the word "municipality"
is used in the fire prevention code herein adopted, it shall be held to mean the
City of Harriman, Tennessee.
7-204. Modifications. Section 101.1 Insert: City of Harriman;
Section 109.4. Insert: each offense, $50, as prescribed by law;
Section 111.4. Insert: $50, as prescribed by law.
(as replaced by Ord. #06-04-07, May 2006, Ord. #0111-04, Feb. 2011, and
Ord. #0413-05, April 2013)
7-205. Gasoline trucks. No person shall operate or park any gasoline
tank truck within the central business district or within any residential area at
any time except for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the
expeditious delivery of gasoline.
7-206. Variances. The chief of the fire department may recommend to
the city council variances from the provisions of the fire prevention code upon
application in writing by any property owner or lessee, or the duly authorized
agent of either, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
variances when granted or allowed shall be contained in a resolution of the city
council.
7-207. Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the International Fire Code and
the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code herein adopted, or fail to comply therewith, or
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been modified by the city council or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein. The violation of any section of this
chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) as prescribed
by law, for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The application of a penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (as amended by
Ord. #06-04-07, May 2006)
7-5
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
7-301. Creation, composition, compensation, and medical coverage for
members, etc.
7-302. Inspections, drills, etc.
7-303. Command and authority at fires.
7-304. Equipment to be used only within corporate limits generally.
7-305. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-306. Damaging, tampering with, or obstructing fire hydrants, etc.
7-301. Creation, composition, compensation, and medical coverage for
members, etc. There is hereby created a city fire department to be composed of
a chief, a first assistant chief, a second assistant chief, and as many other
members or firemen as the city council shall authorize the board of fire
department commissioners to appoint.
Members of the fire department shall receive such compensation as the
city council shall prescribe. In addition, the mayor is authorized to provide for
hospitalization, medical, and surgical aid for any member of the fire department
or any person impressed into service during an emergency when such member
or other person is injured in line of duty. (1972 code, sec. 7-201)
7-302. Inspections, drills, etc. Twice a year the board of fire department
commissioners shall carefully inspect each company of the fire department and
shall satisfy itself that each company is in an efficient operating condition.
The chief of the fire department shall make such inspections of the
companies of the department as are necessary to satisfy himself that the fire
department is in an efficient operating condition. He shall require drills, with
or without notice, and may test each company as to its ability and efficiency.
The assistant chiefs of the fire department shall make frequent
inspections of the companies and shall satisfy themselves that each company is
in efficient operating condition, that the membership is as required, that the
rules and regulations of the board of fire department commissioners are being
complied with, and that this chapter is being observed. (1974 code, sec. 7-202)
7-303. Command and authority at fires. The chief of the fire department,
or, in his absence, the assistant chiefs in the order of their rank, shall have full
power and command over all members of the fire department at fires. Such
1Charter references
Article II, sec. 25 and article IX.
7-6
commanding officer shall direct and adopt such measures as he shall deem most
advisable for the extinguishing of fires and for the care and protection of
property endangered thereby. He shall have power to summon any and all
residents of the city present at a fire to aid in extinguishing such fire and in
removing or caring for personal property endangered by the fire.1 He shall also
have the power and authority to order and have any wall torn down that has
become dangerous to life. When reasonably necessary in order to prevent the
spread of a fire, he may direct the destruction of any building or any part
thereof. (1974 code, sec. 7-203)
7-304. Equipment to be used only within corporate limits generally. No
equipment of the fire department shall be used for fighting any fire outside the
corporate limits unless such fire is on city owned property or, in the opinion of
the chief of the fire department, is in such hazardous proximity to property
owned by or located within the city as to endanger such city property or unless
expressly authorized in writing by the city council and board of fire department
commissioners. (1974 code, sec. 7-204)
7-305. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to requirements of
Tennessee Code annotated, section 68-17-108, the chief of the fire department
is designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of insurance and
banking and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by Tennessee
Code Annotated, title 8, chapter 17 and shall be subject to the directions of the
fire prevention commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. (1974
code, sec. 7-205)
7-306. Damaging, tampering with, or obstructing fire hydrants, etc. It
shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or negligently damage,
tamper with, or obstruct any fire hydrant or any city apparatus or equipment
used or intended for fighting fires. (1974 code, sec. 7-206)
1Charter reference
Article II, section 18(22).
7-7
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION
7-401. Definition.
7-402. Manufacture, sale, and discharge of fireworks.
7-403. Bond for fireworks display required.
7-404. Disposal of unfired fireworks.
7-405. Exceptions.
7-406. Seizure of fireworks.
7-401. Definition. "Fireworks" shall mean and include any combustible
or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives
are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or
other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or
flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper
caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain
of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(1974 code, sec. 7-301)
7-402. Manufacture, sale, and discharge of fireworks.
(1) The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city.
(2) The storing, offering for sale, exposing for sale, or selling at retail
any fireworks is permitted within the city on the following conditions:
(a) Upon approval of the police chief; and
(b) Upon approval of the fire chief. The police chief and the fire
chief shall consider the effect of the business on traffic flow, its location,
the nature of the business, the type of structure, zoning regulations, etc.
(3) The fire chief shall have power to grant permits for supervised
public displays of fireworks by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, and
other organizations. Every such display shall be handled by a competent
operator approved by the chief of the fire department of the city, and shall be of
such a character, and be so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the
chief of the fire department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to
property or dangerous to any person.
(4) Applications for permits for public displays shall be made in
writing in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege shall have
7-8
been granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only.
(5) No permit granted hereunder shall be transferrable. (1973 code,
sec. 7-302, as amended by ord. 875-A, sec. 1, and ord. 882, sec. 1, as replaced by
ord. 887, sec. 1)
7-403. Bond for fireworks display required. The permittee shall furnish
a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the fire chief for the payment of all
damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by
reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, his
agents, employees, or subcontractors. (1974 code, sec 7-303)
7-404. Disposal of unfired fireworks. Any fireworks that remain unfired
after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for
the particular type of fireworks remaining. (1974 code, sec. 7-304)
7-405. Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit
any resident wholesaler, dealer, or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as
are not herein prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same
are to be shipped directly out of the city; or the use of fireworks by railroads or
other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or the sale or
use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations. (1974 code,
sec. 7-305)
7-406. Seizure of fireworks. Policemen and firemen shall seize, take,
remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of
fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this chapter.
(1974 code, sec. 7-306)
Change 5, July 5, 2016 7-9
CHAPTER 5
FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS
SECTION
7-501. Definitions.
7-502. Notifications.
7-501. Definitions. (1) "False emergency alarm." Any signal actuated by
an emergency alarm to which the fire department responds which is not the
result of fire or other actual emergency and not caused by a violent act of nature.
(2) "Owner and/or operator." A person or persons who resides in or
operates a business in which an emergency alarm is connected. (as added by
Ord. #0714-02, Aug. 2014)
7-502. Notifications. The following schedule of notice, warnings,
penalties, and costs shall be assessed to the owners and/or operators of
emergency alarm systems for false emergency alarms transmitted to the fire
department within any twelve (12) month period commencing from the first
false alarm.
First false alarm - Verbal notification by a fire department officer.
Second false alarm - Warning letter and notice to insure that the alarm
system is in proper working order. Once the second false emergency
alarm has been received the fire chief shall send, by certified mail, a
notice to the owner and/or operator that further false emergency alarms
will result in the imposition of a penalty and/or costs of providing such
service.
Third false alarm - A penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be imposed.
Fourth and more - A penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm
and a fee for the actual costs of such response by the fire department
including the costs of equipment, fuel, personnel, administration, and
other such factors as determined by the fire chief. (as added by Ord.
#0714-02, Aug. 2014)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
CHAPTER
1. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
2. BEER.
CHAPTER 1
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-101. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation.
8-102. Application for certificate of good moral character.
8-103. Applicant to agree to comply with laws.
8-104. Applicant to appear before city council; duty to give information.
8-105. Action on application.
8-106. Residency requirement.
8-107. Applicants for certificate who have criminal record.
8-108. Only one establishment to be operated by retailer.
8-109. Where establishments may be located.
8-110. Retail stores to be on ground floor; entrances.
8-111. Limitation on number of retailers.
8-112. Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in
retail establishments.
8-113. Inspection fee.
8-114. Violations.
8-101. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation. It shall be unlawful to
engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting, distributing, or to
purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of this city
except as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57. (Ord. 1012)
1Charter references
Article II, section 18(12).
Municipal code references
Driving under the influence: section 15-104.
Public drunkenness, etc.: title 11, chapter 2.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
8-2
8-102. Application for certificate of good moral character1. Before any
character certificate, as required by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208 or
a renewal as required by 57-3-213 shall be signed by the mayor, or by any
aldermen,2 an application in writing shall be filed with the city clerk on a form
to be provided by the city, giving the following information:
(1) Name, age and address of the applicant.
(2) Number of years residence in the city.
(3) Occupation or business and length of time engaged in such
occupation or business.
(4) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a violation of
any state or federal law or of the violation of this code or any city ordinance, and
the details of any such conviction.
(5) If employed, the name and address of employer.
(6) If in business, the kind of business and location thereof.
(7) The location of the proposed store for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(8) The name and address of the owner of the store.
(9) If the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address of each
partner, and his occupation, business or employer. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name, age and address of the stockholders and their degrees of
ownership of stock in the corporation.
The information in the application shall be verified by the oath of the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the application
shall be verified by the oath of each partner, or by the president of the
corporation.
Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable investigation
fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1012)
8-103. Applicant to agree to comply with laws. The applicant for a
certificate of good moral character shall agree in writing to comply with the
state and federal laws and ordinances of the city and rules and regulations of
the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of the State for sale of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 1012)
8-104. Applicant to appear before city council; duty to give information.
An applicant for a certificate of good moral character may be required to appear
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208.
2State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208 requires the certificate of good
moral character to be signed by the mayor or a majority of the
governing body.
8-3
in person before the city council for such reasonable examination as may be
desired by the city council. (Ord. 1012)
8-105. Action on application. Every application for a certificate of good
moral character shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation and to
the city attorney for review, each of whom shall submit his findings to the city
council within thirty (30) days of the date each application was filed.
The city council may issue a certificate of good moral character to any
applicant, which shall be signed by the mayor or by a majority of the city
council. (Ord. 1012)
8-106. Residency requirement. Residency is not a requirement as part
of the certificate of good moral character (Section 8-105). (Ord. 1012, as replaced
by Ord. #2000-14, Oct. 2000)
8-107. Applicants for certificate who have criminal record. No certificate
of good moral character for the manufacture or sale at wholesale or retail of
alcoholic beverages, or for the manufacture or vinting of wine, shall be issued to
any person, (or if the applicant is a partnership, any partner, or if the applicant
is a corporation, any stockholder), who, within ten (10) years preceding the
application for such certificate of good moral character, has been convicted of
any felony or of any offense under the laws of the state or of the United States
prohibiting the sale, possession, transportation, storage or otherwise handling
of intoxicating liquors, or who has during such period been engaged in business,
alone or with others, in violation of such laws. (Ord. 1012)
8-108. Only one establishment to be operated by retailer. No retailer
shall operate, directly or indirectly, more than one place of business for the sale
of alcoholic beverages in the city. The word "indirectly," as used in this section,
shall include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business by way
of stock, ownership, loan, partner's interest or otherwise. (Ord. 1012)
8-109. Where establishments may be located. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or maintain any retail establishment for the sale, storage or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city except at locations zoned for that
purpose, but in no event shall any establishment be located within five hundred
(500) feet of a hospital, church or school, or any other place of public gathering,
measured in a straight line1 between the nearest point on the property line upon
1State law reference
See Watkins v. Naifeh, 635 S.W.2d 104 (Tenn. 1982) and other cases
cited therein which establish the straight line method of
measurement.
8-4
which sits the building from which the alcoholic beverages will be sold, stored
or distributed, and the nearest point on the property line of the hospital, school,
church, or other place of public gathering. (Ord. 1012)
8-110. Retail stores to be on ground floor; entrances. No retail store shall
be located anywhere on premises in the city except on the ground floor thereof.
Each such store shall have only one main entrance; provided, that when a store
is located on the corner of two (2) streets, such store may maintain a door
opening on each such street; and provided further, that any salesroom adjoining
the lobby of a hotel may maintain an additional door into such lobby as long as
the lobby is open to the public. (Ord. 1012)
8-111. Limitation on number of retailers.1 No more than three (3) retail
licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 1012)
8-112. Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in
retail establishments. No radios, pinball machines, slot machines or other
devices which tend to cause persons to congregate in such place shall be
permitted in any retail establishment. No seating facilities shall be provided for
persons other than employees. (Ord. 1012)
8-113. Inspection fee. The City of Harriman hereby imposes an
inspection fee in the amount of five percent (5%) on all licensed retailers of
alcoholic beverages located within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1012)
8-114. Violations. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine under the
general penalty clause of this code. Upon conviction of any person under this
chapter, it shall be mandatory for the city judge to immediately certify the
conviction, whether on appeal or not, to the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage
Commission. (Ord. 1012)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208(c).
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-5
CHAPTER 2
BEER1
SECTION
8-201. Beer board established.
8-202. Meetings of the beer board.
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept.
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action.
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board.
8-206. "Beer" defined.
8-207. Permit required for engaging in beer business.
8-208. Beer permits shall be restrictive.
8-209. Classes of consumption permits.
8-210. Interference with public health, safety, and morals prohibited.
8-211. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes prohibited.
8-212. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders.
8-213. Revocation of beer permits.
8-214. Limitation on reissue of permits for same location.
8-215. Industry interest in permit prohibited.
8-216. Nonassignable.
8-217. Privilege tax.
8-218. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension.
8-201. Beer board established. There is hereby established a beer board
to be composed of five (5) members, all of which are taxpayers for the City of
Harriman and shall include one member of the Harriman City Council and one
member of the Harriman Planning Commission. The chairman shall preside at
its meetings. Its members shall serve without compensation for the staggered
term of two (2) and four (4) year(s). The chairman is to serve a term of one (1)
year and cannot be a member of the Harriman City Council. (Ord. 1008)
8-202. Meetings of the beer board. All meetings of the beer board shall
be open to the public. The board shall hold regular meetings as follows: 4th
Wednesday every month at 5:30 P.M.; unless the chairman announces in
1Charter reference
Article 11, section 18(2).
Municipal code reference
Tax provisions: title 5.
State law reference
For a leading case on a municipality's authority to regulate beer, see
Watkins v. Naifeh, 635 S.W.2d 104 (Tenn. 1982).
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-6
advance that there is no business to come before the beer board. A special
meeting of the beer board may be called by its chairman provided he gives ten
(10) days notice thereof to each board member and to the public, and the board
may adjourn a meeting at any time to another time and place. (Ord. 1008, as
amended by Ord. #0314-01, March 2014)
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept. The city clerk shall
be required to attend and to make separate record of the proceedings of all
meetings of the beer board and the clerk shall be compensated the sum of $50
for each meeting attended. The record shall be a public record and shall contain
at least the following: The date of each meeting; the names of the board
members present and absent; the names of the members introducing and
seconding motions and resolutions, etc., before the board; a copy of each such
motion or resolution presented; the vote of each member thereon; and the
contents of each beer permit issued by the board. (Ord. 1008, as replaced by ord.
1022)
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action. The attendance
of at least a majority of the members of the beer board shall be required to
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. However, when a
quorum is present the affirmative vote of only a simple majority of the members
voting shall be required for affirmative action by the board. (Ord. 1008)
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board. The beer board shall have
the power and it is hereby directed to regulate the selling, storing for sale,
distributing for sale, and manufacturing of beer within this city in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1008)
8-206. "Beer" defined. The term "beer" as used in this chapter shall
mean and include all beers, ales, and other malt liquors having an alcoholic
content of not more than five percent (5%) by weight. (Ord. 1008)
8-207. Permit required for engaging in beer business. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture
beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer
board. The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe
and/or furnish, and pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, section 57-5-101(b),
and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of two hundred
and fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be in the form of a cashier's check
payable to the City of Harriman. Each applicant must be a person of good moral
character and he must certify that he has read and is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1008, as replaced by ord. 1022)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-7
8-208. Beer permits shall be restrictive. All beer permits shall be
restrictive as to the type of beer business authorized under them. Each permit
shall be in the name of the corporation or owner designee. Separate permits
shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing, and manufacturing.
It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type or phase
of the beer business not expressly authorized by his permit. It shall likewise be
unlawful for him not to comply with any and all express restrictions or
conditions which may be written into his permit by the beer board. (Ord. 1008)
8-209. Classes of consumption permits. Permits issued by the beer board
shall consist of three (3) classes:
(1) Class 1 on-premises permit. A Class 1 on-premises permit shall be
issued for the consumption of beer only on the premises. To qualify for a Class
1 on-premises permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other
regulations and restrictions in this chapter:
(a) Be primarily a restaurant or an eating place; and
(b) Be able to seat a minimum of thirty (30) people, including
children, in booths and at tables, in addition to any other seating it may
have; and
(c) Have any and all such seating in the interior of the building
or on an enclosed patio; and
(d) Shall not have monthly beer sales exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of the gross sales of the establishment.
Any such establishment, which for two (2) consecutive months or for any
three (3) months in any calendar year has beer sales exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of its gross sales, shall have its beer permit revoked.
(2) Off-premises permit. An off-premises permit shall be issued for the
consumption of beer only off the premises. To qualify for an off-premises permit,
an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other regulations and
restrictions in this chapter:
(a) Be a grocery store or a convenience type market; and
(b) In either case, be primarily engaged in the sale of grocery,
personal and home care and cleaning articles, but may also sell gasoline;
and
(c) Shall not have monthly beer sales exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of the gross sales of the establishment.
Any such establishment, which for two (2) consecutive months or for any
three (3) months in any calendar year has beer sales exceeding fifty percent
(50%) of its gross sales, shall have its beer permit revoked.
(3) Special event permits for sale in certain areas. An application for
a special events permit to sell beer, or any other beverage with an alcoholic
content not exceeding five percent (5%) of weight, may be obtained from the city
clerk for special events. An applicant for special events permit must meet all
other requirements contained in title 8, chapter 2 of the Harriman Municipal
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-8
Code except such an event may be permitted without being located in a
permanent structure as otherwise required in this section. A special events
permit holder shall not be required to pay the privilege tax established in
§ 8-217 of this chapter.
(a) Emory Golf Course. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this section to the contrary, the beer board is hereby authorized and
empowered in its discretion to permit the sale of beer at the Emory Golf
Course, Map 026O, Group B, Parcel 011.00 and Map 026O, Group C,
Parcel 012.00, at such times and events and under such terms,
conditions, rules and regulations, including the temporary closure of
public rights-of-way within the area with the express permission and
cooperation of the city police department, as the beer board may establish
which are not inconsistent with state law regulating the sale of beer.
(b) Harriman Industrial Park. The beer board is further
authorized and empowered in its discretion to permit the sale of beer on
the site of the Harriman Industrial Park, Map 018. Parcel 058.00, at such
times and events and under such terms, conditions, rules and regulations,
including the temporary closure of public rights-of-way within the area
with the express permission and cooperation of the city police department
as the beer board may establish which are not inconsistent with state law
regulating the sale of beer.
(c) Any person, organization or other entity conducting a special
event at Emory Golf Course or Harriman Industrial Park shall provide
at least forty-five (45) days advance written notice to the chairman of the
beer board, with a copy to the city clerk, of the intent to conduct such a
special event. The notice required by this subsection shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following information:
(i) Date(s) and time(s) of the event(s):
(ii) The sponsor of the event;
(iii) The specific location where any beer is to be sold;
(iv) Any plans for proposed temporary closure of public
rights-of-way;
(v) Plans for security and policing of the event; and
(vi) The anticipated number of persons attending the
event.
Upon receipt of the notice as required herein, the proposed special
event shall be posted and advertised and subsequently shall be placed on
the beer board's agenda at its next regularly scheduled meeting following
receipt of the notice and the sponsor of the proposed event shall send a
representative or representatives to the beer board meeting to address
any questions or issues arising out of the proposed special event.
The special permit shall not be issued for longer than a four (4)
consecutive day period, subject to the limitations on the hours of sale
imposed by law, except this provision shall not apply to special event
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-9
permits issued for the Harriman Industrial Park. The special permit for
the Harriman Industrial Park shall not be issued for longer than fortyfive
(45) days in any twelve (12) month period, subject to the limitations
on the hours of sale imposed by law.
(d) The fee for each special events permit shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
(4) Special occasion permit. An application for a permit to serve but
not sell beer, or any other beverage with an alcoholic content not exceeding five
percent (5%) of weight, may be obtained from the city clerk for special occasions:
(a) The beer board of the city is authorized to issue special
occasion permits to bona fide charitable, nonprofit or political
organizations for special occasions. Special occasion permits to bona fide
charitable, nonprofit or political organizations shall be limited to two (2)
events per organization in any twelve (12) month period.
(b) The special occasion permit shall not be issued for longer
than one (1) twenty-four (24) hour period, subject to the limitations on the
hours of sale imposed by law. The application for the special occasion
permit shall state whether the applicant is a charitable, nonprofit or
political organization, include documents showing evidence of the type of
organization, and state the location of the premises upon which alcoholic
beverages shall be served and the purpose for the request of the permit.
(c) The fee for each special occasion permit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00).
(d) For purposes of this section: "Bona fide charitable
organization" or "nonprofit organization" means any corporation which
has been recognized as exempt from federal taxes under section 501(c) of
the Internal Revenue Code. "Bona fide political organization" means any
political campaign committee as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 2-10-101(a) or any political party as defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 2-13-101.
(e) No charitable, nonprofit or political organization possessing
a special occasion permit shall purchase, for sale or distribution, beer
from any source other than a licensee as provided to state law.
(5) Existing permits. Existing permits granted prior to annexation
shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 1008, as replaced by Ord. #0314-01, March
2014)
8-210. Interference with public health, safety, and morals prohibited. No
permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when such business would
cause congestion of traffic or would interfere with hospitals, schools, churches,
or other places of public gathering, or would otherwise interfere with the public
health, safety, and morals. (Ord. 1008)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 8-10
8-211. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes
prohibited. No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted
for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor,
or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years. (Ord.
1008)
8-212. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders. It shall
be unlawful for any beer permit holder to:
(1) Employ any person convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture,
or transportation of intoxicating liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude
within the past ten (10) years.
(2) Make or allow any sale of beer between the hours of 3:00 A.M. to
8:00 A.M. weekdays on Monday through Saturday or between the hours of 3:00
A.M. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
(3) Allow any loud, unusual, or obnoxious noises to emanate from his
premises.
(4) Make or allow any sale of beer to a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
(5) Allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to loiter in or
about his place of business.
(6) Make or allow any sale of beer to any intoxicated person or to any
feeble-minded, insane, or otherwise mentally incapacitated person.
(7) Allow drunk persons to loiter about his premises.
(8) Serve, sell, or allow the consumption on his premises of any
alcoholic beverage with an alcoholic content of more than five percent (5%) by
weight.
(9) Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for
men and women.
In addition, it shall be unlawful for any Class 2 on premises permit holder
to employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) on the premises in any
capacity whatsoever. (Ord. 1008, modified, as amended by Ord. #0314-01,
March 2014)
8-213. Revocation of beer permits. The beer board shall have the power
to revoke any beer permit issued under the provisions of this chapter when the
holder thereof is guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
However, no beer permit shall be revoked until a public hearing is held by the
board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Revocation
proceedings may be initiated by the police chief or by any reputable local citizen
upon the filing of an application with the beer board requesting such action.
(Ord. 1008)
8-214. Limitation on reissue of permits for same location. Where a
permit is revoked, no new permit shall be issued to permit the sale of beer on
8-11
the same premises until after the expiration of one year from the date the
revocation became final and effective. (Ord. 1008)
8-215. Industry interest in permit prohibited. No permits shall be issued
when a brewer, manufacturer, distributor or warehouseman of legal beer has
any interest in the business, financial or otherwise, or in the premises upon
which the sale of beer is to be carried out. (Ord. 1008)
8-216. Nonassignable. Holders of permits may not assign permit to new
owners of establishment, property or anyone else. (Ord. 1008)
8-217. Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of selling,
distributing, storing or manufacturing beer a privilege tax of one hundred
dollars ($100). Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or
association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or manufacture of beer
shall remit the tax on January 1, 1994, and each successive January 1, to the
City of Harriman, Tennessee. At the time a new permit is issued to any
business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the
privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining
until the next tax payment date. (Ord. 1022)
8-218. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension. The beer board may, at the
time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder the alternative
of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $1,500 for each offense of making or
permitting to be made any sales to minors or, a civil penalty not to exceed
$1,000 for any other offense. If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to
revocation or suspension, the holder shall have seven (7) days within which to
pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the
civil penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be
deemed withdrawn.
9-1
1Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, wiring and housing regulations: title 12.
Junkyards: title 13.
Liquor and beer regulations: title 8.
Noise reductions: title 11.
Taxation: title 5.
Zoning: title 14.
2Municipal code references
Privilege taxes: title 5.
Trespass by peddlers, etc.: § 11-501.
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
2. TAXICABS.
3. VIDEO ARCADES, POOL ROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS, ETC.
4. RODEOS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT SHOWS.
5. LIMITATIONS ON VENDORS DURING PARADES.
CHAPTER 1
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.2
SECTION
9-101. Definitions.
9-102. Exemptions.
9-103. Permit required.
9-104. Permit procedure.
9-105. Restrictions on peddlers, street barkers and solicitors.
9-106. Restrictions on transient vendors.
9-107. Display of permit.
9-108. Suspension or revocation of permit.
9-109. Expiration and renewal of permit.
9-110. Violation and penalty.
9-101. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in
this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given to them in this
section:
(1) "Peddler" means any person, firm or corporation, either a resident
or a nonresident of the city, who has no permanent regular place of business and
9-2
who goes from dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from
street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and
offering or exposing the same for sale.
(2) "Solicitor" means any person, firm or corporation who goes from
dwelling to dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to
street, taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise,
or personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery, except that the
term shall not include solicitors for charitable and religious purposes and
solicitors for subscriptions as those terms are defined below.
(3) "Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes" means any person,
firm, corporation or organization who or which solicits contributions from the
public, either on the streets of the city or from door to door, business to business,
place to place, or from street to street, for any charitable or religious
organization, and who does not sell or offer to sell any single item at a cost to the
purchaser in excess of ten dollars ($10.00). No organization shall qualify as a
"charitable" or "religious" organization unless the organization meets one of the
following conditions:
(a) Has a current exemption certificate from the Internal
Revenue Service issued under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Service Code of 1954, as amended.
(b) Is a member of United Way, Community Chest or similar
"umbrella" organizations for charitable or religious organizations.
(c) Has been in continued existence as a charitable or religious
organization in Roane County for a period of two (2) years prior to the
date of its application for registration under this chapter.
(4) "Solicitor for subscriptions" means any person who solicits
subscriptions from the public, either on the streets of the city, or from door to
door, business to business, place to place, or from street to street, and who offers
for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by provisions
of the Constitution of the United States.
9-3
1State law references
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 62-30-101 et seq. contains permit
requirements for "transitory vendors."
The definition of "transient vendors" is taken from Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 62-30-101(3). Note also that Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-709(a) prescribes that transient vendors shall pay a tax of
$50.00 for each 14 day period in each county and/or municipality in
which such vendors sell or offer to sell merchandise for which they are
issued a business license, but that they are not liable for the gross
receipts portion of the tax provided for in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-709(b).
(5) "Transient vendor1" means any person who brings into temporary
premises and exhibits stocks of merchandise to the public for the purpose of
selling or offering to sell the merchandise to the public. Transient vendor does
not include any person selling goods by sample, brochure, or sales catalog for
future delivery; or to sales resulting from the prior invitation to the seller by the
owner or occupant of a residence. For purposes of this definition, "merchandise"
means any consumer item, whether new (not previously owned by a consumer)
or used (previously owned by a consumer), and "temporary premises" means any
public or quasi-public place including a hotel, rooming house, storeroom,
building or part of a building, tent, vacant lot, railroad car, or motor vehicle
which is temporarily occupied for the purpose of exhibiting stocks of
merchandise to the public. Premises are not temporary if the same person has
conducted business at those premises for more than six (6) consecutive months
or has occupied the premises as his or her permanent residence for more than
six (6) consecutive months.
(6) "Street barker" means any peddler who does business during
recognized festival or parade days in the city and who limits his business to
selling or offering to sell novelty items and similar goods in the area of the
festival or parade.
9-102. Exemptions. The terms of this chapter shall neither apply to
persons selling at wholesale to dealers, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide
merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to
persons selling agricultural products, who, in fact, themselves produced the
products being sold. However, in order for persons selling agricultural products
to fall within this exception, they must be selling said products at a location on
property they either own or have an otherwise legal interest in the property or
legal right to use the property upon which they are selling said products.
Further, in order for persons selling agricultural products to fall within this
9-4
exception, they must be able to prove the products they are selling were, in fact,
produced by them.
9-103. Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate a
business as a peddler, transient vendor, solicitor or street barker, and no
solicitor for charitable or religious purposes or solicitor for subscriptions shall
solicit within the city unless the same has obtained a permit from the city in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
9-104. Permit procedure. (1) Application form. A sworn application
containing the following information shall be completed and filed with the city
clerk by each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient vendor, solicitor, or
street barker and by each applicant for a permit as a solicitor for charitable or
religious purposes or as a solicitor for subscriptions:
(a) The complete name and permanent address of the business
or organization the applicant represents.
(b) A brief description of the type of business and the goods to
be sold.
(c) The dates for which the applicant intends to do business or
make solicitations.
(d) The names and permanent addresses of each person who
will make sales or solicitations within the city.
(e) The make, model, complete description, and license tag
number and state of issue, of each vehicle to be used to make sales or
solicitations, whether or not such vehicle is owned individually by the
person making sales or solicitations, by the business or organization
itself, or rented or borrowed from another business or person.
(f) Tennessee State sales tax number, if applicable.
(g) Anyone over eighteen (18) years of age is required to have
a photo I.D.
(2) Permit fee. Each applicant for a permit as a peddler, transient
vendor, solicitor or street barker shall submit with his application a
nonrefundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). There shall be no fee for an
application for a permit as a solicitor for charitable purposes or as a solicitor for
subscriptions.
(3) Permit issued. Upon the completion of the application form and
the payment of the permit fee, where required, the clerk shall issue a permit
and provide a copy of the same to the applicant.
(4) Submission of application form to chief of police. Immediately after
the applicant obtains a permit from the city clerk, the city clerk shall submit to
the chief of police a copy of the application form and the permit.
9-5
9-105. Restrictions on peddlers, street barkers and solicitors. Except
when specifically permitted by the governing body, no peddler, street barker,
solicitor, solicitor for charitable purposes, or solicitor for subscriptions shall:
(1) Be permitted to set up and operate a booth or stand on any street
or sidewalk, or in any other public area within the city.
(2) Stand or sit in or near the entrance to any dwelling or place of
business, or in any other place which may disrupt or impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(3) Offer to sell goods or services or solicit in vehicular traffic lanes, or
operate a "road block" of any kind.
(4) Call attention to his business or merchandise or to his solicitation
efforts by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or creating other
noise, except that the street barker shall be allowed to cry out to call attention
to his business or merchandise during recognized parade or festival days of the
city.
(5) Enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter in or upon any
premises wherein a sign or placard bearing the notice "Peddlers or Solicitors
Prohibited," or similar language carrying the same meaning, is located.
9-106. Restrictions on transient vendors. A transient vendor shall not
advertise, represent, or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or merchandise as an
insurance, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor,
administrator, receiver's manufacturer's wholesale, cancelled order, or misfit
sale, or closing-out sale, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, water or
otherwise, unless such advertisement, representation or holding forth is actually
of the character it is advertised, represented or held forth.
9-107. Display of permit. Each person subject to the provisions of this
chapter is required to have in his possession a valid permit while making sales
or solicitations, and shall be required to display the same to any police officer or
the building inspector upon demand.
9-108. Suspension or revocation of permit. (1) Suspension by the clerk.
The permit issued to any person or organization under this chapter may be
suspended by the city clerk for any of the following causes:
(a) Any false statement, material omission, or untrue or
misleading information which is contained in or left out of the
application; or
(b) Any violation of this chapter.
(2) Suspension or revocation by the city council. The permit issued to
any person or organization under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the city council, after notice and hearing, for the same causes set out in
paragraph (1) above. Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a
permit shall be given by the city clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the
9-6
grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall
be mailed to the permit holder at his last known address at least five (5) days
prior to the date set for hearing, or it shall be delivered by a police officer in the
same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for
hearing.
9-109. Expiration and renewal of permit. The permit of peddlers,
solicitors and transient vendors shall expire on the same date that the permit
holder's privilege license expires. The registration of any peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor who for any reason is not subject to the privilege tax shall be
issued for six (6) months. The permit of street barkers shall be for a period
corresponding to the dates of the recognized parade or festival days of the city.
The permit of solicitors for religious or charitable purposes and solicitors for
subscriptions shall expire on the date provided in the permit, not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
9-110. Violation and penalty. In addition to any other action the city may
take against a permit holder in violation of this chapter, such violation shall be
punishable by a penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100) for each offense.
Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
9-7
1Municipal code reference
Privilege tax provisions: title 5.
CHAPTER 2
TAXICABS1
SECTION
9-201. Definitions.
9-202. Permit required.
9-203. Form of permit.
9-204. Application for permit.
9-205. Investigation and hearing on application; issuance or refusal of
certificate or permit.
9-206. Licensee to be bona fide owner of vehicle; muniment of title to be
deposited.
9-207. Renting or leasing vehicles prohibited.
9-208. Liability insurance required.
9-209. Permit number to be painted on each cab; requirements as to letters
and figures.
9-210. Reservation of right to fix fares.
9-211. Taxicab stands on streets and alleys prohibited.
9-212. Operating over fixed routes.
9-213. Awaiting employment at other than stands prohibited.
9-214. Leaving vehicles unattended on streets.
9-215. Conduct of drivers.
9-216. Drivers not to solicit passengers.
9-217. Vehicles to be kept clean and in good repair; inspection; removal
from service.
9-218. Number of passengers.
9-219. Applicability of chapter to nonresident owners or operators.
9-220. Revocation of permits.
9-201. Definitions. The following terms, when used or referred to in this
chapter, shall have the following respective meaning unless a different meaning
appears from the context:
(1) "Person" shall include an individual, partnership, corporation, or
association.
(2) "Taxicab" shall mean a motor vehicle designed or constructed to
accommodate and transport passengers, not more than five (5) in number,
exclusive of the driver, and not operating on an established route between fixed
terminals under a permit granted by the city or the railroad and public utilities
commission.
9-8
(3) "Council" shall mean the city council of the city. (1974 code, sec.
5-401)
9-202. Permit required. No person shall operate a taxicab in the city
without first having applied for and received from the board a permit therefor.
(1974 code, sec. 5-402)
9-203. Form of permit. The permit required by this chapter shall be in
the form of a certificate of public necessity and convenience. (1974 code, sec.
5-403)
9-204. Application for permit. Any person desiring to operate a taxicab
in the city shall make an application for a permit addressed to the council,
which application shall be in writing, verified by the affidavit of the applicant,
or his duly authorized agent, and shall state the following facts:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant, including the location
of the garage from which he is to operate.
(2) If a partnership, the name of each partner.
(3) If a corporation, the name and addresses of the executive officers
thereof.
(4) The number of taxicabs desired to be operated.
(5) The make of each taxicab.
(6) State license numbers.
(7) Such other information as may be required by the council.
The application shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall refer same to
the council for investigation and hearing. (1974 code, sec. 5-404)
9-205. Investigation and hearing on application; issuance or refusal of
certificate or permit. The permit required by this chapter shall be granted only
after an investigation and hearing by the council to determine the need for
additional taxicab service, the quality of services proposed to be rendered, as
well as the number of taxicabs to be operated. If the council finds that public
necessity and convenience require the operation of such vehicles or a greater or
lesser number of vehicles than for which a permit has been applied, and the
applicant is a person of suitable character and qualifications to conduct such
business, it shall direct and notify the city clerk to issue the certificate as
hereinafter provided. If the board finds that public necessity and convenience
do not require the operation of any such vehicle, or the applicant is not a person
of suitable character and qualifications to conduct such business, it shall
immediately notify the applicant of its findings, and no permit or license shall
be issued to such applicant. (1974 code, sec. 5-405)
9-206. Licensee to be bona fide owner of vehicle; muniment of title to be
deposited. No permit or license for the operation of a taxicab shall be granted
9-9
1Charter reference
Article II, section 18(11).
to any person unless such person shall be the bona fide owner of such license,
such person so applying shall deposit with the city clerk a certificate or other
muniment of title for every taxicab to be licensed. The muniment of title shall
be retained by the city clerk for such period of time as such vehicle is used as a
taxicab. The business of every licensed taxicab shall be carried on by the person
to whom the license or permit is issued, and by the person in whose name the
contract of insurance provided for in this chapter is written. (1974 code, sec.
5-406)
9-207. Renting or leasing vehicles prohibited. No owner of a taxicab
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall rent or lease the
same to any person, including his employees. (1974 code, sec. 5-407)
9-208. Liability insurance required. No person shall be allowed to
operate a taxicab service until he has procured from some reliable insurance
company, insurance to the extent of legal liability to one person in the sum of
one hundred thirty thousand dollars ($130,000) and to one accident to the extent
of three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000), and property damage to the
extent of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). Such liability shall extend regardless
of whether the taxicab, at the time of the accident be driven by the owner or an
employee. Such policies of insurance shall be approved by the city attorney and
filed and left with the city clerk. Such policies of insurance shall not be
cancelled or surrendered, except upon written notice to the city clerk.
Failure of any person to procure and file the policies of insurance as
required by this section shall immediately forfeit and make null and void any
permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, and all rights thereunder
shall at once cease. (1974 code, sec. 5-408, modified)
9-209. Permit number to be painted on each cab; requirements as to
letters and figures. Each person who has been granted a permit under the
terms of this chapter shall have and keep painted in fast colors contrasting with
the color of the vehicle, on each side of each and every vehicle used by him as a
taxicab, the words: "Taxicab-Permit No. ____" filling the blank with the figures
denoting the serial number of his permit. The letters and figures shall not be
less than four (4) inches in height. (1974 code, sec. 5-409)
9-210. Reservation of right to fix fares.1 The city reserves the right to fix
taxicab fares within the city limits.
9-10
9-211. Taxicab stands on streets and alleys prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to operate a taxicab stand on any part of any
public street or alley in the City of Harriman, Tennessee. (1974 code, sec. 5-411)
9-212. Operating over fixed routes. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a taxicab over a certified route, running on regular schedules, and
soliciting business in any way whether at a regular stop or on any part of a
certified route which has been granted to a bus operating either through a
franchise by the city or a certificate of convenience and necessity granted by the
railroad and public utilities commission. (1974 code, sec. 5-412)
9-213. Awaiting employment at other than stands prohibited. No owner
or driver of any taxicab shall stand beside a parked taxicab on any street or
public thoroughfare while awaiting employment at any place other than a stand
designated by the council and assigned to the owner of such taxicab. (1974 code,
sec. 5-413)
9-214. Leaving vehicles unattended on streets. No owner or driver of any
taxicab shall leave such cab unattended on any street for a period of time longer
than three (3) minutes. (1974 code, sec. 5-414)
9-215. Conduct of drivers. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab,
while on duty, to drink any intoxicating liquor, to use any profane or obscene
language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace in
any way. (1974 code, sec. 5-415)
9-216. Drivers not to solicit passengers. It shall be unlawful for any
driver of any taxicab to drive or cruise about on the streets of the city soliciting
passengers who have not ordered or called for a taxicab. (1974 code, sec. 5-416)
9-217. Vehicles to be kept clean and in good repair; inspection; removal
from service. All taxicabs shall be kept clean and in a good state of repair, and
shall be subject to inspection by the council, chief of police, or any person
designated to make such inspection. Inspections may be made at any time
deemed advisable by the council or chief of police. If a taxicab, when so
inspected, shall be found in an unsanitary condition, or unsafe or improper for
use, such vehicle shall be removed from service until it passes inspection by such
authority. (1974 code, sec. 5-417)
9-218. Number of passengers. No more than five (5) passengers shall be
carried in the same taxicab at any one (1) time, and not more than two (2)
persons, excluding the driver, shall be seated in the front seat of any cab while
the same is in motion. (1974 code, sec. 5-418)
9-11
9-219. Applicability of chapter to nonresident owners or operators. This
chapter shall apply with equal force and effect to every owner and operator of
a taxicab in, over, upon, and through the streets and thoroughfares of the city,
whether such owner and operator of such taxicab shall reside within or without
the corporate limits of the city and regardless of whether or not the taxicab
stand from which the taxicab is operated is located within or without the
corporate limits of the city, if such operator or person owning and operating such
taxicab shall make a regular practice of bringing passengers for hire into the
city or of picking up passengers within the corporate limits of the city for the
purpose of transporting such passengers for hire to other points within or
without the corporate limits of the city. (1974 code, sec. 5-419)
9-220. Revocation of permits. In the event any person granted a permit
under the provisions of this chapter or any driver or other employee thereof
shall be convicted in any court of this state of violating any provision of this
chapter or of storing, transporting, or selling liquor or any other intoxicating
beverages, in, from, or about any taxicab or premises for which a license has
been granted, such license shall automatically be revoked and shall become null
and void from and after the date of such conviction, and the further operation
of any taxicab by any person under such license shall be in violation of this
chapter. (1974 code, sec. 5-420)
9-12
1Charter reference
Specific authority of the city to license and regulate billiard tables,
bowling alleys, etc: Article II, section 8(12).
Municipal code reference
Privilege tax provisions: title 5.
CHAPTER 3
VIDEO ARCADES, POOL ROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS, ETC.1
SECTION
9-301. License required.
9-302. Authority of council to license; fee.
9-303. Application for license; signature of adjoining property owners required;
affidavit of petitioner.
9-304. Proximity to churches, schools, etc.
9-305. Issuance of license.
9-306. Operating without a license.
9-307. Duration of license; renewal.
9-308. Failure of treasurer to comply with chapter relative to issuance of
license.
9-309. Allowing gambling, disorderly conduct, or intoxicating liquor on
premises.
9-310. Minors prohibited; exceptions.
9-311. Closing hours.
9-312. Forfeiture of license for violation of chapter.
9-313. License not transferable; exception.
9-301. License required. No person shall have, use or operate any pool
or billiard tables, tenpin or bowling alley, box ball table or by video arcade in the
city, for pay or profit, without first having obtained from the city a license
therefor, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 8833, sec. 1)
9-302. Authority of council to license; fee. The city council is hereby
authorized to license any person to have, use or operate pool or billiard tables,
tenpin and bowling alleys, box ball tables, and video arcades in the city, upon
payment to the treasurer of the city of a fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50)
for each pool or billiard table, or each tenpin or bowling alley, or each box ball
table or each video machine licensed by it, for a period of three (3) months.
(Ord. 8833, sec. 2)
9-303. Application for license; signature of adjoining property owners
required; affidavit of petitioner. The applicant for a license, under the
9-13
provisions of this chapter, shall petition the mayor and city council in writing,
stating in such petition the location where such pool or billiard tables, tenpin or
bowling alleys, or box ball tables, or video machines will be used and operated
should the license be granted. Such petition shall be signed by the owner of the
building to be occupied, and also by the occupants of the buildings on either side
of such building and contiguous thereto to be occupied. The petitioner shall
annex to his petition his affidavit stating the names of all owners and occupants
of such buildings, that each has signed such petition of his own free will and
accord, and without any consideration therefor paid or agreed to be paid or
rendered therefor by the applicant or by his procurement. The applicant must
also show by affidavit that he has never been convicted of a violation of any
license, excise, or internal revenue law or is not at the time of making
application under indictment for any offense against the laws of any municipal,
county, state, or the United States Government. (Ord. 8833, sec. 3)
9-304. Proximity to churches, schools, etc. The place or building to be
occupied by a licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall not be closer to
any church, school building, library, or public assembly room than a distance of
one hundred (100) feet, however this provision shall not apply to video arcades.
(Ord. 8833, sec. 4)
9-305. Issuance of license. The city council may in its discretion, by
resolution, authorize the issuance of a license, as required by this chapter, and
the mayor may approve the same. Such resolution of the city council with the
mayor's approval thereon shall be certified by the city clerk to the city treasurer,
who shall, upon receipt of the same, and upon the payment to him of the
required license fee, issue to the applicant the license so authorized by the city
council. (1974 code, sec. 5-505)
9-306. Operating without a license. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a poolroom or bowling alley or video arcade without having obtained
a license as required by this chapter, which license must be unrevoked and
effective during any operation of such business. (Ord. 8833, sec. 5)
9-307. Duration of license; renewal. The license required by this chapter
shall not be issued for a longer period than three (3) months, but may be
renewed by the city council to operate in the same location without the necessity
of the petitioner obtaining the written consent of the adjoining property owners
and owner of the building in which the business is to be conducted; provided,
that no complaint has been filed by such property owner or occupants of the
adjoining property with any member of the city council, the mayor, the chief of
police, or the city clerk; provided, further, that the applicant shall file the
prescribed affidavit as required in section 9-303 of this code and it otherwise
9-14
appears that the business has been conducted in accordance with law and under
the provisions of this chapter. (1974 code, sec. 5-507)
9-308. Failure of treasurer to comply with chapter relative to issuance
of license. If the city treasurer should issue a license under the provisions of
this chapter for a longer period than three (3) months, or without the necessary
certified resolution from the city clerk, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1974 code, sec. 5-508)
9-309. Allowing gambling, disorderly conduct, or intoxicating liquor on
premises. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for the holder of a license
under the provisions of this chapter, or his agents or employees, or other person
for him, to permit gambling, disorderly, or indecent conduct on the premises
occupied by such licensee or to allow any intoxicating liquors, beer and/or other
alcoholic beverages to be kept, brought into, used, or drunk on premises. (1974
code, sec. 5-509)
9-310. Minors prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor for the holder of a license under the provisions of this chapter, his
agents or employees, or other persons for him, to permit any persons under the
age of eighteen (18) years to enter and remain in the rooms or places where any
pool and billiard tables, tenpin alleys, or box ball tables are located without
being accompanied by their parents or guardians or having their written
permission.
Any minor who shall claim to have the written permission of his parents
or guardian, to enable him to play pool or billiards, or at a tenpin or bowling
alley or box ball table, shall, on entering the room, file the same with the owner
or operator of such place of business. Such permit shall cover only one (1)
admission to such pool or billiard room, tenpin, or bowling alley, or box ball
game and shall not justify or authorize any further admissions to any other
time. (1974 code, 5-510, modified)
9-311. Closing hours. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person owning or in charge of any place licensed under this chapter to keep the
same open or to allow any person to enter the same or to play after 10:00 P.M.
at night, except on Friday and Saturday nights when it shall be unlawful for
any person owning or in charge of any place licensed under this chapter to keep
the same open or allow any person in the same or to play therein after 12:00
P.M. at night. (1974 code, sec. 5-511, modified)
9-312. Forfeiture of license for violation of chapter. Should any holder
of a license, issued under the provisions of this chapter, his agent, or employees,
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, the city council shall have the power
and authority to declare such license forfeited upon proof of such violation, in
9-15
which event such license shall cease to be operative and shall be null and void.
(1974 code, sec. 5-512)
9-313. License not transferable; exception. No license issued under this
chapter shall be transferable except upon the consent of the city council in called
or regular session, and such action shall be made a part of the proceedings of the
city council. (1974 code, sec. 5-513)
9-16
CHAPTER 4
RODEOS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER ITINERANT SHOWS
SECTION
9-401. Permit required; application for permit.
9-402. General conditions to issuance of permit.
9-403. Permit fees.
9-404. Occupancy of structure prohibited prior to issuance of permit.
9-405. Liability insurance and cash bond.
9-406. Inspection of premises.
9-407. Revocation of permit.
9-401. Permit required; application for permit. No person shall conduct,
erect, or cause to be conducted or erected any rodeo, wild west show, menagerie,
circus, carnival, or similar type or itinerant show within the City of Harriman
without a permit to do so issued by the city coordinator. Application for such
permit shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk at least fourteen (14) days
prior to the opening date of any performance. The application shall clearly state
the following:
(1) The name of the owner and location of the property where the show
or performance is to take place.
(2) Whether any open flame is intended to be used within the structure
and if so, what precautions are to be taken to render it safe.
(3) The name of person, firm or corporation which will use the
structure.
(4) Location of principal place of business of such person, firm or
corporation.
(5) Names and addresses of the offices of such firm or corporation.
(6) The length of time the structure or property is intended to be used
for the purposes applied for.
(7) The hours of the day or night during which such structure is
intended to be used as a place of assembly or as a place of entertainment.
(8) The formula of the solution which is to be used to flameproof the
structure, or a copy of a certificate showing the date of the last flameproof
treatment and by who performed.
(9) What provisions have been made for sanitary facilities for persons
using the premises on which such structure is to be erected or is maintained.
(10) The name or names of the sponsoring local person or group.
(11) That only safety film motion pictures will be used where motion
pictures are to be shown.
(12) That the proposed operation is in compliance with the zoning
ordinance, as amended.
9-17
(13) The applicant will be required to furnish a sworn affidavit that no
employee of the applicant has been convicted of a felony within ten (10) years.
(14) The applicant will file a sworn affidavit that there will be no
obscene or nude performances; no gambling devices; no shell games; no activities
of a wagering nature.
(15) The applicant will furnish a plan showing adequate off-street
parking which will not congest traffic.
(16) The applicant will file a plan showing adequate sewage facilities
for the disposal of sewage and all trash from the operation of the business
including human excrement.
(17) The applicant will furnish a statement which will certify that the
business will not be conducted in such a way as to create loud noises or disturb
people sleeping in a residential neighborhood after 10:00 p.m.
(18) The applicant will furnish such other relevant information as the
city clerk may require.
Such application shall include the name or names of the owner or owners,
their address and the name or names of the manager or managerial personnel
of the operation. (Ord. 834)
9-402. General conditions to issuance of permit. The city council shall
not issue any permit required by this article, unless the applicant has made
provision for:
(1) Adequate aisles, seats, platforms, and poles.
(2) Sufficient exits, well marked and properly lighted.
(3) Lighted and unobstructed passageways to areas leading away from
the structure, so that fire-fighting equipment and personnel may operate easily.
(4) Removal, before the structure is to be used as a place of public
assembly, of any pole, rope or other obstruction in any aisle or exit.
(5) Inspection before the opening of the show by the city electrical
inspector to ascertain if any defect exists in the wiring and provision made for
immediate correction of any defect which may be found.
(6) Sufficient first-aid fire appliances to be distributed through the
structure with operating personnel familiar with the operation of such
equipment available and assigned during the use of such structure as a place of
assembly.
(7) Sufficient "NO SMOKING" signs visible at all times.
(8) An employee at each entrance to require the extinguishing of all
cigarettes, cigars and other smoking materials.
(9) Announcement at frequent intervals to the persons in the structure
that smoking is prohibited.
(10) Proper safeguarding of any open flame or its use prohibited.
(11) Prohibition of fireworks.
(12) The clearing of straw, dry grass, sawdust and any combustible
trash from the structure before it is opened to the public and arrangements
9-18
made to keep the areas where debris may be expected to accumulate well
serviced, especially under open seats.
(13) Proper facilities for calling the fire department and police
department.
(14) Adequate police and fire personnel and equipment at the
applicant's expense, for the control of persons in the assembly to prevent
overcrowding, obstructions of aisles and exits and such other control as may be
necessary to render the occupation of such structure or its use by the public safe.
(15) Rendering nonflammable the tent and canvas parts of the structure
and all combustible decorative materials, including curtains, acoustic materials,
streamers, cloth cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss. (Ord. 834)
9-403. Permit fees. (1) The following fees are to be paid to the city
treasurer for permits required by this section, in addition to any other fee, tax
or payment required by any other provision of the code or state statutes:
(a) Rodeo and wild west shows, per day . . . . . . . . . . $150.00
(b) Menageries, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75.00
(c) Motor carnival, per day (first day) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100.00
per day, (after first day) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75.00
concessions, less than 20'x 20', per day . . . . . . . . . . . 3.00
concessions, 20'x 20' or more, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.00
(d) Circus, per day (first day) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100.00
per day, (after first day) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75.00
concession, less than 20'x 20' or more, per day . . . . . 3.00
concession, 20'x 20' or more, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.00
(e) Tent shows, per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
per week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75.00
(f) Any amusement or entertainment or show of any
kind on any lot of land in the city, not included
above; per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
per week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75.00
(2) The above fees shall not apply to those activities fostered and
supervised by the recreation department of the City of Harriman, or to
permanently located amusement facilities and any public organization that
receives funding from the city and established service clubs within the city.
(Ord. 834 and amended by ord. 976)
9-404. Occupancy of structure prohibited prior to the issuance of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the occupancy of a
structure for the purposes defined in this article as a place of assembly or
entertainment unless the permit required by this article has been issued and the
permit fee has been paid. (as added by Ord. 834)
9-19
9-405. Liability insurance and cash bond. The applicant for a permit
required by this article shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance
policy in the amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for one person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one
accident, is in force and effect at the time such structure is to be occupied as a
place of assembly by the public. The applicant shall deposit with the city
coordinator a cash bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
conditioned that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or
adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be
permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such
applicant. Such cash bond shall be returned to the applicant upon certification
by the city coordinator that all conditions of this article have been complied
with. (Ord. 834 and amended by ord. 976)
9-406. Inspection of premises. The municipal building inspector shall
cause an inspection to be made at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the first
performance or to the erection of a structure for which a permit is required by
this section, to determine if provisions of all health, safety, and zoning rules,
regulations, and appropriate sections of this code are complied with or will be
complied with in a satisfactory manner. (Ord. 834)
9-407. Revocation of permit. If the municipal building inspector finds
that a structure is being maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, or in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard, he may revoke the
permit issued under this section and it shall thereafter be unlawful for any
person to continue to operate the activity or show covered by such permit or to
allow the occupancy of such structure. (Ord. 834)
9-20
CHAPTER 5
LIMITATIONS ON VENDORS DURING PARADES
SECTION
9-501. Limitations.
9-502. Registration required.
9-503. Exemption.
9-504. Violation and penalty.
9-501. Limitations. On the dates that any parades or other outdoor
community gatherings are scheduled in the City of Harriman, Tennessee, only
local civic and/or service clubs or organizations will be allowed to engage in
street vending within the City of Harriman. (as added by ord. 928, sec. 1)
9-502. Registration required. Any local civic and/or service club or
organization desiring to engage in street vending at the times set forth under
section 9-501, above, shall register with the city clerk of the City of Harriman,
Tennessee, at least seven (7) days in advance of the dates vending is to be
carried on. (Ord. 928, sec. 2)
9-503. Exemption. Nothing herein shall be construed as referring to
gatherings at organized sports activities, at which places the persons in charge
may determine the control of sales. (Ord. 928, sec. 3)
9-504. Violation and penalty. Violations of this chapter shall be
punishable according to the general penalty provisions of this municipal code or
ordinances. (Ord. 928, sec. 4, modified)
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. DOMESTIC ANIMAL PETS.
3. DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
4. WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS.
5. RABIES AND DISEASE.
6. ENFORCEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Definitions.
10-102. Animal control officer.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc. to be provided.
10-105. Keeping such as to become a nuisance prohibited.
10-106. Cruel treatment prohibited.
10-107. Running at large prohibited.
10-101. Definitions. For the purposes of title 10, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively hereinbelow ascribed to them:
(1) "Animal" shall mean any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild,
including birds, fish and reptiles, and excluding human beings.
(2) "Pet" shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
(3) "Domestic animal" shall mean any tame animal bred in captivity
and which has never known the wild, or any other animal which is not
hereinbelow defined as a wild or exotic animal.
(4) "Wild or exotic animal" shall mean any animal which would
ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the
wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a
reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or significant destruction of
property. Such animals are further defined as being those mammals or
non-venomous reptiles, excluding non-poisonous snakes, weighing over fifty (50)
pounds at maturity which are known at law as "ferae naturae". By way of
example, such animals include, but are not limited to, any live monkey
(non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger,
lion, lynx, bear, deer, elephants, ostriches, sharks, any poisonous animal, fish
or reptile, or any other warm blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula
10-2
which can normally be found in the wild state, or any other member of
crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and
gavials. Wild or exotic animals specifically do not include domestic animals,
animals of a species customarily used in the State of Tennessee as ordinary
household pets, or animals of a species customarily used in the State of
Tennessee as domestic farm animals, fish confined in an aquarium.
(5) "Dangerous or vicious animal" shall mean and include:
(a) Any domestic animal which attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation; or
(b) Any domestic animal with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or to otherwise
reasonably endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; or
(c) Any dog known by the owner to be a pit bull terrier, which
is defined as any American pit bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, or
American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog
which contains as an element of its breeding any of the characteristics of
the aforementioned breed so as to be identifiable as partially of any or all
of these aforementioned breeds.
(d) Any domestic animal declared by the animal control officer
to be a dangerous or vicious animal, as defined herein, or any animal
determined to be a dangerous or vicious animal under the authority of
title 10, chapter 6, section 10-602 of this code.
10-102. Animal control officer. The position of animal control officer is
hereby created, and said individual shall be appointed by the mayor. The
animal control officer shall be considered an employee of the street and
sanitation department and under the direct supervision of the supervisor of said
department. This position, together with any operating expenses, shall be
budgeted separately from the street and sanitation department budgets. The
animal control officer shall enforce the provisions of title 10 of this code, and is
hereby granted all powers, duties and responsibilities contained therein for this
purpose.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean. When any animal is kept
within the corporate limits, the building, structure, corral, pen, or enclosure in
which it is kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided. No
animal shall be kept or confined in any place where the food, water, shelter, and
ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of its health and
safety.
All feed shall be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box,
or receptacle.
10-3
10-105. Keeping such as to become a nuisance prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or caretaker to keep, harbour or maintain an animal in
such a place or condition as to become a nuisance because of either odor,
contagious disease, dangerous or vicious disposition, or other reason.
It shall also be unlawful for any owner or caretaker to keep, harbour or
maintain any animal which, by loud and frequent production of sound
unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet or repose of a person or persons of
ordinary sensibility, provided the provisions of this section shall not apply to
duly authorized hospitals or clinics conducted for the treatment of animals.
10-106. Cruel treatment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to kill, injure or otherwise abuse any animal within the corporate limits unless
it be in defense of himself or another person. This section shall not apply to
veterinarians, the animal control officer, or police officers if they are acting with
the scope and course of their employment. The animal control officer, or any
person under his direct supervision, may use tranquilizing equipment in
capturing or controlling a dangerous, vicious or rabid animal or any animal
which cannot otherwise be captured or controlled.
10-107. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner
or caretaker of an animal to wilfully, knowingly or negligently allow such animal
to run at large in any street, alley, or unenclosed lot within the corporate limits.
10-4
CHAPTER 2
DOMESTIC ANIMAL PETS
SECTION
10-201. Application.
10-202. Restriction on number of pets.
10-203. Permits.
10-204. Prohibition.
10-205. Exception.
10-201. Application. The provisions of title 10, chapter 2, sections 10-201
- 10-205 shall apply only to domestic animal pets.
10-202. Restriction on number of pets. No owner or caretaker of any
residential building shall knowingly allow any pets over the age of four (4)
months to be kept, harboured or maintained within any residential building or
on any residential lot or parcel of property in the city without a permit, except
as hereinbelow specified and provided.
Maximum Number
of Pets Allowed Lot of Parcel Size
3 One-quarter (1/4) acre or less
4 Exceeding one-quarter (1/4) acre up
to, and including, one-half (1/2) acre
5 Exceeding one-half (1/2) acre up to,
and including, three-quarter (3/4)
acre
6 Exceeding three-quarter (3/4) acre
up to, and including, one (1) acre
8 Exceeding one (1) acre up to, and
including, two (2) acres
10 Exceeding two (2) acres up to and
including three (3) acres
10-203. Permits. Any owner or caretaker of any residential building
desiring to keep, harbour or maintain more pets than allowed in section 10-202
shall file a written application therefor upon a form provided by the animal
10-5
control officer, which application shall state the name, address and telephone
number of the owner or caretaker, the size of the lot or parcel of property, the
number and kind of pets desired to be kept, and a short statement of the
reason(s) for the request.
The animal control officer shall review the information supplied by the
owner or caretaker and inspect the residential building and/or lot or parcel of
property after which he shall reasonably ascertain if any pets over the
maximum number of pets herein provided should be allowed, and if he
determines the same should be allowed, he shall decide how many pets will be
allowed, and issue a permit therefor.
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify any restrictions, limitations,
conditions or prohibitions which the animal control officer deems reasonably
necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary conditions,
unreasonable noise or odors, or annoyance, or to protect the public health or
safety.
Any permit issued hereunder may be modified from time to time or
revoked by the animal control officer for failure to conform to the restrictions,
limitations, conditions or prohibitions therein contained. Such modification or
revocation shall be effective from and after ten (10) days following the mailing
of written notice thereof by certified mail to the owner or caretaker keeping,
harbouring or maintaining such pets.
The fee for such permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which shall
be paid at the time of the making of the application therefor.
10-204. Prohibition. No owner or caretaker of a domesticated animal pet
shall be allowed to keep, harbour or maintain such animal inside a building or
upon a lot or parcel of property which is not residential except as otherwise
provided in title 10.
10-205. Exception. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to fish,
amphibians, reptiles and birds which would be considered domestic animal pets
and which are kept inside the building in an appropriate self-contained
enclosure.
10-6
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
SECTION
10-301. Dangerous or vicious animals to be confined.
10-302. Restraint in public.
10-303. Causing animal to be dangerous or vicious.
10-304. Exception.
10-301. Dangerous or vicious animals to be confined. No owner or
caretaker of a dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal
to go unconfined on the premises of such person. A dangerous or vicious animal
is "unconfined" as the term is used in this section if such animal is not securely
confined indoors or confined in a secure enclosure suitably sized for the animal
so confined upon the premises of said person. An "enclosure" is secure within
the meaning of this section if it is constructed of heavy gauge steel mesh, or
other suitable material; consists of a top and sides, with the bottom of such sides
fastened along their perimeter to a slab floor of concrete or other suitable
material; and, where no slab floor is provided, the sides must be embedded into
the ground no less than one foot; and, all access points of the enclosure must be
locked when the animal is confined therein.
10-302. Restraint in public. No owner or caretaker of a dangerous or
vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of
such person unless such animal is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain
not exceeding three (3) feet in length, and having a tensile strength sufficient
to restrain the animal. Animals which are actively participating in recognized
local, regional or national trials, training or other such sponsored competition,
need not be muzzled while being transported to or from or during such
competition.
10-303. Causing animal to be dangerous or vicious. No person shall own,
keep, harbour or maintain any animal for the purpose of fighting, or train,
torment, badger or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging
such animal to commit unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic
animals.
10-304. Exception. Dogs owned and controlled by local, state and federal
law enforcement agencies which are used in law enforcement or related
activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter while engaged in such
activities.
The enclosure requirement of section 10-301 of this chapter shall not
apply to non-residential buildings or lots or parcels of property upon which are
10-7
housed guard dogs during the hours when such buildings or lots or parcels of
property are not open to the general public; however, any such guard dog shall
still be confined in an enclosure constructed in such a fashion as to make it
impossible for the dog to escape the premises unless released by a person who
is entering the premises without authorization during such non-public hours.
10-8
CHAPTER 4
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS
SECTION
10-401. Prohibition.
10-402. Exception.
10-403. Notice required at place of sale.
10-401. Prohibition. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his
premises any wild or exotic animal for any purpose or reason whatsoever, except
as otherwise permitted hereinbelow.
10-402. Exception. The provisions of section 10-402 shall not apply to
properly licensed and lawfully operated and located pet shops, menageries,
zoological gardens, scientific research laboratories, circuses, animal exhibitions,
or veterinary clinics, provided that the animal is maintained in quarters so
constructed and maintained as to prevent escape, and the exempt person,
business, organization or entity complies with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, rules and regulations for the care and maintenance of such animal.
Further, in no case shall such animal be exhibited or displayed in such a
manner that persons other than their handlers can pet, fondle, or otherwise
come in direct physical contact with such animal. This prohibition shall not
apply to the riding of elephants by persons other than the elephants' handlers
while under the direct supervision of the elephants' handlers where such
elephants are performing in zoological parks, animal exhibitions or circuses.
10-403. Notice required at place of sale. Any person who offers for sale
a wild or exotic animal as defined in chapter 1, section 10-101 (4) of this title
shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice:
"No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept within the corporate
limits of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, any live wild or exotic animal, which
shall mean any animal which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which
would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one
which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or
significant destruction of property. Such animals are further defined as being
those mammals or non-venomous reptiles, excluding non-poisonous snakes,
weighing over fifty (50) pounds at maturity which are known at law as "ferae
naturae". By way of example, such animals include, but are not limited to, any
live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard,
panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear, deer, elephants, ostriches, sharks, any poisonous
animal, fish or reptile, or any other warm blooded animal, poisonous snake or
tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state, or any other member
10-9
of crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and
gavials."
10-10
CHAPTER 5
RABIES AND DISEASE
SECTION
10-501. Rabies vaccination and registration required.
10-502. Animal to wear tags.
10-503. Confinement of animal suspected of being rabid or diseased.
10-501. Rabies vaccination and registration required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any animal requiring a rabies
vaccination without having the same duly vaccinated against rabies and
registered in accordance with the provisions of the "Tennessee Anti-Rabies Law"
(Tennessee Code Annotated, sections 68-8-101 through 68-8-115) or other
applicable law.
10-502. Animal to wear tags. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
keep, or harbor any animal requiring a rabies vaccination which does not wear
a tag evidencing the vaccination and registration required by the preceding
section.
10-503. Confinement of animal suspected of being rabid or diseased. If
any animal has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person or
is for any reason suspected of being infected with rabies or other disease, the
animal control officer shall cause such animal to be confined or isolated for such
time as he deems reasonably necessary to determine if such animal or fowl is
rabid or diseased.
10-11
CHAPTER 6
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
10-601. Disposition of animal running at large.
10-602. Disposition of dangerous, vicious or infected animal.
10-603. Penalties.
10-604. Applicability.
10-601. Disposition of animal running at large. Any animal found
running at large may be seized by any police officer or the animal control officer
or any person acting under the direct supervision of any police officer or the
animal control officer and placed in the city pound. If the animal is wearing a
tag the owner or caretaker shall be notified in person or by telephone, if
possible, and by the mailing of written notice thereof by certified mail to the
owner's or caretaker's last known mailing address to appear within five (5) days
and redeem his animal. If the animal is not wearing a tag and its owner or
caretaker cannot be reasonably determined, a notice describing the impounded
animal will be posted in at least three (3) public places within the corporate
limits. In either case, the notice shall state that the impounded animal must be
claimed within five (5) days by paying the pound fees or the same will be sold
or humanely destroyed. If not legally claimed by the owner, the animal shall be
sold or humanely destroyed, or it may otherwise be disposed of as authorized by
the city council. No animal shall be released in any event from the pound unless
or until such animal has been vaccinated as provided by law and had a tag
evidencing such vaccination placed on its collar.
The animal control officer shall collect from each person claiming an
impounded animal reasonable fees, in accordance with a schedule approved by
the city council, to cover the costs of impoundment, maintenance, upkeep and
vaccination of the animal.
10-602. Disposition of dangerous, vicious or infected animal. Any
dangerous, vicious, rabid, diseased or otherwise infected animal found running
at large, and which can be safely impounded, shall be seized by any police officer
or the animal control officer or any person acting under the direct supervision
of any police officer or the animal control officer and placed in the city pound or
a veterinary clinic.
If the impounded animal is wearing a tag the owner or caretaker shall be
notified in person or by telephone, if possible, and by the mailing of written
notice thereof by certified mail to the owner's or caretaker's last known mailing
address of such impoundment, the reasons therefor, and the conditions,
restrictions and limitations under which the owner or caretaker may redeem his
animal. If the animal is not wearing a tag and its owner or caretaker cannot be
10-12
reasonably determined, a notice describing the impounded animal will be posted
in at least three (3) public places within the corporate limits describing thereon
the conditions, restrictions and limitations under which the owner or caretaker
may redeem his animal. The notice herein described shall also inform the owner
of when and where the animal may be redeemed, and the animal must be
claimed at the time and place provided by paying the pound and/or veterinary
fees of the same will be sold or humanely destroyed. If not legally claimed by
the owner, the animal shall be sold or humanely destroyed, or it may otherwise
be disposed of as authorized by the city council. No animal shall be released in
any event from the pound unless or until such animal has been vaccinated as
provided by law and had a tag evidencing such vaccination placed on its collar.
If, in the judgement of the animal control officer the animal should not be
returned to the owner or caretaker thereof because the risk of returning the
animal would create an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to a human being,
any domestic animal or the animal itself, he shall notify the owner or caretaker
thereof in the same manner as the other notifications required in this section,
and he shall give the owner or caretaker no more than five (5) days in which to
take the appropriate steps to alleviate said risk or the animal will be destroyed.
If the owner or caretaker does not take the appropriate steps to alleviate the
risk identified by the officer within the time prescribed, then the animal shall
be humanely destroyed.
When, due to its dangerousness, viciousness or apparent infection with
rabies or other disease, an animal found running at large cannot be safely
impounded it may be summarily destroyed by any police officer or the animal
control officer or any person acting under the direct supervision of any police
officer or the animal control officer.
Any police officer or the animal control officer or any person acting under
the direct supervision of any police officer or the animal control officer is
authorized to seize and impound, and the animal control officer is authorized to
order the humane destruction or other disposition, of any animal which:
(1) Has bitten one or more persons on two (2) or more occasions, or
(2) Has caused serious bodily injury or disfigurement to any person,
or
(3) Has killed any person, or
(4) Has caused serious bodily injury or disfigurement to any domestic
animal.
Any animal which has taken any of the actions enumerated in (1) - (4) of
this section is hereby determined to be a dangerous or vicious animal.
10-603. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of title
10, and is found guilty thereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each day the violation continues shall be treated as a separate
offense.
10-13
10-604. Applicability. The provisions of title 10 shall not apply to
properly licensed and lawfully operated and located pet shops, menageries,
zoological gardens, scientific research laboratories, circuses, animal exhibitions,
or veterinary clinics, provided that the animal is maintained in quarters so
constructed and maintained as to prevent escape, and the exempt person,
business, organization or entity complies with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, rules and regulations for the care and maintenance of such animal.
However, such exempt person, business, organization or entity as herein
enumerated shall be subject to any additional requirements imposed in title 10
upon said exempt person, business, organization or entity.
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES1
CHAPTER
1. ALCOHOL.
2. FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
3. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
4. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
5. TRESPASSING AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
6. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOL2
SECTION
11-101. Drinking alcoholic beverages in public, etc.
11-102. Minors in beer places.
11-103. Violations and penalty.
11-101. Drinking alcoholic beverages in public, etc. It shall be unlawful
for any person to drink, consume or have an open can or bottle of beer or
intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley, avenue, highway, sidewalk,
public park, public school ground or other public place.
11-102. Minors in beer places. No person under the age of twenty-one
(21) shall loiter in or around or otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold
at retail for on premises consumption.
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Housing and utilities: title 12.
Fireworks and explosives: title 7.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
2Municipal code reference
Sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer: title 8.
State law reference
See Tennessee Code Annotated § 33-8-203 (Arrest for Public
Intoxication, cities may not pass separate legislation).
11-2
11-103. Violations and penalty. A violation of any provision of this
chapter shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to one hundred dollars
($100) for each offense.
11-3
CHAPTER 2
FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
SECTION
11-201. Fortune telling, etc.
11-201. Fortune telling, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct the business of, solicit for, or ply the trade of fortune teller, clairvoyant,
hypnotist, spiritualist, palmist, phrenologist, or other mystic endowed with
supernatural powers. A violation of this section shall subject the offender to a
penalty of up to seventy-five dollars ($75) for each offense.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 11-4
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-301. Disturbing the peace.
11-302. Anti-noise regulations.
11-303. Violation and penalty.
11-304. Noise pollution--engine compression braking devices regulated.
11-301. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb,
or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or
obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon
any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control.
11-302. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this section,
the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise is
prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental
to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and
welfare, is prohibited.
(1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(a) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or other device on
any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, or vehicle while not in motion
except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently
out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes
are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation
by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but
not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or
amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with
motion pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.,
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office
or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
(c) Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
11-5
quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck,
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to cause loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
city authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any residential area or
section or the construction or repair of streets and highways in any
residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and
6:00 P.M. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building
inspector granted for a period while the emergency continues not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If the building inspector should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and
if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to
any party in interest through delay, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is
in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and other
containers.
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale or display of
merchandise.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 11-6
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of
mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply
to or be enforced against:
(a) City vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon
necessary public business.
(b) Repair of streets, etc. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets, or highways at night, by or on behalf of the city, the county, or
the state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the day.
(c) Noncommercial and nonprofit use of loudspeakers or
amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured
from the board of mayor and aldermen. Hours for the use of an amplified
or public address system will be designated in the permit so issued and
the use of such systems shall be restricted to the hours so designated in
the permit.
11-303. Violation and penalty. A violation of any provision of this
chapter shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to one hundred dollars
($100) for each offense.
11-304. Noise pollution--engine compression braking devices regulated.
(1) All truck tractor and semi-trailers operating within the City of
Harriman shall conform to the visual exhaust system inspection requirements,
40 C.F.R. 202.22, of the Interstate Motor Carriers Noise Emission Standards.
(2) A motor vehicle does not conform to the visual exhaust system
inspection requirements referenced in subsection (1) of this section if inspection
of the exhaust system of the motor carrier vehicle discloses that the system:
(a) Has a defect that adversely affects sound reduction, such as
exhaust gas leaks or alteration or deterioration of muffler elements.
(small traces of soot on flexible exhaust pipe sections shall not constitute
a violation);
(b) Is not equipped with either amuffler or other noise
dissipative device, such as a turbocharger (supercharger driven by
exhaust by gases); or
(c) Is equipped with a cut out, bypass, or similar device, unless
such device is designed as an exhaust gas driven cargo unloading system.
(3) Violations of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per offense. (as added by Ord. #07-01-01, Feb. 2007)
11-7
CHAPTER 4
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-401. Air rifles, etc.
11-402. Throwing missiles.
11-403. Discharge of firearms.
11-401. Air rifles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to
discharge any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, "BB" gun, or sling shot capable of
discharging a bullet or pellet, made of metal, plastic or any other kind of
material, whether propelled by spring, compressed air, expanding gas, explosive,
or other force-producing means or method. A violation of this section shall
subject the offender to a penalty of up to seventy-five ($75) for each offense.
11-402. Throwing missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
maliciously throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile upon or at
any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property or upon or at any
person. A violation of this section shall subject the offender to a penalty of up
to one hundred fifty dollars ($150) for each offense.
11-403. Discharge of firearms. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized
person to discharge a firearm within the corporate limits. A violation of this
section shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to two hundred fifty dollars
($250) for each offense.
11-8
CHAPTER 5
TRESPASSING AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-501. Trespassing.
11-502. Interference with traffic.
11-503. Violation and penalty.
11-501. Trespassing.1 (1) On premises open to the public.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to defy a lawful order,
personally communicated to him by the owner or other authorized person,
not to enter or remain upon the premises of another, including premises
which are at the time open to the public.
(b) The owner of the premises, or his authorized agent, may
lawfully order another not to enter or remain upon the premises if such
person is committing, or commits, any act which interferes with, or tends
to interfere with, the normal, orderly, peaceful or efficient conduct of the
activities of such premises.
(2) On premises closed or partially closed to public. It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain upon the premises of
another which is not open to the public, notwithstanding that another part of
the premises is at the time open to the public.
(3) Vacant buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or
remain upon the premises of a vacated building after notice against trespass is
personally communicated to him by the owner or other authorized person or is
posted in a conspicuous manner.
(4) Lots and buildings in general. It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter or remain on or in any lot or parcel of land or any building or other
structure after notice against trespass is personally communicated to him by the
owner or other authorized person or is posted in a conspicuous manner.
(5) Peddlers, etc. It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass
for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person to fail
to promptly leave the private premises of any person who requests or directs
him to leave.2
1State law reference
Subsections (1) through (4) of this section were taken substantially
from Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-405.
2Municipal code reference
Provisions governing peddlers: title 9, chapter 1.
11-9
11-502. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere
with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
11-503. Violation and penalty. A violation of any provision of this
chapter shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to one hundred dollars
($100) for each offense.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 11-10
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-601. Abandoned refrigerators, etc.
11-602. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc.
11-603. Posting notices, etc.
11-604. Deleted.
11-601. Abandoned refrigerators, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, unused,
or discarded refrigerator, icebox, or other container with any type latching or
locking door without first removing therefrom the latch, lock, or door or
otherwise sealing the door in such a manner that it cannot be opened by any
child. A violation of this section shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to
one hundred fifty dollars ($150) for each offense.
11-602. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well,
cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb
without an adequate cover or safeguard. A violation of this section shall subject
the offender to a penalty of up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150) for each
offense.
11-603. Posting notices, etc. No person shall paint, make, or fasten, in
any way, any show-card, poster, or other advertising device or sign upon any
public or private property unless legally authorized to do so. A violation of this
section shall subject the offender to a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50) for each
offense. Each posting of such unauthorized notice shall constitute a separate
offense.
11-604. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #1013-03, Nov. 2013, and deleted by
Ord. #0116-01, Jan. 2016)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES1
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. FUEL GAS CODE.
4. RESIDENTIAL CODE.
5. ELECTRICAL CODE.
6. UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE.
7. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
8. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
9. MECHANICAL CODE.
10. EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION
12-101. Building code adopted.
12-102. Modifications.
12-103. Available in clerk's office.
12-104. Violations and penalty.
12-101. Building code adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of which
is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and designated
as the International Building Code,2 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapter
A, B, C, E, F, G, H, I, J and K as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Harriman, in the
State of Tennessee for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-2
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on
file in the Office of the City of Harriman are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 12-102 of this chapter. (Ord. 746,
modified, as replaced by Ord. #06-04-01, May 2006, Ord. #0111-01, Feb. 2011,
and Ord. #0413-02, April 2013)
12-102. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Harriman
Section 1013.2 Where required. Delete the first sentence and replace with
"Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces or ground surfaces
including mezzanines, equipment platforms, stairs, ramps, landings, retaining
walls and any other locations that are located more than thirty inches (30")
(762 mm) measured vertically to the floor or graded below at any point within
thirty-six inches (36") (914 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side.
Section 1013.8, change "36" inches to "24" inches.
Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Harriman.
Section 1612.3. Insert: November 18, 2009.
Section 3410.2. Insert: 15 days of final passage, 5 days after publication.
(Ord. 746, modified, as replaced by Ord. #06-04-01, May 2006, Ord. #0111-01,
Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-02, April 2013)
12-103. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of the
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the building code has been
placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (Ord. 746, modified)
12-104. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the building code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter
shall be punishable by a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) as prescribed by
law, for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 745, modified, as amended by
Ord. #06-04-01, May 2006)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-3
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Plumbing code adopted.
12-202. Modifications.
12-203. Available in clerk's office.
12-204. Violations and penalty.
12-201. Plumbing code adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of
which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Plumbing Code,2 2012 edition, including
Appendix Chapter B, C, D, E and F, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of
Harriman, in the State of Tennessee for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said plumbing code on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
§ 12-202 of this chapter. (Ord. 746, modified, as replaced by Ord. #06-04-03, May
2006, Ord. #0111-03, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-04, April 2013)
12-202. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: City of Harriman.
Section 106.6.2: as adopted by resolution.
Section 106.6.3: 50%, 50%.
Section 108.4: municipal code violation, $50, as prescribed by law.
Section 108.5: $50, as prescribed by law.
Section 305.4.1: 12 inches, 12 inches.
1Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-4
Section 903.1: 12 inches. (Ord. 746, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #06-04-03, May 2006, Ord. #0111-03, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-04, April
2013)
12-203. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the plumbing code has
been placed on file in the city clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public. (Ord. 746, modified)
12-204. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the plumbing code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter
shall be punishable by a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) as prescribed by
law, for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 746, modified, as amended by
Ord. #06-04-03, May 2006)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-5
CHAPTER 3
FUEL GAS CODE1
SECTION
12-301. Fuel gas code adopted.
12-302. Piping installed prior to adoption of gas code.
12-303. License and bond required for engaging in gas business.
12-304. Administration and enforcement of the gas code.
12-305. Inspections, disconnections, etc.
12-306. When gas installation permits are required.
12-307. Rough piping and final piping inspections.
12-308. Certificates of approval.
12-309. Inspection fees.
12-310. Violations.
12-311. No liability assumed by city.
12-312. Severability clause.
12-313. Definitions.
12-314. Available in clerk's office.
12-301. Fuel gas code adopted. (1) A certain document, one (1) copy of
which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Fuel Gas Code,2 2012 edition including
Appendices A, B, C and D as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Harriman, in the
State of Tennessee for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired
appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on file in the Office of the
City of Harriman are hereby referred to, adopted, and mad a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Harriman.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: as adopted by resolution.
Section 106.6.3 Insert: 50%, 50%.
Section 108.4. Insert: municipal code violation, $50, as prescribed by law.
1Municipal code reference
Street excavations and operation of gas system: titles 16 and 19.
2Copies of the fuel gas code and its amendments may be purchased from
the International Code Congress, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, AL 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-6
Section 108.5. Insert: $50, as prescribed by law. (Ord. 746, modified, as
replaced by Ord. #0413-10, April 2013)
12-302. Piping installed prior to adoption of gas code. Notwithstanding
any provision in this chapter or the gas code to the contrary, consumer's piping
installed prior to the adoption of the gas code or piping installed to supply other
than natural gas may be converted to natural gas, if the inspector finds, upon
inspection and proper tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory
gas service to the consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property;
otherwise, such piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to
conform with the requirements of this chapter and the gas code. (Ord. 746)
12-303. License and bond required for engaging in gas business.
(1) No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in or work at the
installation, extension, or alteration of consumer's gas piping or certain gas
appliances until such person, firm, corporation engaging in such business shall
have secured a license as hereinafter provided, and shall have given a good and
sufficient bond payable to the City of Harriman, Tennessee, in the sum of
$15,000.00 which bond shall be delivered to the gas inspector and shall be filed
by him with his records after same has been approved by the Harriman Utility
Board. Said bond shall be made by an approved surety company duly
authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, and shall be approved by
the Harriman Utility Board, same to be conditioned that the person, firm, or
corporation engaging in said business will faithfully observe all the laws of the
City of Harriman pertaining to the gas fitting business, blasting, and excavating
and all rules and regulations established under the authority of the gas code.
Said bond shall further indemnify and save harmless the City of Harriman from
all claims arising from accidents and damages of any character whatsoever
caused by negligence of such person, firm, or corporation in doing said work or
by any unfaithful or inadequate work done by the parties themselves, their
agents, or employees. The said bond shall be for the benefit of all persons
injured or aggrieved by any violation of or neglect to observe the requirements
of the gas code, or the laws and ordinances of the City of Harriman, and it shall
be the duty of the person, firm, or corporation engaging in such business to see
that said bond is maintained in active status as long as the person, firm, or
corporation engages in this type work within the City of Harriman or connects
to lines served by the Harriman Utility Board. Upon failure or refusal to comply
with this condition, the City of Harriman, Tennessee, acting through its
operating agent, the Harriman Utility Board, and the gas inspector, will refuse
permits for installing gas piping and gas appliances.
(2) Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work
shall secure from the city treasurer a nontransferable license which shall run
until the first day of January next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-7
revoked. The person obtaining a license shall pay an annual license fee in the
same amount required by state law, to the city treasurer.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an
individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing,
extending, replacing, altering, or repairing consumer's piping on his own
premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work
on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in
conformity with all other provisions of this chapter and the gas code; including
those relating to permits, inspections, and fees. (Ord. 746)
12-304. Administration and enforcement of the gas code. To provide for
the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the gas code, the office
of gas inspector is hereby created. From and after the effective date of these
provisions the gas inspector shall be named by and under the general
supervision of the Harriman Utility Board, Harriman, Tennessee, and it shall
be the duty of said board to see that the provisions of this chapter and the gas
code are carried out and specifically as same relate to the gas inspector, his
office and duties. From and after the effective date of these provisions all
applications for permits shall be made to the office of the Harriman Utility
Board and all fees properly chargeable hereunder shall be collected by said
board. (Ord. 746)
12-305. Inspections, disconnections, etc. (1) The inspector is authorized
and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and the gas code and
the inspector, by permission of the owner or lessee, or upon issuance of a
property warrant, may enter any building or premises for the purpose of making
inspections or preventing violations of the gas code.
(2) The inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture
or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been
issued with respect to same, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective
or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a
disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture, or
appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall sate that the same
has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or
reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the
inspector and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service
or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his
prior disconnection notice.
(3) It shall be the duty of the inspector to confer from time to time with
representatives of the local health department, the local fire department, and
the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful
information and advice, presenting same to the city officials from time to time
for their consideration. (Ord. 746)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-8
12-306. When gas installation permits are required. (1) No person shall
install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace, central heating plant, vented
recessed heater, water heater, boiler, consumer's gas piping, or convert existing
piping to utilize natural gas without first obtaining a permit to do such work
from the as inspector; however, permits will not be required for setting or
connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair of leaks in house piping.
(2) When only temporary use of gas is desired, the inspector may issue
a permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed sixty (60) days, provided the
consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a final
piping inspection.
(3) The gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set
meters, or to extend, relocate, remove, or repair its service lines, mains, or other
facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system. (Ord. 746)
12-307. Rough piping and final piping inspections. (1) A rough piping
inspection shall be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been
installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto.
(2) A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized
by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be
concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall
include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to or not less than the pressure of a column of mercury twelve (12) inches
in height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least
fifteen (15) minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge
shall be used for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor, and assistance necessary
for the tests shall be furnished by the installer of such piping. (Ord. 746)
12-308. Certificates of approval. The inspector shall issue a certificate
of approval at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping
has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the
provisions of this chapter and the gas code. A duplicate of each certificate issued
covering consumer's gas piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used
as its authority to render gas service. (Ord. 746)
12-309. Inspection fees. (1) The total fees for inspection of consumer's
gas piping at one location (including both rough and final piping inspection)
shall be $1.50 for one to four outlets, inclusive, and $0.50 for each outlet above
four.
(2) The fees for inspecting conversion burners, floor furnaces, boilers,
or central heating plants shall be $1.50 for each unit.
(3) The fees for inspecting vented recessed heaters and water heaters
shall be $1.00 per unit.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-9
(4) If the inspector is called back, after correction of defects noted, an
additional fee of $1.00 shall be made for each such return inspection.
(5) Any and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is
issued. (Ord. 746)
12-310. Violations. Any person who shall fail to comply with or violate
any other provision of this chapter or the gas code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined under the general
penalty clause of the Harriman Municipal Code, or the license of such person
may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed. (Ord.
746)
12-311. No liability assumed by city. This chapter shall not be construed
as imposing upon the City of Harriman any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliances
mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, not shall the City of Harriman, or
any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or
responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate
of approval issued by the inspector. (Ord. 746)
12-312. Severability clause. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, or
word of this chapter or of the code hereby adopted by declared for any reason to
be invalid then such decision shall affect only the section or provision so
declared to be invalid and shall not affect any other section or provision of this
chapter or the code hereby adopted. (Ord. 746)
12-313. Definitions. The following definitions are provided for the
purpose of interpretation and administration of this chapter and the gas code:
(1) "Inspector" means the person named by the Harriman Utility
Board as the gas inspector, such inspector to serve for the term set by the board
or subject to the will of the board.
(2) "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or
any other organized group of individuals.
(3) "Certificate of approval" means a document or tag issued and/or
attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping, or appliance
installation, filled out, together with date, address of the premises, and signed
by the inspector.
(4) "Certain appliances" means conversion burners, floor furnaces,
central heating plants, vented recessed heaters, water heaters, and boilers.
(Ord. 746)
12-314. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the gas code with
the above modifications, has been placed on file in the office of the city clerk of
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-10
the City of Harriman and shall be kept there available for public use, inspection,
and examination. (Ord. 746, modified)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-11
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION
12-401. Residential code adopted.
12-402. Modifications.
12-403. Available in clerk's office.
12-404. Violations and penalty.
12-401. Residential code adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of
which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk of the City of Harriman,
being marked and designated as the International Residential Code,1 2012
edition including Appendix A, B, C, D, F, G, H, J, K, M, N, O, P, and Q as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
building code of the City of Harriman, in the State of Tennessee for regulating
and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment location, removal and demolition of detached
one and two family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses)
not more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said residential code on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter,
with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 12-402
of this chapter. (Ord. 746, modified, as replaced by Ord. #06-04-02, May 2006,
Ord. #0111-02, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-03, April 2013)
12-402. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1. Insert: City of Harriman
Section R301.2(1). Insert: Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, as
specified (1) now load "10#," wind speed "90," Seismic "C," weathering "severe,"
Frost line depth, "12,"" Termite "Moderate to Heavy," winter design temperature
"19"F," Ice Barrier Required "No," Flood Hazards, "As shown on FEA FIRM
Panel, Air Freezing Index "1500 or less," and Mean Annual Temperature
"58.4"F."
Section P2603.5.1. Insert: Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches below finished grade at the
point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches
below grade.
1Copies of the fuel gas code and its amendments may be purchased from
the International Code Congress, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, AL 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-12
Section 303.4. Add the following language to the end of the code section
to read: "...or approved air exchanger on the HVAC System which will make up
the required ventilation."
Section R313. Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Add the words
"(Optional, see Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 68-120-101(a)(8))." In the
section title after the word "Systems."
Section R314.3. Location, Insert: "4. In each attached garage or storage
area with a six foot or wider door to the outside. These smoke alarms shall be
specifically approved for use in garages in the manufacturers written
instructions. Exception: Heat detectors interconnected with the alarm system
having battery back-up may be used in a garage or storage area.
Section P2503.5.1. Remove the words, "for piping systems other than
plastic." (Ord. 746, modified, as replaced by Ord. #06-04-02, May 2006,
Ord. #0111-02, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-03, April 2013)
12-403. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the housing code has been
placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (Ord. 746, modified)
12-404. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the housing code as herein adopted
by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day
a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 746,
modified, as amended by Ord. #06-04-02, May 2006)
12-13
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-501. Electrical code adopted.
12-502. Available in clerk's office.
12-503. Permit required for doing electrical work.
12-504. Violations.
12-505. Enforcement.
12-506. Fees.
12-501. Electrical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, sections 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the
purpose of providing practical minimum standards for the safeguarding of
persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use
of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling, or for other purposes,
the National Electrical Code,2 1984 edition, as prepared by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a
part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the electrical code. (Ords. 724
and 725, modified)
12-502. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the electrical code
has been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public. (Ords. 724 and 725, modified)
12-503. Permit required for doing electrical work. No electrical work
shall be done within this city until a permit therefor has been issued by the city.
The term "electrical work" shall not be deemed to include minor repairs that do
not involve the installation of new wire, conduits, machinery, apparatus, or
other electrical devices generally requiring the services of an electrician. (Ords.
724 and 725, modified)
12-504. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to do or authorize
any electrical work or to use any electricity in such manner or under such
1Municipal code reference
Fire protection, fireworks and explosives: title 7.
2Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Protection
Association, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02210.
12-14
circumstances as not to comply with this chapter and/or the requirements and
standards prescribed by the electrical code. (Ords. 724 and 725, modified)
12-505. Enforcement. The electrical inspector shall be such person as the
city council shall appoint or designate. It shall be his duty to enforce compliance
with this chapter and the electrical code as herein adopted by reference. He is
authorized and directed to make such inspections of electrical equipment and
wiring, etc., as are necessary to insure compliance with the applicable
regulations, and may enter any premises or building at any reasonable time for
the purpose of discharging his duties. He is authorized to refuse or discontinue
electrical service to any person or place not complying with this chapter and/or
the electrical code. (Ords. 724 and 725, modified)
12-506. Fees. The electrical inspector shall collect the same fees as are
authorized in Tennessee Code Annotated, section 68-17-143 for electrical
inspections by deputy inspectors of the state fire marshal. (Ords. 724 and 725,
modified)
12-15
CHAPTER 6
UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE
SECTION
12-601. Unsafe building abatement code adopted.
12-602. Modifications
12-603. Available in clerk's office.
12-604. Violations.
12-601. Unsafe building abatement code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the
purpose of regulating buildings and structures to insure structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or
premises, within or without the city, the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement
Code,1 1985 edition as prepared and adopted by the Southern Building Code
Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the unsafe building
abatement code. (Ord. 921, modified)
12-602. Modifications. Definitions. Whenever the unsafe building
abatement code refers to the "Chief Appointing Authority," or the "Chief
Administrator" it shall be deemed to be a reference to the city council. When the
"Building Official" is named it shall, for the purposes of the unsafe building
abatement code, mean such person as the city council has appointed or
designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the unsafe building
abatement code. (Ord. 921, modified)
12-603. Available in clerk's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the unsafe building
abatement code has been placed on file in the clerk's office and shall be kept
there for the use and inspection of the public.
12-604. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the unsafe building abatement code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. (Ord. 921)
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-16
CHAPTER 7
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE1
SECTION
12-701. Energy conservation code adopted.
12-702. Available in recorder's office.
12-701. Energy conservation code. (1) A certain document, one (1) copy
of which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Energy Conservation Code,2 2006 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Energy Conservation Code of the City of Harriman, in the State of Tennessee
for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation
of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said energy
conservation code on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter,
with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The following sections are hereby revised:
Section C101.1. Insert: City of Harriman.
Section R101.1. Insert: City of Harriman.
Table C402.2. Replace with Table 502.2(1) and (2) from the 2006 edition
of the IECC.
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-19-106 requires Tennessee cities
either to adopt the Model Energy Code, 1992 edition, the International
Energy Conservation Code, 2000 edition with 2002 amendments, or to
adopt local standards equal to or stricter than the standards in the
energy code.
Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-17
Table R402.1.1. Replace with Table 402.1.1 from the 2006 edition of the
IECC. (as added by Ord. #06-0 4-05, May 2006, and replaced by Ord. #0111-06,
Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-07, April 2013)
12-702. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the energy code has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (as added by Ord. #06-04-05, May 2006)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-18
CHAPTER 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
12-801. Property maintenance code adopted.
12-802. Modifications.
12-803. Available in recorder's office.
12-801. Property maintenance code. A certain document, one (1) copy of
which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code,1 2012 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Harriman, in the State of Tennessee
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code
on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 12-802 of this chapter. (as added
by Ord. #06-04-06, May 2006, and replaced by Ord. #0111-07, Feb. 2011, and
Ord. #0413-08, April 2013)
12-802. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Harriman
Section 102.3. Delete: "International Zoning Code." and insert in its place
"adopted codes, ordinances, and resolutions of the City of Harriman."
Section 103.5. Insert: As adopted by resolution.
Section 302.1.1. Insert: Dirty lots. It shall be unlawful for any owner of
record or occupant of real property to create, maintain, or permit to be
maintained on such property the accumulation of debris, trash, litter, garbage,
disassembled or inoperable lawn mowing equipment and parts.
Section 302.4. Insert: "12 inches," and insert after . . . other than trees or
shrubs provided, "no shrubs shall exceed 4 feet in height within 20 feet of the
house."
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-19
Section 302.8. Insert after: no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles,
"including but not limited to water craft, RV's and campers." Insert: no vehicle,
"including but not limited to water craft, RV's and campers" . . .shall at any time
be in a state of disrepair.
Section 303.3. Insert: Abandoned pools. All abandoned swimming pools
shall be filled with concrete, dirt, or such other protective material as is
necessary to prevent the accumulation of water within such abandoned pool.
Any pool which is maintained or exists in such condition as to demonstrate the
intent of the owner that they are not to be in use for an indefinite period of time
or any swimming pool not in use for a period of one year shall be presumed to
be abandoned."
Section 304.14. Insert: During the period from March 15 to October 15,
every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms for rental and leased property only . . .shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch. . .
Section 602.3. Insert: during the period from September 15 to April 15 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68 for rental and leased property
only . . ."
Section 602.4. Insert: "Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied
with heat during the period from September 15 to April 15 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 65"F for rental and leased property only" (as added by
Ord. #06-04-06, May 2006, and replaced by Ord. #0111-07, Feb. 2011, and Ord.
#0413-08, April 2013)
12-803. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the International
Property Maintenance Code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and
shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. Administrative
regulations adopting amendments to the international property maintenance
code will be placed on file when they are published by the building inspector,
and at least fifteen (15) days before their effective date. (as added by Ord. #06-
04-06, May 2006)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-20
CHAPTER 9
MECHANICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-901. Mechanical code adopted.
12-902. Modifications.
12-903. Available in recorder's office.
12-901. Mechanical code adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of
which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Mechanical Code,2 2012 edition including
Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code for the City of Harriman, in the State of
Tennessee for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical
code on file in the Office of the City of Harriman are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 12-902 of this chapter.
(as added by Ord. #06-04-04, and replaced by Ord. #0111-05, Feb. 2011, and
Ord. #0413-06, April 2013)
12-902. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 10l.l. Insert: City of Harriman
Section 106.5.2. Insert: as adopted by resolution.
Section 106.5.3. Insert: 50%, 50%.
Section 108.4. Insert: municipal code violation, $50, as prescribed by law.
Section 108.5. Insert: $50, as prescribed by law. (as added by
Ord. #06-04-04, and replaced by Ord. #0111-05, Feb. 2011, and Ord. #0413-06,
April 2013)
1Municipal code references
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-21
12-903. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the mechanical code has
been placed on file in the city recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use
and inspection of the public. (as added by Ord. #06-04-04)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 12-22
CHAPTER 10
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION
12-1001. Existing building code adopted.
12-1002. Modifications.
12-1001. Existing building code adopted. A certain document, one (1)
copy of which is on file in the Office of the Harriman City Clerk, being marked
and designated as the International Existing Building Code,1 2012 edition
including Appendices A, B and Resource A, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City
of Harriman, in the State of Tennessee for regulating and governing the repair,
alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings,
including historic buildings; providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office of the City
of Harriman are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 12-1002 of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #0111-08, Feb. 2011,
and replaced by Ord. #0413-09, April 2013)
12-1002. Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Harriman.
Section [A] 101.2. Scope. At the end of the section insert: "The use of this
code shall not exempt any portion of any existing building from any of the
requirements of the 2012 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code."
Section [B] 1401.2. Delet: "[DATE TO BE INSERTED BY THE
JURISDICTION]" and insert "the effective date of the building codes within the
jurisdiction" in its place. (as added by Ord. #0111-08, Feb. 2011, and replaced
by Ord. #0413-09, April 2013)
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
13-1
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Littering streets, etc.: section 16-107.
Toilet facilities in beer places: section 8-213(12).
Wastewater treatment: title 18, chapter 2.
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. GENERAL.
2. SLUM CLEARANCE.
3. JUNKYARDS.
4. JUNKED OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
5. TREES.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION
13-101. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc.
13-102. Stagnant water.
13-103. Weeds and grass.
13-104. Overgrown and dirty lots.
13-105. Dead animals.
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances.
13-107. Violations and penalty.
13-101. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the
health, comfort, and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to
cause injury or damage to property or business. (1974 code, sec. 8-405)
13-102. Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his property
without treating it so as effectively to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. (1974
code, sec. 8-406)
13-103. Weeds and grass. Every owner or tenant of property shall
periodically cut the grass and other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds
13-2
1Municipal code reference
Section 13-103 applies to cases where the city wishes to prosecute the
offender in city court. Section 13-104 can be used when the city seeks
to clean up the lot at the owner's expense and place a lien against the
property for the cost of the clean-up but not to prosecute the owner in
city court.
This title, chapter 2.
on his property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an
order by the building inspector to cut such vegetation when it has reached a
height of over one (1) foot. (1974 code, sec. 8-407, modified)
13-104. Overgrown and dirty lots.1 (1) Prohibition. Pursuant to the
authority granted to municipalities under Tennessee Code Annotated, section
6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create,
maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees,
vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, or
garbage or any combination of the preceding elements so as to endanger the
health, safety, or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the infestation of rats
and other harmful animals.
(2) Limitation on application. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to any parcel of property upon which an owner-occupied residence is
located.
(3) Designation of public officer or department. The city council shall
designate an appropriate department or person to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(4) Notice to property owner. It shall be the duty of the department
or person designated by the city council to enforce this section to serve notice
upon the owner of record in violation of subsection (1) above, a notice in plain
language to remedy the condition within ten (10) days (or twenty (20) days if the
owner of record is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a
utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or
other materials), excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. The notice
shall be sent by registered or certified United States Mail, addressed to the last
known address of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the owner of
the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the
following additional information:
(a) A brief statement that the owner is in violation of section
13-104 of the Harriman Municipal Code, which has been enacted under
the authority of Tennessee Code Annotated, section 6-54-113, and that
the property of such owner may be cleaned-up at the expense of the owner
and a lien placed against the property to secure the cost of the clean-up;
13-3
(b) The person, office, address, and telephone number of the
department or person giving the notice;
(c) A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which
shall be in conformity with the standards of cost in the city; and
(d) A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the
notice, indicating the desire for a hearing.
(5) Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of
record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten (10) days after
receiving the notice (twenty (20) days if the owner is a carrier engaged in the
transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications,
electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials), the department or
person designated by the city council to enforce the provisions of this section
shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in
conformity with reasonable standards, and the cost thereof shall be assessed
against the owner of the property. Upon the filing of the notice with the office
of the register of deeds in Roane County, the costs shall be a lien on the property
in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county, and
municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and
any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected
by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These cost shall be placed on the tax
rolls of the municipality as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are
collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and
shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes.
(6) Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination
and order of the public officer may appeal the determination and order to the
city council. The appeal shall be filed with the building inspector within ten (10)
days following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to subsection (3) above.
The failure to appeal within this time shall, without exception, constitute a
waiver of the right to a hearing.
(7) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of city
council under subsection (5) above may seek judicial review of the order or act.
The time period established in subsection (4) above shall be stayed during the
pendency of judicial review.
(8) Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision in the municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances or other
applicable law which permits the city to proceed against an owner, tenant or
occupant of property who has created, maintained, or permitted to be
maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, weeds,
underbrush and/or the accumulation of the debris, trash, litter, or garbage or
any combination of the preceding elements, under its charter, any other
provisions of this municipal code of ordinances or any other applicable law.
13-4
13-105. Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any
dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify
the animal control officer and dispose of such animal in such manner as the
animal control officer shall direct.
13-106. Health and sanitation nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to become
or remain in a filthy condition, or permit the use or occupation of same in such
a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection
therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and
offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents, or other vermin on the
premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing
within the vicinity. (1974 code, sec. 8-409)
13-107. Violations and penalty. Violations of this chapter shall be
punished in accordance with the general penalty provision of this municipal code
of ordinances except that violations of section 13-104 shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of that section.
13-5
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13, chapter 21.
CHAPTER 2
SLUM CLEARANCE1
SECTION
13-201. Findings of city council.
13-202. Definitions.
13-203. "Public officer" designated; powers.
13-204. Initiation of proceedings; hearings.
13-205. Orders to owners of unfit structures.
13-206. When public officer may repair, etc.
13-207. When public officer may remove or demolish.
13-208. Lien for expenses; sale of salvage materials; other powers not limited.
13-209. Basis for a finding of unfitness.
13-210. Service of complaints or orders.
13-211. Enjoining enforcement of orders.
13-212. Additional powers of public officer.
13-213. Powers conferred are supplemental.
13-201. Findings of city council. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
section 13-21-101, et seq., the city council finds that there exists in the city
structures which are unfit for human occupation due to dilapidation, defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings
unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety and
morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord.
1009)
13-202. Definitions. (1) "Municipality" shall mean the City of Harriman,
Tennessee, and the areas encompassed within existing city limits or as hereafter
annexed.
(2) "Governing body" shall mean the city council charged with
governing the city.
(3) "Public officer" shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 13-21-101, et seq.
(4) "Public authority" shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or
state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning
structures in the city.
13-6
(5) "Owner" shall mean the holder of title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(6) "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
(7) "Structures" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used for human occupation and intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
(Ord. 1009)
13-203. "Public officer" designated; powers. There is hereby designated
and appointed a "public officer," to be the building inspector of the city, to
exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, which powers shall be
supplemental to all others held by the building inspector. (Ord. 1009)
13-204. Initiation of proceedings; hearings. Whenever a petition is filed
with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the
city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy or use, or
whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any structure
is unfit for human occupation or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not
less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the service of the
complaint; and the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint; and the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before
the public officer. (Ord. 1009)
13-205. Orders to owners of unfit structures. If, after such notice and
hearing as provided for in the preceding section, the public officer determines
that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupancy or use, he
shall state in writing his finding of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: (1) if the
repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a reasonable
cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding fifty percent [50%]
of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, during the time specified in the
order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to render it fit for human
occupancy or use or to vacate and close the structure for human occupancy or
use; or (2) if the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed
13-7
fifty percent [50%] of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. (Ord. 1009)
13-206. When public officer may repair, etc. If the owner fails to comply
with the order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the structure
as specified in the preceding section hereof, the public officer may cause such
structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed; and
the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling
so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building for human occupancy or
use is prohibited and unlawful." (Ord. 1009)
13-207. When public officer may remove or demolish. If the owner fails
to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish the structure,
the public officer may cause such structure to be removed and demolished. (Ord.
1009)
13-208. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other powers not
limited. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be
assessed against the owner of the property, and shall upon the filing of the
notice with the office of the register of deeds of Roane County, be a lien on the
property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county
and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments,
and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly
perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be
collected by the municipal tax collector or county trustee at the same time and
in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the
costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty
and interest as delinquent property taxes. In addition, the municipality may
collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in
any court of competent jurisdiction. The municipality may bring one action for
debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom said
costs have been assessed and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in
one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. If the
structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the
materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the
cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited
in the chancery court of Roane County by the public officer, shall be secured in
such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such
court provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Harriman to define and
13-8
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. 1009)
13-209. Basis for a finding of unfitness. The public officer defined herein
shall have the power and may determine that a structure is unfit for human
occupation and use if he finds that conditions exist in such structure which are
dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants or users
of such structure, the occupants or users of neighboring structures or other
residents of the City of Harriman; such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the
hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light,
or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and
uncleanliness. (Ord. 1009)
13-210. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued by
the public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons, either
personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also
be filed for record in the Register's Office of Roane County, Tennessee, and such
filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided
by law. (Ord. 1009)
13-211. Enjoining enforcement of orders. Any person affected by an order
issued by the public officer served pursuant to this chapter may file a suit in
chancery court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out
the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon the filing of such suit, issue
a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final
disposition of the cause; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days after the
posting and service of the order of the public officer, such person shall file such
suit in the court. (Ord. 1009)
13-212. Additional powers of public officer. The public officer, in order
to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, shall
have the following powers in addition to those otherwise granted herein:
(1) To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
13-9
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate. (Ord. 1009)
13-213. Powers conferred are supplemental. This chapter shall not be
construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of its charter or any other ordinances or
regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers
conferred by the charter and other laws. (Ord. 1009)
13-10
1Municipal code reference
Refuse and trash disposal: title 17.
CHAPTER 3
JUNKYARDS1
SECTION
13-301. Definitions.
13-302. Junkyard screening.
13-303. Screening methods.
13-304. Requirements for effective screening.
13-305. Maintenance of screens.
13-306. Utilization of highway right-of-way.
13-307. Non-conforming junkyards.
13-308. Permits and fees.
13-301. Definitions. (1) "Junk" shall mean old or scrap copper, brass,
rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled,
or wrecked automobiles, trucks, vehicles of all kinds, or parts thereof, iron, steel,
and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
(2) "Junkyard" shall mean an establishment or place of business which
is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or
for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. This definition
includes scrap metal processors, used auto parts yards, yards providing
temporary storage of automobile bodies or parts awaiting disposal as a normal
part of the business operation when the business will continually have like
materials located on the premises, garbage dumps, sanitary landfills, and
recycling centers.
(3) "Recycling center" means an establishment, place of business,
facility or building which is maintained, operated, or used for the storing,
keeping, buying, or selling of newspaper or used food or beverage containers or
plastic containers for the purpose of converting such items into a usable product.
(4) "Person" means any individual, firm, agency, company, association,
partnership, business trust, joint stock company, body politic, or corporation.
(5) "Screening" means the use of plantings, fencing, natural objects,
and other appropriate means which screen any deposit of junk so that the junk
is not visible from the highways and streets of the city.
13-302. Junkyard screening. Every junkyard shall be screened or
otherwise removed from view by its owner or operator in a manner that is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Harriman Zoning Ordinance.
13-11
13-303. Screening methods. The following methods and materials for
screening are given for consideration only:
(1) Landscape planting. The planting of trees, shrubs, etc., of
sufficient size and density to provide a year-round effective screen. Plants of the
evergreen variety are recommended.
(2) Earth grading. The construction of earth mounds which are
graded, shaped, and planted to a natural appearance.
(3) Architectural barriers. The utilization of:
(a) Panel fences made of metal, plastic, fiberglass, or plywood.
(b) Wood fences of vertical or horizontal boards using durable
woods such as western cedar or redwood or others treated with a
preservative.
(c) Walls of masonry, including plain or ornamented concrete
block, brick, stone, or other suitable materials.
(4) Natural objects. Naturally occurring rock outcrops, woods, earth
mounds, etc., may be utilized for screening or used in conjunction with fences,
plantings, or other appropriate objects to form an effective screen.
13-304. Requirements for effective screening. Screening may be
accomplished using natural objects, earth mounds, landscape plantings, fences,
or other appropriate materials used singly or in combination as approved by the
city. The effect of the completed screening must be the concealment of the
junkyard from view on a year-round basis.
(1) Screens which provide a "see-through" effect when viewed from a
moving vehicle shall not be acceptable.
(2) Open entrances through which junk materials are visible from the
main traveled way shall not be permitted except where entrance gates, capable
of concealing the junk materials when closed, have been installed. Entrance
gates must remain closed from sundown to sunrise.
(3) Screening shall be located on private property and not on any part
of the highway right-of-way.
(4) At no time after the screen is established shall junk be stacked or
placed high enough to be visible above the screen nor shall junk be placed
outside of the screened area.
13-305. Maintenance of screens. The owner or operator of the junkyard
shall be responsible for maintaining the screen in good repair to insure the
continuous concealment of the junkyard. Damaged or dilapidated screens,
including dead or diseased plantings, which permit a view of the junk within
shall render the junkyard visible and shall be in violation of this code and shall
be replaced as required by the city.
If not replaced within sixty (60) days the city shall replace said screening
and shall require payment upon demand. Failure to pay in full shall result in
13-12
the fee plus interest to be assessed to the property and shall be combined with
the subsequent taxation of the property by the city.
13-306. Utilization of highway right-of-way. The utilization of highway
right-of-way for operating or maintaining any portion of a junkyard is
prohibited; this shall include temporary use for the storage of junk pending
disposition.
13-307. Non-conforming junkyards. Those junkyards within the city and
lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this code, which do not conform
with the provisions of the code shall be considered as "non-conforming." Such
junkyards shall be subject to the following conditions, any violation of which
shall terminate the non-conforming status:
(1) The junkyard must continue to be lawfully maintained.
(2) There must be existing property rights in the junk or junkyard.
(3) Abandoned junkyards shall no longer be lawful.
(4) The location of the junkyard may not be changed for any reason.
If the location is changed, the junkyard shall be treated as a new establishment
at a new location and shall conform to the laws of the city.
(5) The junkyard may not be extended or enlarged.
13-308. Permits and fees. It shall be unlawful for any junkyard located
within the city to operate without a "Junkyard Control Permit" issued by the
city.
(1) Permits shall be valid for the fiscal year for which issued and shall
be subject to renewal each year. The city's fiscal year begins on July 1 and ends
on June 30 the year next following.
(2) Each application for an original or renewal permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) which is not subject to either
proration or refund.
(3) All applications for an original or renewal permit shall be made on
a form prescribed by the city.
(4) Permits shall be issued only to those junkyards that are in
compliance with these rules.
(5) A permit is valid only while held by the permittee and for the
location for which it is issued.
13-13
CHAPTER 4
JUNKED OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION
13-401. Definitions.
13-402. Public nuisance.
13-403. Impoundment and disposal.
13-404. Order to remove.
13-405. Abatement of public nuisance.
13-406. Exceptions.
13-407. Violation and penalty.
13-401. Definitions. (1) A "junked motor vehicle" is any motor vehicle,
the condition of which is any one or more of the following:
(a) Wrecked,
(b) Dismantled or partially dismantled,
(c) Inoperative,
(d) Discarded, and/or
(e) In an obvious state of disrepair.
(2) "Obvious state of disrepair" means a motor vehicle exhibiting one
(1) or more of the following characteristics: inoperable under its own power,
missing one (1) or more wheels or inflated tires, burned throughout, or with
more than one (1) broken window.
(3) An "abandoned motor vehicle" is such as is defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, section 55-16-103.
(4) A "motor vehicle" for all purposes hereunder is defined as any
vehicle which is self-propelled and any device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is, or may be, transported from one location to another, excepting
devices moved only by human power. (Ord. 1057D)
13-402. Public nuisance. The location or presence of any junked motor
vehicle on a lot, tract, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, or upon any street,
highway, road, or public property of any governmental entity, or upon any
property occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, shall be unlawful,
and shall be deemed, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance.
It shall also be unlawful, and deemed a public nuisance, for any person
or other legal entity to cause, maintain, or permit a motor vehicle or vehicles to
be in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperable, abandoned, and/or discarded condition,
and/or to otherwise cause, maintain, suffer, permit, or allow such motor vehicle
or vehicles to be in an obvious state of disrepair, upon the property of another,
or to cause, suffer, permit, or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained,
or to exist upon real property belonging to such person or other legal entity.
(Ord. 1057D)
13-14
13-403. Impoundment and disposal. Junked and abandoned motor
vehicles, as defined herein and by reference, shall be impounded and disposed
of by the police department in accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code
Annotated, sections 55-16-103 through 55-16-111, and in instances wherein said
state code sections are not applicable; or, in the case of junked motor vehicles,
as an alternative or in addition thereto, in accordance with the following
sections of this chapter. (Ord. 1057D)
13-404. Order to remove. Whenever any junked motor vehicle is found
within the City of Harriman in violation of this chapter, the chief of police, or his
duly authorized representative, shall cause the owner of the vehicle or the
occupant of the premises on which such vehicle is located to be served with an
order to remove such vehicle within ten (10) days after service of such order and
it shall be unlawful for the person, or persons, upon whom said order is served
to fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order within the time prescribed therein.
(Ord. 1057D)
13-405. Abatement of public nuisance. If the premises on which a junked
motor vehicle is located contrary to the provisions of this chapter are unoccupied
and the owner, or agent, or any person having an interest therein, cannot be
found, the chief of police, or his duly authorized representative, shall abate such
public nuisance by entering upon the property and impounding and taking into
custody the motor vehicle in question and disposing of the same in accordance
with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, sections 55-16-103 through
55-16-110, inclusive. Such impoundment and disposition shall not relieve any
person or party from any liability or penalty imposed upon conviction for
violating other provisions of this chapter, but is in addition to any other penalty
provided by law. (Ord. 1057D)
13-406. Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Motor vehicles in an operable condition and specifically adapted or
constructed for racing or operation on drag strips or raceways.
(2) [Repealed.]
(3) Motor vehicles stored with the permission of the property owner by
a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty
assignment.
(4) Motor vehicles in a completely enclosed building or legally operated
junk yard, automobile repair shop or body shop. However, for automobile repair
or body shops, such vehicles shall be kept and maintained to the side or rear of
the building out of which the business operates, and not in front of the same.
(5) Motor vehicles in an appropriate storage place officially designed
and maintained by the City of Harriman. (Ord. 1057D, modified, as amended
by Ord. #99-09, Oct. 1999)
13-15
13-407. Violation and penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, or other
legal entity, violating this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, and each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The City of Harriman shall also have the right and remedy to file
proceedings in any state court which has jurisdiction to abate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1057D)
13-16
CHAPTER 5
TREES
SECTION
13-501. Definitions.
13-502. Creation and establishment of city tree board.
13-503. Duties and responsibilities.
13-504. Street tree species to be planted.
13-505. Distance and spacing requirements.
13-506. Public tree care.
13-507. Tree topping, pruning and corner clearance.
13-508. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
13-509. Removal of stumps.
13-510. Aborists license and bond.
13-511. Review by city council.
13-512. Interference with city tree board.
13-513. Penalties.
13-501. Definitions. (1) Street trees: "Street trees" are herein defined
as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between
property lines on either side of all streets within the city.
(2) Park trees: "Park trees" are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes
and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all
areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
(3) Street: "Street" is herein defined as being any public, city
maintained street, alley, avenue, drive, road, lane, place, way, circle or court.
(as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-502. Creation and establishment of city tree board. There is hereby
created a city tree board for the City of Harriman, Tennessee, which shall
consist of five members, citizens and residents of the city, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council.
The term of office of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall
be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first
board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board
shall be for two years. In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any
member, the successor thereto shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of
the term.
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (as added by
Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-503. Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
board to study, investigate, council and develop and/or update annually, and
13-17
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets
and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city
council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan for the City of Harriman, Tennessee. The board,
when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding,
report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the
scope of its work.
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1,
Nov. 1997)
13-504. Street tree species to be planted. The city tree board shall
compile and adopt a list which will constitute the official street tree species for
the City of Harriman, Tennessee. No species other than those included in this
list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the City Tree
Board. The street tree list shall make provision for three species size classes of
trees which may be planted as street trees, these classes being: small trees,
medium trees and large trees. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-505. Distance and spacing requirements. (1) The spacing of street
trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section
13-504 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer than the following:
small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in
special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
(2) The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in
section 13-504 of this chapter, and no tree may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following: small trees, 2 feet; medium trees, 3 feet; and large
trees, 4 feet.
(3) No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any fireplug.
(4) No street trees other than those species listed as small trees may
be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over
or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission
line or other utility. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-506. Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets and
public grounds as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
13-18
The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree
or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public
improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance
with sections 13-504 through 13-505 of this chapter (as added by Ord. #1067,
§ 1, Nov. 1997)
13-507. Tree topping, pruning and corner clearance. (1) It sha l l be
unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any
street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the
severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within
the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city
tree board.
(2) Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any street lamp or right-of-way within the city so that there shall
be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said
owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed
limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
(3) The city shall have the right to prune, cut, clear, or remove any
tree, shrub, bush or flower on public or private property which overhangs any
street, right-of-way or public easement within the city so as to constitute a
hazard to the safety or property of any person upon such street, right-of-way or
easement, or to prune, cut, clear or remove any tree, shrub, bush or flower on
public or private property when such interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a street light, or interferes with the visibility of any traffic
control, device or sign, or interferes with pedestrian travel, or interferes with the
safe line of sight along any street or roadway, or which is injurious or a potential
threat to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public
improvements. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-508. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. The city shall
have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private
property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and
property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to
other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners
of such trees by certified, return receipt mail. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within sixty days after the date of service of notice.
In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such provisions, the city
13-19
shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on
the owners property tax notice. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-509. Removal of stumps. All stumps of street or park trees shall be
removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1, Nov. 1997)
13-510. Aborists license and bond. It shall be unlawful for any person or
firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing
street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a
license. The license fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided; however,
that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee
doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any
license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $135,000.00 for bodily injury per
person (with maximum liability of $350,000.00 for all persons so injured) and
$100,000.00 property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or
damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. (as
added by Ord. #1067, § 1997)
13-511. Review by city council. The city council shall have the right to
review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may
appeal within ten (10) days from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the
city council who shall hear the matter and make a final decision. (as added by
Ord. #1067, § 1997)
13-512. Interference with city tree board. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its
agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private
grounds as authorized in this chapter. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1997)
13-513. Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall
be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision of this municipal
code of ordinances. (as added by Ord. #1067, § 1997)
14-1
1It is the intention of the city council in adopting chapters 2-10 herein
merely to continue in effect the provisions of the zoning ordinance No. 662,
adopted on May 1, 1962, as amended to date. It expressly is not the intention
of the city council to hereby enact any new zoning regulations.
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL1
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-101. Creation and membership.
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc.
14-103. Additional powers.
14-101. Creation and membership. Pursuant to the provisions of section
13-4-101 of the Tennessee Code Annotated there is hereby created a municipal
planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the Planning Commission. The
planning commission shall consist of ten (10) members; two (2) of these shall be
the mayor and another member of the city council selected by the city council;
the other eight (8) members shall be appointed by the mayor. All members of
the Planning Commission shall serve as such without compensation. Except for
the initial appointments, the terms of the eight (8) members appointed by the
mayor shall be for three (3) years each. Of the five (5) members first appointed
shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3) years each. The
terms of the mayor and the member selected by the city council shall run
concurrently their terms of office. Any vacancy in an appointive membership
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor. (1974 code, sec. 11-101, as
amended by ord. 858, sec. 1)
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc. The planning commission
shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions, and duties in
accordance with title 13 of the Tennessee Code Annotated. (1974 code, sec.
11-102)
14-2
14-103. Additional powers. Having been designated as a regional
planning commission, the municipal planning commission shall have the
additional powers granted by, and shall otherwise be governed by the provisions
of the state law relating to regional planning commissions. (1974 code, sec.
11-103)
14-3
1Ordinance No. 1025, and any amendments thereto, are published as
separate documents and are of record in the office of the city clerk.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-202. Violations and penalty.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use within
the City of Harriman shall be governed by Ordinance Number 1025, titled
"Zoning Ordinance, Harriman, Tennessee," and any amendments thereto.1
14-202. Violations and penalty. Violations of the zoning ordinance shall
subject the offender to a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500) for each
offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
ZONING ORDINANCE
HARRIMAN, TENNESSEE
HARRIMAN ZONING ORDINANCE
HARRIMAN, TENNESSEE
Title 11of the Harriman Municipal Code
PLANNING AND ZONING
Prepared For The
Harriman Regional/Municipal Planning Commission
Allan Williams, Chairman
Herbert Griffen, Vice-Chairman
Harold Wester, Mayor
Larry Garrett
Orvis McKinney, Secretary
Garvin Moms, City Council
Tommy Goldston
Prepared By The
LOCAL PLANNING ASSISTANCE OFFICE
The Department of Economic and Community Development
Knoxville, Tennessee
Ruth Viergutz Hawk
assisted by Jay Vincent
December 1993
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 2 .........................................................................................................................................1
HARRIMAN MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
11-201 - Short Title ................................................................................................................................... 1
11-202 - Creation and Membership. ......................................................................................................... 1
11-203 – Powers. ...................................................................................................................................... 1
11-204 - Purpose of Zoning Ordinance ..................................................................................................... 1
11-205 - Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 2
CHAPTER 3 .........................................................................................................................................8
GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION
11-301 - Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. ............................................................... 8
11-302 - Off-Street Automobile Parking. .................................................................................................. 9
11-303 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space .................................................................................. 10
11-304 - Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements ............................................................................ 11
11-305 - Ingress and Egress..................................................................................................................... 12
11-306 - Access Control .......................................................................................................................... 12
11-307 - Vision Clearance ....................................................................................................................... 13
11-308 - Planned Unit Development {PUD) Regulations ........................................................................ 13
11-309 - Signs .......................................................................................................................................... 16
11-310 - Site Plan Regulations ................................................................................................................ 19
11-311 - Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory Assembled Structures ...................................... 20
11-312 - Customary Home Occupations ................................................................................................. 21
11-313 - Gasoline Service Stations .......................................................................................................... 22
11-314 - Swimming Pools ........................................................................................................................ 23
11-315 - Cemeteries ................................................................................................................................ 23
CHAPTER4 ........................................................................................................................................ 24
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
11-401 - Use ............................................................................................................................................ 24
11-402 - Street Frontage ......................................................................................................................... 24
11-403 - Corner Lots................................................................................................................................ 24
11-404 - One Principal Building on a Lot ................................................................................................. 24
11-405 - Reduction of Lot Size ................................................................................................................ 24
11-406 - Yard and Other Spaces .............................................................................................................. 24
11-407 - Conformity to Subdivision Regulations .................................................................................... 24
11-408 - Accessory Building and Use Regulations .................................................................................. 24
11-409 - Height and Density ................................................................................................................... 25
CHAPTER 5 ....................................................................................................................................... 26
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
11-501 - Classification of Districts ........................................................................................................... 26
11-502 - Zoning District Boundaries........................................................................................................ 26
CHAPTER 6 ....................................................................................................................................... 27
PROVISIONS GOVERNING USE DISTRICTS
11-601 - R-H Residential Historic ............................................................................................................ 27
11-602 - R-1 Low Density Residential ..................................................................................................... 27
11-603 - R-2 Medium Density Residential .............................................................................................. 28
11-604 - C-1 Central Business District ..................................................................................................... 30
11-605 - C-2 General Commercial District .............................................................................................. 31
11-607. - I-1Light Industrial District ........................................................................................................ 32
11-608 - I-2 Heavy Industrial District ...................................................................................................... 33
11-609 – O-S Open Space/Park/Agriculture District ............................................................................... 34
11-610 - F-1 Flood Hazard District .......................................................................................................... 35
11-611 - H-1 Historic District ................................................................................................................... 35
CHAPTER 7 ....................................................................................................................................... 36
AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
11-701 - Area, Yard and Height Requirements ....................................................................................... 36
CHAPTER 8 ....................................................................................................................................... 37
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
11-801 - Lot of Record............................................................................................................................. 37
11-802 - Adjoining and Substandard Lots of Records ............................................................................. 37
11-803- Front Yards................................................................................................................................. 37
11-804 - Exceptions on Height Limits ...................................................................................................... 37
CHAPTER 9 ....................................................................................................................................... 38
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-901 - Building Permit Required .......................................................................................................... 38
11-902 - Enforcing Officer ....................................................................................................................... 38
11-903 - Application For/Issuance of Building Permits ........................................................................... 38
11-904 - Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals ................................................................. 38
11-905 - Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy ...................................................... 39
11-906 - Violations .................................................................................................................................. 39
11-907 – Penalties ................................................................................................................................... 39
11-908 - Remedies .................................................................................................................................. 39
CHAPTER 10 ..................................................................................................................................... 40
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
11-1001. -Creation and Appointment ..................................................................................................... 40
11-1002 - Procedure ............................................................................................................................... 40
11-1003 - Appeals ................................................................................................................................... 40
11-1004 – Powers ................................................................................................................................... 40
11-1005 - Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals ................................................................................... 41
CHAPTER 11 ..................................................................................................................................... 42
HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION
11-1101 - Creation and Appointment ..................................................................................................... 42
11-1102 - Procedure ............................................................................................................................... 42
11-1103 - Powers and Duties .................................................................................................................. 42
11-1104 - Jurisdiction .............................................................................................................................. 42
11-1105 - Review of Decisions ................................................................................................................ 43
CHAPTER 12 ..................................................................................................................................... 44
AMENDMENTS
11-1201 - Procedure ............................................................................................................................... 44
CHAPTER 13 ..................................................................................................................................... 45
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
11-1301 - Conflict with Other Ordinances .............................................................................................. 45
11-1302 - Validity .................................................................................................................................... 45
11-1303 - Effective Date ......................................................................................................................... 45
APPENDICES .................................................................................................................................... 46
APPENDIX B ............................................................................................................................................ 47
APPENDIX C ............................................................................................................................................ 48
APPENDIX D ................................................................................................................................. 49
HARRIMAN PLANNING COMMISSION RESOLUTION
ORDINANCE NUMBER
WHEREAS, the Harriman Municipal Zoning Code was initially adopted on May 1, 1962 and subsequently
amended on April 2, 197 and
WHEREAS, several amendments recommended and subsequently adopted by the Harriman Municipal
Mayor and Board of Aldermen have not been properly codified, and
WHEREAS, the planning commission hereby presents for adoption by this council appropriate revisions
and corrections the Harriman Municipal Zoning Code,
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE HARRIMAN CITY COUNCIL THAT
SECTION 1. The adoption of this ordinance in no way diminishes the zoning authority of the Board
of Mayor and Alderman, nor increases the zoning authority and jurisdiction of the Harriman Municipal-
Regional Planning Commission. As prescribed in TCA Title 13, zoning authority shall rest with the
governing body.
SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted the Harriman zoning Ordinance, dated December 1993 and the
accompanying map prepared by the planning commission.
SECTION 3. This ordinance shall take effect after t required public hearing and upon second reading.
CITY COUNCIL CERTIFICATION
Passed 1st Reading
Passed 2nd Reading
1
CHAPTER 2
HARRIMAN MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
11·201 Short Title
11-202. Creation and Membership
11-203 Powers
11-204 Purpose of Zoning Ordinance
11-205 Definitions
11-201 - Short Title This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Harriman,
Tennessee," the ma herein referred to, and which is identified by the title "Zone Map of the City of
Harriman, Tennessee," and all explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this
ordinance.
11-202 - Creation and Membership. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 13-4-101 of the Tennessee Code
Annotated there is herein created a municipal planning commission, hereinafter referred as the planning
commission. The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members; two (2) of these shall be the
m and another member of the governing body selected by the governing body; the other five (5) members
shall be appointed the mayor. All members of the planning commission shall serve such without
compensation. Except for the initial appointment the terms of the five (5) members appointed by the
mayor shall be for three (3) years each and shall be so arranged that the term of at least one (1) member
will expire each year. The t of the mayor and the member selected by the governing body she run
concurrently with their terms of office. Any vacancy in appointive membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term the mayor.
11-203 – Powers. The planning commission shall be organized shall carry out its powers, functions, and
duties in accordance with title 13 of the Tennessee Code Annotated. Having also been designated as a
regional planning commission, the municipal planning commission shall have the additional powers
granted and shall otherwise be governed by the provisions of the stat law relating to regional planning
commissions.
11-204 - Purpose of Zoning Ordinance. The zoning regulations an districts as herein set forth have been
made in accordance with comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. They have been designed
to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fires floods, panic, and other dangers, to provide
adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things, as to the
character of each district, and its peculiar uses and with a view of conserving value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use land throughout the city.
2
11-205 - Definitions. Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this ordinance,
have the mea herein indicated. Words used in the present tense include t future. The singular number
includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. The
words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words
intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.
1. Access. The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and
vehicle enter and leave property.
2. Advertising. Includes any writing, printing, graphics painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or
other device designed, used or intended for advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees,
or other natural structures or on buildings, structures, milestones, sign boards, billboards, wall
board, roof board, frames, supports, fences or other man-made structure.
3. Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public us which affords a means of vehicular access to the
back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
4. Arterial Street. A street which the primary function is move traffic between major activity centers
and which collects and distributes traffic to and from other streets.
5. Bed and Breakfast/Tourist Homes. An owner - occupied single family dwelling with not more than
four guest rooms where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
6. Billboard. An off-premises advertising sign having more than thirty-two (32) square feet of sign
area.
7. Boarding or Rooming House. A building containing a sing dwelling unit and not more than five
rooms (units) lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
8. Buffer Strip. A strip of land not less than ten (10) feet in width and on which plant material is
planted that such growth characteristics as will provide an obscuring screen not less than six (6) feet
in height within (2)years of planting.
9. Buildable Area of a Lot. That portion of a lot bounded by required rear yard, side yards, and front
yard building setback lines (See Appendix A, Illustration A).
10. Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter,
housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel.
a. Building or Use, Accessory. A building or use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or use and located on the same lot with such building or use.
b. Building, Modular. A unit of construction which is totally or in part constructed off-site and
transported for on-site erection, placement, assembly, or similar terms.
c. Building, Prefabricated. A building constructed on-sit from components which have been
prefabricated, panelized, or constructed in sections off-site.
3
d. Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted principal use of the lot on which said
building located.
11. Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade at any building line to the
highest point of the roof; provided that where land is subject to required minimum floor elevations,
the building height shall be measured from such elevation.
12. Building Setback Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line
and the outermost protrusion of a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall
be placed except as otherwise provided (See Appendix A, Illustration B).
13. Carport. A structure used for the storage of vehicle and having no enclosure other than its roof and
such necessary support as will present the minimum obstruction to light, air, and view.
14. Certificate of Appropriateness. Certification which is issue either the building official or the
Harriman Historic Zoning Commission and which is required prior to any exterior changes being
undertaken to any structure or any alterations being made in parking, yards, or other open spaces
within the historic districts.
15. Club. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by association or persons for a social or
recreational purpose, but not operated primarily for profit or to render a service which is
customarily carried on as business.
16. Condominium. A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, and the
structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided
basis.
17. Day Care Center. An establishment which receives for and supervision six (6) or more children or
adults for less than 24 hours per day unattended by parent or legal guardian, and shall include day
nurseries, child or senior adult day care services, nursery and play schools, and non-public
kindergartens.
18. Driveway. A single curb cut allowing entrance and/or exit to and/or from a parcel. A single
driveway may be split by a median provided the total width for the entrance, exit and median does
not exceed forty (40) feet.
19. Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms designed as a unit for occupancy as living quarters for
sleeping and cooking purposes.
a. Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed, constructed or reconstructed, and used for more
than two dwelling units; with each dwelling unit having a common structural wall with any other
dwelling the same floor.
b. Dwelling, Single-Family. A building designed, constructed, and used for one (1) dwelling unit.
c. Dwelling, Single Family with Accessory Apartment. A residential building having the external
appearance of a single-family residence, but in which there is located a second and/or third
dwelling unit, subordinate in size to the primary dwelling unit. For the purposes of this
4
ordinance, a single family dwelling with one or two accessory apartments shall not be
considered a duplex or a multi-family dwelling.
d. Dwelling, Two Family or Duplex. A building designed, constructed, or reconstructed and used
for two dwelling units that are connected by a common structural wall.
20. Home Occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident as an accessory use in the
resident's dwelling unit and/or other structure located on the same lot as the dwelling unit. Not
more than one person not a resident of the premises shall be employed by the activity.
21. Incinerator. An engineered apparatus used to burn was substances and in which all the combustion
factors, temperature, retention time, turbulence and-combust air, can be controlled.
22. Junk Yard or Salvage Yard. A lot, land or structure, or pa thereof, used for collecting, storage and/or
sale of waste-paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling,
storage and salvaging of machinery or two (2)or more vehicles n in running condition or for the sale
of parts thereof.
23. Local Collector. A street which collects traffic from l streets and whose adjacent land use is primarily
residential in nature.
24. Local Street. A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discourage
through traffic.
25. Lot. A parcel of land which fronts on and has access a public street and which is occupied or
intended to be occupied by a building or building with customary accessories and open spaces.
26. Lot Line. The boundary dividing a given lot from a street, alley, or adjacent lots.
27. Lot of Record. A lot existing prior to this ordinance, boundaries of which are filed as legal record.
28. Major Collector. A street which collects traffic from l streets and connects with arterials.
29. Medical Facilities.
a. Convalescent, Rest or Nursing Home. A health facility where persons are housed and furnished
with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
b. Dental Clinic or Medical Clinic. A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted h
out-patients, provided however that patients are kept overnight except under emergency
conditions
c. Hospital. An institution providing health service primarily for human in-patient medical care for
sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities,
emergency medical services, and staff offices wh are an integral part of the facility.
d. Public Health Center. A facility utilized by a health unit for the provision of public health services
5
30. Mobile Home. A detached residential dwelling unit built on a single chassis and designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other
trailers, and arriving the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor an incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location jacks or
other temporary or permanent foundations connections to utilities, and the like, and which m all
standards of the Southern Standard Building Code.
31. Mobile Home Park. A parcel or tract of land under sin ownership which has been planned and
improved for t placement of mobile homes for dwelling purposes und the planned unit development
regulations.
32. Non-Conforming Use. Any structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the
use regulations of the district in which it is situated
33. Noxious Matter. Material in gaseous, liquid or solid which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms, chemical reactions or detrimental effects upon the social, economic or psychological
well-being of individuals.
34. Planned Unit Development. An integrated design for development of residential, commercial, or
industrial uses or combination of uses which is professionally designed to allow flexibility and
initiative in sit building design and location, in accordance with a plan approved by the planning
commission.
35. Principal Use. The specific primary purpose for which or a building is used.
36. Professional Office. The office of a physician, dentist, attorney, architect, engineer, urban planner,
accountant, or related professions.
37. Recreation Facility. A place designed and equipped for t conduct of sports, leisure time activities,
and other customary and usual recreation activities.
38. Retail Trade and Services. Establishments engaged in selling goods and/or offering services to the
general public for personal, small business or household use or consumption.
39. Shopping Center. For the purpose of this ordinance, a shopping center shall be considered as an
enterprise located on a single parcel of property which is internally separated or segregated into
individual or separate, distinct businesses or functions. Individual ownership is not a factor. These
center shall be considered as planned unit developments.
40. Sign. Any object, device, structure, or natural feature or part thereof, which is used to attract the
attention of persons for the purpose of communicating a message by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. Included within
the definition of sign are following types of signs.
a. Business Sign. A sign which displays the name of and directs attention to a business,
establishment, commodity, service or activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the
premises or off the premises where the sign is located.
6
b. Directory Sign. A sign which displays the name of a directs attention to a mall, office complex,
shopping center or other multi-tenant commercial building and which may display thereon the
name the individual businesses located in the mall, complex, center or building.
c. Freestanding Sign. A sign that is attached to, erect on, or supported by some structure (such as
a pole, mast, frame or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a
building or other structure having a principal function other than the support of a sign.
d. Ground Sign. A type of freestanding sign supported by poles, uprights or braces in or upon the
ground.
e. Nonconforming Sign. Any sign which does not conform this ordinance.
f. Off-Premise Sign. A sign relating in its subject matter to premises, products, accommodations,
services or activities other than those on which it is located.
g. On-Premise Sign. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to
products, accommodations, services or activities the premises.
h. Portable Sign. Any sign which is, or is intended be, affixed or mounted to a frame with or
without wheels for the expressed purpose of mobility.
i. Projection Sign. A type of sign erected approximately perpendicular to a building wall and which
extends the wall or building line. A projection sign shall be considered a wall sign and shall
include a sign suspended from the ceiling of a marquee, canopy or other such covered structure.
j. Roof Sign. Any sign which extends above the roof line.
k. Temporary Sign. A sign that is used in connection with a circumstance, situation or event that is
designed, intended or expected to take place or be completed within a reasonably short or
definite period after the erection of such sign; or is intended to remain on the location where it
is erected or placed for a period of not more than 15 days. If a sign display area is permanent
but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as
temporary.
l. Wall Sign. Any sign attached to the face or on the outside wall of any building and which does
not extend above the roof line.
41. Sign Area. The net geometric surface area of a sign including the outer extremities of all letters and
characters, but excluding the horizontal framing and post used to install the sign.
42. Site Plan. A drawing of sufficient scale and size to graphically show proposed improvements
including all physical features on the site, all dimensional requirements of the zoning and building
codes, all streets, drainage structures, utilities and other features in the immediate vicinity that may
have a bearing on the proposed development.
43. Street, Public. Any vehicular way, except alleys, which is owned and maintained by the city, state, or
federal governments.
7
44. Structure. Any combination of materials, including buildings, constructed or erected, the use of
which requires location on the ground, excluding signs and fences.
45. Townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its
own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.
46. Travel Trailer. A vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its being used as conveyance upon the
public streets or highways duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) more persons, and designed, for shortterm
occupancy for frequent and/or extensive travel, and for recreational and vacation use,
including camper trucks and self-propelled campers, etc.
47. Travel Trailer Park. Any plot of land approved as a planned unit development upon which two or
more travel trailers are located and used as temporary living or sleeping quarters for periods of
thirty days, or less.
48. Wholesale Trade. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business uses or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to,
such individuals or companies.
49. Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed
by buildings from the ground to the sky except as other provided in this ordinance, provided that
accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard (See Appendix A, Illustration A).
a. Front Yard. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the front lot line and
nearest part of the principal building, including porches.
b. Rear Yard. The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the rear lot line and
the nearest part of the principal building, including porches.
c. Side Yard. The required space unoccupied except herein provided, measured between the side
lot and the nearest point of the principal building including porches, and between the front yard
and the rear yard.
8
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION
SECTION
11-301 Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
11-302 Off-Street Automobile Parking
11-303 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space
11-304 Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements
11-305 Ingress and Egress
11-306 Access Control
11-307 Vision Clearance
11-308 Planned Unit Development Regulations
11-309 Signs
11-310 Site Plan Regulations
11-311 Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory-Assembled Structures
11-312 Customary Home Occupations
11-313 Gasoline Service Stations
11-314 Swimming Pools
11-315 Cemeteries
11-301 - Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Lawful nonconforming uses, buildings,
and structures existing at the time of the passage of this zoning ordinance, or any amendment thereto,
shall be allowed to remain subject to the following provisions:
1. No building or land containing a nonconforming uses hereafter be extended unless such extensions
shall conform with the provisions of this ordinance for the district in which it is located; provided,
however, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building which were
manifestly arranged o designed for such use prior to the time of enactment this ordinance.
2. When the following conditions have existed for a per of six (6) months, it shall be evidence of an
intent to abandon a nonconforming use; and no use of land or structures shall be undertaken
thereafter unless it be in conformity with the provisions of the district within which such property is
located.
a. Nonresidential Uses. No employees, customers, or cli are present on site who are there to
actively conduct business, give or receive professional services, participate in activities, or use
equipment that is considered to be essential to character and operation of the nonconforming
use and, no serious attempts are being made to market the property for sale for its former use.
b. Residential Uses. No residents, whether they be owners or tenants, are present, and no serious
attempts are being made to market the property for sale for its former use.
3. Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire or other causes, may be reconstructed
and used before unless the building official determines that building is damaged to the extent of
more than fifty (50) percent of its appraised value for tax purpose which case any repair or
reconstruction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
9
4. Nonconforming mobile homes located on single lots m replaced with newer and/or more
structurally sound mobile homes for protection of the health, welfare, safety of the mobile home
resident and surrounding property owners, provided they are placed on a permanent and enclosed
foundation and the towing tongue is removed.
11-302 - Off-Street Automobile Parking.
1. With the exception of uses within the B-1, Central Business District, the number of parking spaces
provided shall meet the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth below. For uses
not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Board
of Zoning Appeals. Each space shall conform to off-street parking lot design requirements as
established in Section 11-304.
a. Automobile repair shop and/or truck repair: One (1) space f each employee plus one (1) space
for each two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of floor space used for repair work.
b. Bed & Breakfast/Tourist Homes: One (1) space for each to be rented in addition to the two (2)
spaces for the home.
c. Boarding houses and rooming houses: Not less than one (1) space for each room (unit) to be
rented.
d. Bowling Alley: Not less than five (5) spaces for each bowling lane.
e. Churches: One (1) space for each four (4) seats.
f. Clubs and lodges: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor space.
g. Dwelling, single-family: Not less than two (2) spaces dwelling unit.
h. Dwelling, efficiency apartment: Not less than one (1) space per dwelling unit.
i. Dwelling, multiple-family: Not less than two (2) space per dwelling unit.
j. Funeral parlors: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the chapel.
k. Gasoline service stations and similar establishments: Four (4) spaces for each bay or similar
facility plus one space for each employee.
l. Hospitals and convalescent/nursing homes: One (1) space for each four (4) patient beds, plus
one (1) space for each two (2) employees including staff doctors and nurses.
m. Hotels, motels, and other tourist accommodations: Not less than one (1) space for each room to
be rented plus on (1) additional space per three (3) employees.
n. Manufacturing or other industrial use: Not less than two (2) spaces for each three (3) persons
employed or intended to be employed, with a minimum of five spaces for any establishment.
10
o. Mini-Warehouse/Self Storage: One (1) space per storage room rented out.
p. Mobile home parks: Two (2) spaces for each mobile home.
q. Movie Cinema: Not less than one (1) space for each four (4)seats.
r. Offices:
i. Medical - one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor space
ii. Other professional - one (1) space for e four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
iii. General - one (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space
s. Places of public assembly: One space for each five (5) seats in the principal assembly room or
area.
t. Recreation Center: Four (4) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
u. Restaurants: One (1) space per two (2) customers computed on a maximum seating capacity.
Restaurants that also serve take-out orders shall provide six (6) additional spaces. Drive-thru
restaurants with no indoor seating, shall provide fourteen (14) spaces per 1,000 gross square
feet of restaurant area.
v. Retail business, shopping centers and similar uses: Four (4) spaces for each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
w. Schools: One (1) space for each faculty member a five (5) additional spaces for visitor parking,
plus one space for each four (4) pupils except in elementary and junior high schools.
x. Swimming pool or club: Twenty (20) spaces for each acre covered by pool, buildings and
sunbathing areas
y. Wholesale business: One (1) space for each three (3) employees based on maximum
employment.
2. Combination of required parking space. The required parking space for any number of separate uses
may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required space assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned
to another use; except that, the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls
whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed
at night or on Sunday.
11-303 - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. With the exception of uses within the C-1, Central
Business District, every building or structure hereafter constructed and used for industry, wholesale,
business or trade shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or
11
alley. Each space shall measure at a minimum of 12 x 30 feet and shall not be considered as part of the
space requirements for off-street automobile storage.
11-304 - Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements. To protect and enhance community appearance
and to provide orderly, safe, a systematic circulation within parking areas, the following regulations shall
apply:
1. All areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is
required to back into a public street or alley to obtain egress.
2. All parking lots shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all property lines to accommodate
for vehicles hanging over the curbs.
3. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet with minimum parking
aisle and width dimensions shown as follows:
Parking Angle Stall Length Stall Width Aisle Width
30 deg.
45 deg.
60 deg.
70 deg.
90 deg.
19.0
19.0
19.0
19.0
19.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
12.0
13.0
18.0
24.0
24.0
4. Handicapped parking shall be provided as regulated in the Southern Standard Building Code. Each
establish shall have a minimum of one (1) handicapped parking space and be a minimum of twelve
(12) feet and six (6) inches by nineteen (19) feet.
5. All parking aisles shall be arranged so as to channel traffic and minimize vehicular/pedestrian
conflicts.
6. Entrances and exits for all off-street parking lots shall comply with the requirements of Section 11-
306 of this ordinance.
7. The parking lot shall be adequately drained to eliminate surface water without contributing to
drainage problems on adjoining property or rights-of-way.
8. With the exception of single-family dwellings, all required off-street parking shall be paved with a
minimum of asphaltic concrete and have an adequate base to prevent premature break-up.
9. All fixed objects within parking lots (utility pole signs, fire hydrants, etc.) shall be located within
islands to which access by vehicles is physically limited. These islands shall be landscaped with
grass, shrubs, trees or other appropriate plant material which shall not obstruct visibility from
vehicles.
10. Traffic safety signs, signals, and markings shall be in conformance with the Tennessee Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where needed, size reduction of devices shall be approved,
however, shape and color shall meet requirements of the manual.
12
11. Landscaping shall be required between the public street and the parking areas.
12. Maintenance of all islands, parking spaces and ways, landscaping and traffic control devices within
the parking facility is the responsibility of the property owner. All elements shown on the site plan
are to be maintained on a regular schedule.
11-305 - Ingress and Egress. A plan for adequate and safe ingress and egress for all land uses shall be
required.
11-306 - Access Control. It is the purpose of this section establish reasonable and impartial regulations
for the location of driveway entrances, and to promote the safety of users of streets and lands of
Harriman through the control of design, location, and construction of driveway entrances.
1. General Provisions. In no case shall any curbs on city streets or rights-of-way be cut or altered
without f obtaining a driveway permit from the building official. Minimum paving requirements for
such driveways shall be determined by the building official at the time of application. In all cases,
the driveway extension over the right-of-way shall be paved to protect public streets.
2. Driveway Alignment. Driveways shall be positioned at right angles to the roadway. When the
driveway is to be used by vehicles in only one direction of highway travel (right turns only) on a
divided highway, the driveway angle may be between 45 degrees and 60 degrees.
3. Driveway Entrance/Exit Regulations. All driveway entrances/exits shall be located subject to the
following controls:
a. On all streets classified as Arterial on the official Major Road Plan, no driveway entrances shall
be constructed within eighty (80) feet of an intersecting street right-of-way line.
b. On all streets classified as Major Collector Streets and Local Collector Streets on the official
Major Road Plan, no driveway entrances shall be constructed within sixty (60) feet of an
intersecting street right-of-way line.
c. On all streets classified as Local Streets on the official Major Road Plan, no driveway entrances
shall be constructed within twenty-five (25) feet an intersecting street right-of-way line.
d. On all streets classified as Arterial on the official Major Road Plan, no driveway entrances shall
be constructed within forty (40) feet of side property line.
e. On all streets classified as Major Collector Street and Local Collector Streets on the official Major
Road Plan, no driveway entrances shall be constructed within twenty (20) feet of the side
property line.
f. If neighboring property owners wish to share a driveway, the shared side property line setback
requirements shall be waived. If a driveway is shared, this one driveway will count as two, or
one driveway per lot and all other access control requirements shall be met.
g. If a lot of record cannot meet the above access control requirements, a driveway cut will not be
denied; but the spirit and intent of this section shall be adhered to as closely as possible.
13
4. Number of Driveways Allowed. In order to promote the safety of the motorist and to minimize
traffic congestion a property damage by reducing the points of conflict, the following regulations
shall apply:
a. Lots with less than two hundred (200) feet frontage shall have a maximum of one (1) driveway
entrance.
b. Lots with two hundred (200) feet to eight hundred (800) feet of frontage shall have a maximum
of (2) driveway entrances.
c. Lots with over eight hundred (800) feet of frontage have one (1) additional driveway entrance
for each additional four hundred (400) feet of road frontage.
5. Driveway Widths. The width of all curb cuts shall be within the following limits.
a. Residential uses shall be limited to driveway widths between ten (10) and twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Uses serving twenty-five (25) or more large trucks per week shall have driveway widths between
twenty (20) and forty (40) feet.
c. All other uses shall be limited to driveway widths between fifteen (15) and thirty (30) feet.
Additional width for turn lanes may be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
11-307 - Vision Clearance. In all districts there shall be no plants or structures placed in or on any yard
partition of a lot that would obstruct the vision of auto or pedestrian traffic using the intersecting public
streets.
11-308 - Planned Unit Development {PUD) Regulations. The purpose the Planned Unit Development
regulations is to provide for diversification in the relationship of uses and structures to their sites and
also provide flexibility which will create a desirable living environment. A PUD shall mean an integrate
professionally prepared design for development of residential commercial, or industrial uses, or as
permitted, combination such uses, to allow application of new techniques and technology of site and
building design and location; this for the purpose of achieving economies in land usage, maintenance,
and street a utility systems while providing for attractive open areas, safe circulation, and general wellbeing
of the inhabitants.
1. Applicability of PUD Regulations. A PUD may be developed in any district provided that the uses
permitted and density requirements of the district allow the development and the PUD plan
elements are approved by the planning commission. Residential, commercial, public, semipublic,
or industrial uses, or combinations of these uses where district or special regulations permit, may be
developed under the PUD concept. Cluster type subdivisions and condominiums, townhouses,
multidwelling
units, rental developments, multi-use parks, travel trailer parks and multi-use or
ownership developments shall be considered as PUD's for the purpose of this ordinance.
2. Relationships of PUD Regulations to District and Site Plan Regulations. Unless specifically altered by
any provision of this section, the use and development regulations of Sections 11-601 through 11-
14
611, Sections 11-310 or any other applicable provision of this ordinance shall apply to the
development of a PUD.
3. General Requirements. All PUD developments shall comply with the following requirements.
a. Minimum Site. No PUD shall have an area less than that required by the planning commission as
adequate for the proposed project; however, the minimum site shall not be less than the
minimum lot size required in the district in which the proposed project is be located.
b. Structures and Open Space. The planning commission shall require structures and open space to
be arranged on the site in such a way that adjacent uses will not be adversely affected.
i. Where feasible, the highest height and intensity of uses shall be toward the interior of the
projects.
ii. No freestanding building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any other
freestanding building.
iii. Minimum setback requirements for lots as established in Chapters 6 and 7 may be altered
upon approval of the planning commission; except that, in no case shall the setbacks from
any exterior project site side or rear property be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
iv. Landscaping and buffering requirements, as contained in Sections 11-304, 11-310 and
Chapter 6, shall be applied to PUD developments; except that, the planning commission may
require additional landscape materials or structures where it is deemed to be in the public
interest to do so.
4. Open Space Requirements. Preservation, maintenance, and ownership of open space areas and
facilities shall be accomplished by one or more of the following methods and shall be established in
an appropriate legal manner.
a. Dedication to and acceptance by the public as part of a governmentally administered park and
open space system.
b. A property owners association.
c. The developer or management authority of the PUD.
5. Parking and Access Control Requirements. The provisions of this ordinance relating to vehicular
access and parking (Sections 11-302 through 307) shall be adhered to; except that, the planning
commission may alter these requirements in instances in which a superior design alternative is
presented which will not be detrimental to the public interest or in conflict with the intent of this
ordinance.
6. Density Requirements for Residential PUD. The density (units per gross acre) of dwelling units in a
PUD shall be no greater than that allowed in the zoning district within which a PUD is located.
15
7. Signs. The number, size, type and placement of signs within PUD's shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of Section 11-309 of this ordinance.
8. Street and Utility Construction Standards. Public and common ways for pedestrian and vehicular
circulation shall be developed in relationship to other existing or planned streets and ways and with
the Harriman Major Road Plan. Whether or not the subdivision of property is proposed within a
PUD, all project street and way improvement shall comply with the construction standards set out in
the subdivision regulations. Fire hydrants shall be installed so that all portions of buildings can be
reached with a 250 foot hose. Due to the uniqueness each PUD, the owner/developer of a PUD
may request slight adjustments from widths of streets, ways, utility easements, curbing and similar
standards set out in the subdivision regulations; and, upon a determination of good cause being
shown for such adjustments, the planning commission may permit changes or alterations in
standards, provided the spirit and intent of this section can be preserved.
9. Plan Preparation and Review Process
a. PUDs Requiring the Subdivision of Property. In PUDs in which property is divided for the purpose
of sale or rental, such as a subdivision or mobile home park, the following requirements for PUD
plan preparation shall apply:
i. Preliminary PUD Plan. Prior to submitting a preliminary subdivision plat for review, a
preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted to the planning commission which shall include the
following: the location of buildings and uses, circulation patterns, open space and recreation
areas, parking areas, ingress/egress points, sketch elevations and drainage, the boundary
dimensions, overall density of development, public uses, landscaping concepts, zoning
classification, and other information deemed pertinent by the planning commission and
staff. The approved preliminary PUD·plan shall serve as the plan upon which the final PUD
plan and preliminary subdivision plat are based. Approval of a preliminary PUD plan shall
lapse twelve (12) months from the date it was approved.
ii. Final PUD Plan/Preliminary Subdivision Plat. In addition to meeting the applicable
provisions of the subdivision regulations regarding preparation of a preliminary plat, the
final PUD plan shall include detailed architectural/engineering plans for: utilities, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation systems, location of all structures, topographic intervals at no less
than five (5) feet, minimum elevations, and grading, the physical relationship of uses,
parking areas, open space and recreation areas, landscaped areas, buffer or screening
materials and locations, areas proposed for dedication as parks, ways, or places, final drafts
or legal documents, and other information deemed pertinent by the planning commission
and staff. Upon approval of the final PUD plan and the preliminary subdivision plat by the
planning commission, development may commence with the installation of public
improvements. No lots however, shall be sold until final subdivision plat approval has been
granted by the planning commission with all required improvements having either been
installed or appropriate security posted for the installation of such improvements.
b. PUDs Not Requiring the Subdivision of Property. In PUDs in which no individual parcel of
property is owned or rented, such as condominium, apartment, commercial or industrial PUDs,
and similar uses, the following requirements for PUD plan preparation apply:
16
i. Preliminary PUD Plan. A concept plan containing the following information shall be
submitted to the planning commission for review: the location of buildings and uses,
circulation patterns, open space and recreation areas, parking areas, ingress/egress
points, sketch elevations and drainage, the boundary dimensions, overall density of
development, public uses, landscaping concepts, zoning classification, and other
information deemed pertinent by the planning commission and staff. The approved
preliminary PUD plan shall serve as the plan upon which the final PUD plan is based.
Approval of a preliminary PUD plan shall lapse twelve (12) months from the date it was
approved.
ii. Final PUD Plan. Following approval of a preliminary PUD plan, the developer may
proceed to prepare a final PUD plan which shall include detailed
architectural/engineering plans for: utilities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems,
location of all structures, topographic intervals at no less than five (5) feet, minimum
elevations, and grading, the physical relationship of uses, parking areas, open space and
recreation areas, landscaped areas, buffer or screening materials and locations, areas
proposed for dedication as parks, ways, or places, final drafts of legal documents, and
other information deemed pertinent by the planning commission and staff. Upon
approval of the final POD plan, a special conditions permit may be issued.
10. Staging of Development. The PUD applicant may elect to develop the site in successive stages. The
stages and expected development periods shall be shown on the preliminary POD development
plan. However, each stage given final POD approval must be substantially complete within itself.
The planning commission may also require the development of a POD project in stages if public
facilities are not adequate to handle the entire development initially.
11. Permits. The developer of a POD shall be entitled to receive appropriate development
permits following approval of the final POD plan and the preliminary subdivision plat, where
applicable. However, none of these permits shall be issued until the building official receives a
POD plan which bears the signed certificates of approval and of application and agreement
(See Appendix B for examples).
12. Changes and Modifications. A POD project may be changed or modified under conditions
established for minor changes and major changes.
a. Minor changes. The planning commission may approve changes in minor shifts of building
locations, proposed streets and ways, utilities and easements, recreation and open space
areas, or other features on the approved plan. However, these changes shall not increase
densities, change exterior boundary lines, change uses, materially change location or amount
of land devoted to specific uses, or significantly change the exterior features or appearance
of buildings and uses shown on the approved plans.
b. Major changes. All changes other than those established as minor shall be considered as
major changes to the POD plan and shall require a new plan submission in accordance with
the procedures and requirements for approval of a POD plan.
11-309 - Signs. It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable and impartial regulations for
the location of signs within the zoning districts of the city so as to achieve a more aesthetically
desirable environment through flexible and diversified standards that provide for adequate light, air,
17
and open spaces and a reduction in congestion and hazardous conditions within the city. Therefore,
all new signs erected, constructed, or placed upon any property or building within the town shall
conform to the provisions of this section.
1. General Provisions
a. Plans Required. The building official shall be provided with plans and specifications
identifying the location, type, and design of any sign which requires a permit under the
provisions of this section.
b. Height. No part of any sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, unless provided for
elsewhere in this ordinance. Signs placed above a walkway shall have a minimum clearance of
nine (9) feet. Signs located above a driveway shall have a minimum clearance of fifteen (15)
feet.
c. Setback. No part of any sign shall be placed closer than five (5) feet to any public right-of-way;
except that, signs of no more than three (3) square feet may be located at the right-of-way to
designate entrances and exits provided such signs will be less three (3) feet higher than the
driveway to prevent any obstruction of clear visibility to vehicles exiting the premises. One
entrance/exit sign per driveway shall be permitted.
d. Number of Signs. No business shall have more than one (1) ground sign, but any number of
wall signs shall be permitted. Entrance and exit signs shall not be included in the total
number of signs allowed.
2. Prohibited Signs
a. Signs which include action, motion, moving materials, or which have any moving parts; or
contain flashing or rotating lights or bulbs; or are intermittently lighted; or interfere with
the view of traffic or that could be confused with any authorized traffic control sign,
signal, or device, with the exception of signs that display time and temperature and public
service announcements without advertising matter.
b. Roof signs.
c. Signs in any residential district which are internally illuminated.
d. Signs on public property including utility poles, except those erected by an authorized
public entity.
e. All signs which are not expressly permitted by this ordinance or any other ordinance of the
city.
3. Signs Permitted in all Zoning Districts and Not Requiring a Permit.
a. Political Campaign Signs. All campaign signs shall be removed by the property owner within
seven (7) days after the results of an election are certified.
18
b. Temporary Special Event Signs. Signs may be erected on private property no more than thirty
(30) days prior to the event. All special event signs shall be removed by the property owner
within seven (7) days of the conclusion of an event.
c. Parking Areas. Signs internal to parking areas which direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic but
bear no advertising.
d. Construction Site Signs. One sign noting construction information shall be permitted for
each site. The sign shall be removed upon completion of the project.
e. Real Estate Sale/Lease Signs. Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the
sale, rental or lease.
f. Residential Name/Address Signs. For each single family dwelling unit, one (1) nameplate
indicating name, address, house number, home occupation, or an announcement of space
for boarders or roomers if applicable, limited to three (3) square feet in area, is permitted.
4. Signs Requiring a Permit
a. Residential Districts.
i. Subdivision entrances, residential planned unit developments (PUDs), and all nonresidential
uses may have one (1) permanent sign, not to exceed twenty (20)square feet in
area nor twelve (12) feet in height. Individual buildings within a PUD may have one (1)
identification sign not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area.
ii. Homes where a home occupation is being conducted shall be permitted one (1)
permanent sign. The sign shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area nor five (5) feet in
height.
b. Business Districts
i. Shopping centers, malls, and commercial PUDs shall be limited to one (1) major directory
sign, not to exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet in area. Each business within
such developments shall be permitted any number of wall signs, but total area of which
shall contain no more than one (1) square foot of area per linear foot of wall length. Wall
signage shall be limited to walls which face a public street and/or customer parking area.
Entrance and exit signs shall not be included when determining total square footage of
sign area.
ii. Individual businesses shall be permitted one (1) ground sign not to exceed one hundred
and fifty (150) square feet in area. In addition, any number of wall signs shall be
permitted, but the total area of which shall contain no more than one (1) square foot of
area per linear foot of wall length. Wall signage shall be limited to walls which face a public
street and/or customer parking area. Entrance and exit signs shall not be included when
determining total square footage of sign area.
iii. Individual businesses located within two thousand (2,000) feet of the I-40 interchange
right-of-way, shall be permitted a larger freestanding sign in order to attract travelers on
19
the interstate. This sign shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height and two hundred and
fifty (250) square feet in area.
iv. Businesses sharing a portion of their building, wall, or lot with another business, and is
found in the central business district, shall not be permitted a freestanding sign, but will be
permitted any number of wall signs. The total sign area shall contain no more than one (1)
square foot of area per linear foot of wall length. Businesses located within the designated
Historic District shall have their signs approved by the Historic Zoning Commission, prior to
the issuance of a sign permit.
c. Industrial Districts
i. Total sign area permitted for separate establishments on individual lots shall be one
hundred and seventy-five (175) square feet; except that no individual ground sign or
wall sign shall be greater than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet in area.
ii. In industrial PUDs or buildings housing more than one establishment, each
establishment may have one (1) ground sign not to exceed seventyfive
(75) square
feet and any number of wall signs so long as the total sign area for each establishment
does not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet. Industrial park entrance
signs shall be limited to one (1) major directory sign per entrance and shall not exceed
two hundred (200) square feet.
11-310 - Site Plan Regulations. It is the general purpose and intent of this section to require site plans
for all new developments or redevelopments of commercial, industrial, public, or semi-public uses,
and residential structures containing more than four (4) dwelling units, or more than one (1)
residential structure per lot. A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the Harriman Planning
Commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. However, the Building
Inspector may, after consultation with the chairperson of the planning commission, approve site plans
without prior planning commission approval, if the development site is less than one (1) acre. When a
project lies within any historic district, the Harriman Historic Zoning Commission shall also review and
approve such site plans.
No building permit shall be issued until the building official receives a site plan which bears the signed
certificates of site plan approval and of application and agreement (See Appendix C for examples).
Approval of a site plan shall expire twelve (12) months after the date of its approval unless a building
permit has been issued and substantial progress has been made toward completion of the project.
In accordance with the provisions of 13-3-104, Tennessee Code Annotated, site plans for any public
use including, but not limited to, schools, parks, streets and highways, public buildings, and utilities,
shall be submitted to the planning coDD11ission for review, and shall be prepared in accordance
with all the provisions of this ordinance.
A site plan shall set forth the proposed development of the total land tract and shall be at a scale of
not less than 1" = 20' for small tracts and 1" = 50' for large tracts. A site plan shall contain the
following:
20
1. North point and scale.
2. A location map identifying the surrounding land use and streets.
3. Total acreage of the tract of land.
4. Dimensions and bearings of all lot lines.
5. Location of any existing and/or proposed structures (including signs), street rights-of-way,
sidewalks, easements, and covenants.
6. Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures (including signs).
7. Location and size of all existing and/or proposed utilities.
8. Proposed landscape design, which shall include the types and varieties of trees, shrubs, etc. to
be planted.
9. Plans for waste disposal, which must include some type of screening so that it is not visible from
any public street or adjoining properties.
10. Plans for ingress/egress and off-street parking.
11. Location of loading zones and front, rear, and side entrances.
12. Stormwater drainage plans including the location and size of culverts, storm sewers and water
receptacles, stormwater retention areas, and drainage easements.
13. Topography of existing and finished grades when determined appropriate by the staff planner
or building official.
14. Identification of any land subject to flooding.
15. Letter of approval from the appropriate governing agency for any entrance or curb cut on a state
highway.
16. Approval by the health department if on-site sewage disposal is utilized.
17. Any other information deemed pertinent by the planning commission or staff.
11-311 - Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory Assembled Structures. It shall be unlawful to
place any temporary structure, trailer, mobile structure (including, but not limited to: cars, vans,
trucks, or buses), tents and tent-type structures, factory-built or factory assembled structures
designed for conveyance after fabrication, either on their own wheels, flatbed truck, or other trailers
on any residential, commercial, or industrial lot within the town for the purpose of assembly, or for
business, educational, hazardous, institutional, mercantile, residential, or storage occupancies,
except as noted herein or as provided for elsewhere in this ordinance.
21
1. Permitted Temporary, Mobile. Factory-Built or Factory-Assembled Structures.
The following structures shall be allowed subject to the provisions of this and other applicable
sections of this ordinance and upon obtaining the proper permits from the building official.
a. Mobile homes located in approved mobile home parks.
b. Mobile homes located on single lots in the R-2 Medium Density Residential district, provided
all provisions of the district are met.
c. Modular buildings for residential or nonresidential use installed on permanent concrete or
masonry foundation as a finished building with permanent sewer or water connections. Such
units shall be inspected at the point of manufacture and shall bear the insignia of approval of
the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance or other approved inspection agency,
as provided for in Title 58, Chapter 36, Part 3, TCA.
d. Temporary office and storage buildings located on approved construction sites provided
they are removed upon completion of construction.
e. Customary accessory storage buildings in approved residential locations.
f. Tents used by a person, firm, corporation, or group as an assembly occupancy for the purpose
of a religious meeting, festival, fair, circus, or carnival for a limited time not to exceed thirty
(30) days with proper permit procedure followed; additional permits may be granted for up to
ninety (90) days in one calendar year.
g. Tents or temporary buildings used to sell fresh produce locally grown during the growing
season or Christmas trees during the holiday season.
2. Replacement of Nonconforming Mobile Home Dwellings. See Section 11-301.4 of this
ordinance.
3. Establishment of New or Expansion of Existing Mobile Home and Travel Trailer Parks.
Mobile home and travel trailer parks shall be considered PUDs and the establishment or expansion
of these uses shall be subject to the provisions of Section 11-308 and other applicable sections of
this ordinance.
11-312 - Customary Home Occupations. The following uses shall be permitted as home occupations
within all residential zoning districts, subject to the applicable provisions of the zoning districts and
the limitations and requirements set out in subsection 2 below:
1. Permitted Home Occupations.
a. Arts and crafts made by the owners of the premises.
b. Professional offices for architects, real estate brokers, engineers and other contract workers
whose businesses rarely require clients to visit the home.
22
c. Tutorial instruction allowing two pupils per session, except for music instruction which shall
be one student per session.
d. Beauty/barber shops.
e. Antique sales.
f. Any other use which the Board of Zoning Appeals finds to be of similar character.
2. Requirements/Limitations Regarding the Operation of Home Occupations.
a. Location on Premises. A home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling which is the
bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in any building accessory thereto which is
normally associated with a residential use.
b. Exterior Alterations. No alterations to the exterior appearance of the principal residential
building or premises shall be made which changes the character thereof as a residence.
c. Outdoor Display or Storage. No outside display of goods or outside storage of equipment or
materials used in the home occupation shall be permitted.
d. Employees. No persons other than a member of the immediate family occupying such
dwelling, and one (1) person not a member of such family, may participate in or be
employed by such occupation.
e. Level of Activity. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall
under no circumstances change the residential character thereof.
f. Traffic, Parking. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street.
g. Equipment and Production Processes. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
employed other than machinery or equipment customarily found in the home associated with
a hobby or vocation not conducted for gain or profit, or machinery or equipment which is
essential in the conduct of the home occupation; and, no equipment or process shall be used
in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference: detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or televisions receivers off the premises.
h. Signs. No signs accessory to such home occupation shall be displayed except as permitted or
authorized by Section 11-309.
11-313 - Gasoline Service Stations. The following development standards shall apply to all gasoline
service stations:
23
1. Front yard setbacks for all structures except the principal building, shall be reduced to fifteen (15)
feet.
2. On all streets classified as Arterials on the official Major Road Plan, no driveways shall be
constructed within sixty (60) feet of an intersecting street right of-way line.
3. In addition to the allowed signs as regulated in Section 11-309, gas station logo signs affixed to the
canopy shall also be allowed.
11-314 - Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall be permitted an accessory use in all residential
districts, provided that, with the exception of aprons and walks, no part of a swimming pool shall
protrude into any required front or side yard setback. A fence or wall, a minimum of five (5) feet in
height and designed so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children or pets from the street or adjacent
properties into the pool area, shall be constructed by the owner and maintained in good order, so long
as the pool is in existence. Swimming pools built as a primary use shall meet all setback requirements
and a fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained as described above.
11-315 - Cemeteries. The establishment or expansion of a cemetery shall be considered a semipublic/
pubic use and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 11-310 and other applicable provisions
of this ordinance, and in addition shall be subject to the following development standards:
1. Minimum Site. No new cemetery shall be established site less than ten (10) acres in size and no
existing cemetery shall be expanded unless the site is of sufficient size to meet all setback
requirements.
2. Location. Newly established cemeteries shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street and
shall be located so as not to interfere with development of the town's street system.
3. Setbacks. All structures and facilities including, but not limited to, mausoleums, graves, burial lots,
monuments, and maintenance buildings, shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from all
property lines or street right-of-way lines, except where other provisions of this ordinance may
require a greater setback.
24
CHAPTER4
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
SECTION
11-401. Use
11-402. Street Frontage
11-403. Comer Lots
11-404. One Principal Building on a Lot
11-405. Reduction of Lot Size
11-406. Yard and Other Spaces
11-407. Conformity to Subdivision Regulations
11-408. Accessory Building and Use Regulations
11-409. Height and Density
11-401 - Use. Except as herein provided, no building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or
part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
11-402 - Street Frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one
public street for at least forty (40) feet. If an approved public street is inadequate to serve a proposed
development, the developer may be required to improve the existing street to approved city standards.
11-403 - Corner Lots. The minimum width of a side yard along an intersecting street shall be fifty (50)
percent greater than the minimum side yard requirements of the district in which t lot is located.
11-404 - One Principal Building on a Lot. Only one principal building and its customary accessory
buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot; except that planned unit developments may be excluded
from this provision on the approval of the planning commission.
11-405 - Reduction of Lot Size. No lot shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot width, building area, or
other provisions of ordinance cannot be maintained.
11-406 - Yard and Other Spaces. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or
other open space required under this ordinance for another building.
11-407 - Conformity to Subdivision Regulations. No building permit shall be issued for or no building
shall be erected on any lot within the municipality, unless the street giving access to the lot upon which
said building is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened as a public street prior to that
time or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat
approved by the Harriman Planning Commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the
secretary of the commission.
11-408 - Accessory Building and Use Regulations. Buildings and/or uses which are customarily incidental
and subordinate in size and function to the principal use of a site are considered to be accessory
buildings and/or uses and are permitted on the same lot with a principal use. The establishment of
25
accessory buildings and/or uses shall be subject to the following provisions and other applicable
provisions of this ordinance:
1. General Provisions
a. No accessory structure shall be occupied or used unless the principal structure to which it is
accessory is occupied or being used.
b. If an accessory building shares a structural wall with a principal building, it shall be deemed to
be a part of the principal building and shall comply with the requirements of the ordinance
applicable to a principal building, such as setback, height, etc.
2. Location. Accessory buildings may be located as close as ten (10) feet to the rear property line,
except as may be provided for in Chapter 6 or elsewhere in this ordinance. No accessory buildings
or uses shall be permitted within any required front or side yard, except for such items as mail
boxes, yard ornaments, and light fixtures located so as not to create a nuisance or safety hazard to
neighboring property or the public.
11-409 - Height and Density. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to
exceed the height limit to accommodate or house a greater number of families, or to have narrower or
smaller front yards or side yards than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district
in which it is located.
26
CHAPTER 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
SECTION
11-501 Classification of Districts
11-502 Zoning District Boundaries
11-501 - Classification of Districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Harriman, Tennessee, is
hereby divided into eleven (11) classes of districts as follows:
Residential
R-H
R-1
R-2
Residential Historic
Low Density Residential
Medium Density Residential
Commercial
C-1
C-2
C-3
Central Business District
General Commercial District
Neighborhood Commercial District
Industrial
I-1
I-2
Light Industrial District
Heavy Industrial District
Open Space 0-S
Open Space/Park/Agriculture District
Flood F-1
Flood Hazard District
Historic H-1
Historic District
11-502 - Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown
on the map entitled "Zoning Map of The City of Harriman, Tennessee," dated _________________ and
all amendments thereof, which is a part of this ordinance and which is on file in the mayor's office.
Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the map, the boundaries of districts are lot lines or the center
lines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, the corporate limit lines, or a line midway between the
main track of a railroad or the center lines of streams or other water bodies. Questions concerning the
exact locations of district boundaries shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
27
CHAPTER 6
PROVISIONS GOVERNING USE DISTRICTS
SECTION
11-601
11-602
11-603
11-604
11-605
11-606
11-607
11-608
11-609
11-609
11-610
R-H
R-1
R-2
C-1
C-2
C-3
1-1
1-2
0-S
F-1
H-1
Residential Historic
Low Density Residential
Medium Density Residential
Central Business District
General Commercial District
Neighborhood Commercial District
Light Industrial District
Heavy Industrial District
Open Space/Park/Agriculture District
Flood Hazard District
Historic District
11-601 - R-H Residential Historic. It is the purpose and intent of this district to establish the historic
neighborhoods near downtown as a separate residential area. The requirements of the district are
designed to protect the unique characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage an environment
for family life, and to restrict all business oriented activities.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the R-H Residential-Historic District, as shown on the
zoning map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, no building, development, or improvement shall be
commenced or any building or sign permits issued unless such project has received a certificate of
appropriateness from the Harriman Historic Zoning Commission. In addition to complying with the
design criteria of the Harriman Historic Zoning Commission, the following regulations apply and uses are
permitted:
1. Single family residences, except mobile homes.
2. Single family residences with a maximum of two accessory apartments.
3. Customary home occupations as regulated in Section 11-312.
4. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
5. Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Section11-408.
6. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
7. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-602 - R-1 Low Density Residential. It is the purpose and intent of this district to establish low density
residential areas along with open areas which appear likely to develop in a similar manner. The
requirements of the district are designed to protect the total characteristics of the district, to promote
and encourage an environment for family life, and to restrict all business oriented activities.
28
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the R-1 Low Density Residential District, as shown on the
zoning map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
1. Single-family residences, except mobile homes.
2. Single-family residences with a maximum of one access apartment.
3. Individually sited residential structures containing to four (4) dwelling units.
4. Single-family and two-family (duplex) POD's except mobile homes.
5. Customary home occupations as regulated in Section 11-312.
6. Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the planning commission as required in
Tennessee Code Annotated, 13-4-104; schools offering general education, churches and tennis
clubs, country clubs, and other similar uses which are characteristically associated with ample open
space areas and recreation or leisure activities, and are used for social purposes which restrict
participation to members and guests only, provided that:
a. A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 11-310 is reviewed and approved by the planning
commission;
b. The buildings are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from side and rear property lines;
c. There are planted buffer strips with a m n1mum of ten (10) feet in height along rear and side
property lines;
d. That access be restricted to streets classified as Arterial or Major Collector Streets on the
adopted Major Road plan; and
e. Any outside lighting of courts, parking lots, or other facilities shall be designed and constructed
in such a manner as to not cause inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
7. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
8. Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Section 11-408.
9. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302- through 11-307.
10. Set back and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-603 - R-2 Medium Density Residential. It is the purpose and intent of this district to provide areas for
higher density residential development plus open areas where similar development is likely to occur.
Professional services are also permitted in this district provided that they meet applicable standards and
are limited so as not to encourage general commercial activity. When proposed uses are not allowed in
the R-H Residential Historic District or the R-1 Low Density Residential District but are adjacent to these
districts, a ten (10) foot buffer strip shall be planted and maintained.
29
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the R-2 Medium Density Residential District, as shown on
the Zoning Map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are
permitted:
1. Any use and regulations in the R-1 Low Density Residential District.
2. Multi-family dwellings provided they are developed following the regulations set forth in Section 11-
308
3. Mobile home parks as regulated in Sections 11-308 and 11-311.
4. Single-wide mobile homes provided all setback requirements are met, they are placed on a
permanent and enclosed foundation, and the towing tongue is removed.
5. Bed and breakfast inns.
6. Funeral homes; fraternal organizations; clubs not operated for profit; day care centers providing
care and supervision for children, handicapped persons, or elderly for periods of less than twentyfour
(24) hours; and professional offices of doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, dentists, real
estate, insurance agencies, and similar uses, provided:
a. A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 11-3 is reviewed and approved by the planning
commission;
b. The buildings are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from side and rear property lines;
c. There are planted buffer strips with a minimum of ten (10) feet in height along rear and side
property lines;
d. Any outside lighting of parking lots or other facilities shall be designed and constructed in such a
manner as to not cause inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
e. That access be restricted to streets classified as Arterial or Major Collector Streets on the adopt
Major Road Plan; and
f. Existing buildings may be utilized provided that the provisions of this ordinance are met as
closely as possible.
7. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
8. Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Section 11-408.
9. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
10. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
30
11-604 - C-1 Central Business District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to secure the
commercial core of the City, to promote the historic preservation of the old CBD, and to encourage
concentrated development of office and shopping facilities. The requirements of the district are
designed to protect and improve this area as the principal shopping and office district of Harriman. Prior
to the issuance of building permits for all new construction, site plans as required by Section 11-310,
shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission to determine if the projects meet all
requirements and are in keeping with the comprehensive planning program of the City of Harriman,
Tennessee. When proposed uses are adjacent to a residential district, a ten (10) foot buffer strip shall
be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-1 Central Business District, as shown on the zoning
map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
1. Retail trade and services, excluding all types requiring outdoor display or storage.
2. Business, professional, and personal services excluding repair garages, junk yards, and storage yards.
3. Cultural activities.
4. Churches, clubs, and lodges.
5. Dwelling units located above street level, provided parking is provided for as required in Sections 11-
302 through 11-307.
6. Townhouses, condominiums, and similar types of housing may be established as separate uses as a
PUD under the applicable provisions of Section 11-308 of this ordinance when the following
development criteria are met:
a. There shall be no minimum lot size required for this type of development.
b. Setback requirements of the B-1, Central Business District, shall prevail.
c. The density of such developments shall not exceed fifteen (15) units per gross acre.
d. Access and parking as required in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
7. Public buildings and lands, except schools, provided a site plan is submitted as required in 13-4-104
of the Tennessee Code Annotated.
8. Hospitals and clinics provided access and parking requirements are met.
9. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
10. Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section 11-408.
11. No off-street parking is required, except as herein noted, however, any off-street parking provided
shall meet the applicable provisions in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
31
12. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-605 - C-2 General Commercial District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to provide for
general commercial areas at convenient locations within the city. The regulations are designed to
encourage concentrations of commercial activities to preserve the traffic carrying capacity of the major
collect and arterials upon which such uses are located. The regulations are also designed to encourage
groupings of compatible commercial activities in which parking and traffic congestion can be reduced to
a minimum. Therefore, prior to issuance of building permits for all new construction, site plans, as
required by Section 11-310, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission to determine if
the projects meet all requirements and are in keeping with the comprehensive planning program of the
City of Harriman, Tennessee. When proposed uses are adjacent to a residential district, a ten (10) foot
buffer strip shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-2 General Commercial District, as shown on the
zoning map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted.
1. Personal, business, and professional services and offices, excluding junkyards and other similar uses.
2. Storage yards provided a buffer strip is planted.
3. Retail business, including automobile and mobile home sales.
4. Lodges, clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, and other similar services.
5. Funeral homes.
6. Churches and places of worship.
7. Gasoline service stations as regulated in Section 11-313.
8. Wholesale business and warehousing.
9. Places of amusements, recreation, entertainment, or assembly.
10. Shopping centers developed as planned unit developments as regulated in Section 11-308.
11. Commercial and travel trailer parks developed as planned unit developments as regulated in Section
11-308.
12. Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the planning commission as required in
Tennessee Code Annotated, 13-4-104; and schools and colleges offering general education.
13. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
14. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
15. Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section 11-408.
32
16. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-606 - C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to establish
areas to serve surrounding residential districts. The regulations are intended to discourage strip
development and encourage grouping of uses in which parking and traffic congestion will be reduced,
thereby protecting the general public and promoting a more desirable and aesthetically pleasing
community. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any new construction, a site plan, as required
in section 11-310, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval to determine
if the project meets all requirements and is in keeping with the comprehensive planning program of the
City of Harriman, Tennessee. When proposed uses are adjacent to a residential district, a ten (10) foot
buffer strip shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District, as shown on
the zoning Map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are
permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the R-2 Residential District subject to the requirements of the R-2 District.
2. Grocery stores, bakery stores, hardware stores, shoe repair shops, tailor shops, photographic
studios, barber and beauty shops, laundromats, self-service laundries, restaurants and other similar
uses, provided access is restricted to streets classified as Arterial, Major Collector, or Local Collector
on the official Major Road Plan.
3. Multi-use commercial centers developed as planned unit developments as regulated in Section 11-
308.
4. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
5. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
6. Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated Section 11-408.
7. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-607. - I-1Light Industrial District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to establish areas for
certain industrial and commercial establishments along with open areas which will likely develop in a
similar manner. The regulations are designed to protect the essential community characteristics and to
promote and encourage industrial, wholesaling, and commercial uses and to discourage residential
development. Therefore, prior to the issuance of building permits for all new construction, site plans, as
required by Section 11-310, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission to determine if
the projects are in keeping with this ordinance and the comprehensive planning program of the City of
Harriman, Tennessee. When proposed use are adjacent to a residential district, a 25 foot buffer strip
shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the I-1 Light Industrial District, as shown on the Zoning
Map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
1. Personal, business and professional services and offices.
33
2. Wholesale trade.
3. Warehouses.
4. Trucking terminals of moderate vehicle size and activities.
5. Contractor offices and equipment storage.
6. Building supplies.
7. Enclosed manufacturing uses.
8. Junkyards, provided the entire outdoor storage area is enclosed with an eight (8) foot privacy fence.
The purpose of the privacy fence is to screen from view the junkyard from adjacent properties and
rights-of-way. The fence shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet and trees shall be planted in
the setback area.
9. Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the planning commission as required in
Tennessee Code Annotated, 13-4-104.
10. Other uses of the same general character as the above uses.
11. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
12. Access and parking as regulated in Section 11-302 through 11-307.
13. Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section 11-408.
14. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-608 - I-2 Heavy Industrial District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to establish areas for
heavy industrial activities. The regulations are designed to protect essential community characteristics
and promote the economy by encouraging industrial development in an orderly planned manner.
Therefore, prior to the issuance of building permits for all new construction, site plans, as required by
Section 11-310, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission for compliance with this
ordinance and the comprehensive planning program of the City of Harriman, Tennessee. When
proposed uses are adjacent to a residential district, a twenty-five (25) foot buffer strip shall be planted
and maintained. When proposed uses are adjacent to a commercial district, a ten (10) foot buffer strip
shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the I-2 Heavy Industrial District, as shown on the Zoning
Map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
1. Any use permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
2. Service terminals for waterways, trucks, railroads, related facilities.
34
3. Any industry which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, odors, fire hazards, or other
objectionable conditions as determined by the building official. Slaughterhouses, stockyards, and
other similar uses shall automatically be considered as non-permitted uses.
4. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
5. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
6. Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section 11-408.
7. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-609 – O-S Open Space/Park/Agriculture District. It is the purpose and intent of this district to identify
those areas that are predominantly open and not intensely developed or public/semipublic in nature.
The requirements of the district are designed to protect the land and the existing uses of the district and
to restrict all business oriented activities.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the O-S Open Space/Park/Agriculture District, as shown on
the zoning map of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are
permitted:
1. Single-family residences, provided density does exceed one dwelling unit per five (5) acres.
2. Customary home occupations as regulated in Section 11-408.
3. Customary general farming.
4. Parks and recreational uses.
5. Cemeteries.
6. Golf Courses.
7. Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the planning commission as required in
Tennessee Code Annotated, 13-4-104; schools offering general education; churches; nursing homes;
and tennis clubs, country clubs, and other similar uses which are characteristically associated with
ample open space areas and recreation or leisure activities, and are used for social purposes which
restrict participation to members and guests only, provided that:
a. A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 11-310 is reviewed and approved by the planning
commission;
b. The buildings are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from side and rear property lines;
c. There are planted buffer strips with a minimum ten (10) feet in height along rear and side
property lines;
35
d. That access be restricted to streets classified as Arterial or Major Collector Streets on the official
Major Road plan; and
e. Any outside lighting of courts, parking lots or other facilities shall be designed and constructed
in such a manner as to not cause inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
8. Other similar uses as defined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
9. Signs as regulated in Section 11-309.
10. Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Section 11-408.
11. Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
12. Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
11-610 - F-1 Flood Hazard District. The flood hazard district is established as an overlay district, the
intent of which is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens by requiring that development
within this district be regulated in accordance with the National Flood Disaster Act of 1973, and as
subsequently amended. All development shall comply with these regulations.
The use regulations of any zoning district underlying the F-1 district shall prevail; except that no building,
development or improvement project shall be commenced within the F-1 district unless a permit has
been obtained from the building official stating such project plans meet the requirements of the city's
flood hazard area development regulations, a copy of which is in Appendix D.
11-611 - H-1 Historic District. The H-1 District is established as an overlay district. The City of Harriman
may designate areas within existing zoning districts as an H-1 district for the purpose of: preserving and
protecting the historical and/or architectural value of buildings, other structures, or historically
significant areas; regulating exterior design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used
within the historic district to ensure compatibility; creating an aesthetic appearance which complements
the historic building or other structures; stabilizing and improving property values; fostering civic
beauty; strengthening the local economy; and promoting the use of historic districts for the education,
pleasure, and welfare of the present and future citizens of t City of Harriman.
The regulations of any zoning district underlying the H-1- zone shall prevail, except that no building,
development, or improvement project shall be commenced within the H-1 district unless such project
follows the regulations established by the Harriman Historic Zoning Commission and has received a
certificate of appropriateness from the Harriman Historic Zoning Commission.
36
CHAPTER 7
AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
11-701 - Area, Yard and Height Requirements. For the purpose of this ordinance, area, yard, and height requirements for the district
classifications of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, zoning Ordinance are hereby established as follows:
Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Yard Requirements from
Property Lines (feet)
District Area in
Square Feet
Square Feet per
Additional Family
Lot Width at Bldg.
Setback (feet)
Front Yard* Side Yard* Rear Yard* Maximum Height
of Structures (feet)
R-H 7,500 3,500 75 30 10 25 35
R-1 12,000 4,000 75 30 10 25 35
R-2 7,500 3,500 75 30 10 25 35
C-1 n/a  n/a 0 0 0 35
C-2 n/a  n/a 30 15 25 35 
C-3 n/a  n/a 30 15 25 35
I-1 n/a  n/a 30 20 25 55
I-2 n/a  n/a 40 25 25 55 
O-S 217,800  217,800 30 25 25 35  



Notes: Different setback requirements stated in Sections 11-308, 11-310, and 11-601 through 11-611 shall take precedence over the above stated
requirements.
** Structures greater than twenty (20) feet in height shall meet a fifteen (15) foot side yard setback.
*** Height limits may be increased to 45 feet if an internal fire protection system and fire hydrants are installed.
37
CHAPTER 8
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION
11-801
11-802
11-803
11-804
Lot of Record
Adjoining and Vacant Lots of Record
Front Yards
Exceptions on Height Limits
11-801 - Lot of Record. Where the owner of a lot consisting one or more adjacent lots of official record
at the time of t adoption of applicable zoning regulations does not own sufficient land to enable him to
conform to the yard or other requirement of the zoning regulations, an application may be submitted to
the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance. Such lot may be
used as a building site; provided, however, that the yard and other requirements of the district are
complied with as closely, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, as is possible.
11-802 - Adjoining and Substandard Lots of Records. Where two or more lots of record with a
continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a substandard lot of record has
continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form
one or more building sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located.
11-803- Front Yards. The front yard setback requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply
to any lot where the average depth of existing front yards on developed lots located within two hundred
(200) feet on each side of such lot and with the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same
street as such lot, is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case, the minimum front
yard shall be the average of the existing front yard depths on the developed lots.
11-804 - Exceptions on Height Limits. The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to any
structure not intended for human occupancy, including but not limited to chimneys attached to
residential structures, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation
towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio
towers, masts, and aerials.
38
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
11-901
11-902
11-903
11-904
11-905
11-906
11-907
11-908
Building Permit Required
Enforcing Officer
Application for Issuance of Building Permits
Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals
Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy
Violations
Penalties
Remedies
11-901 - Building Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the
construction of any building including accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of
any building, including accessory buildings until the building official has issued for such work a building
per including a statement that the plans, specifications, and intended use of such building in all respects
conform with the provisions of this ordinance. Application for a building per shall be made to the
building official.
11-902 - Enforcing Officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Municipal Building Official. The building official shall have the authority to enter upon any land during
reasonable hours and make examination and surveys that do not occasion damage or injury to private
property.
11-903 - Application For/Issuance of Building Permits. For all multi-family residential, commercial,
public, semi-public, or industrial uses, a site plan or PUD plan, whichever may be applicable, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 11-308 and 11-310 shall be submitted to and approved by
the planning commission prior to the issuance of a building permit. Building permit applications for all
other uses not requiring a site plan or PUD plan shall be accompanied by a dimensioned sketch or scale
plan indicating the size and shape the lot and the location and use of any existing or proposed buildings
or structures on the site. Before a permit is issued the building official may also ask the applicant to
supply any such other information deemed necessary to determine whether provisions of this ordinance
are being observed. If the request for issuance of a building permit is refused, the building official shall
state the reason for his refusal in writing.
11-904 - Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals.
1. Expiration of Building Permits. Unless provided for otherwise this ordinance, building permits, along
with any sketch be null and void six (6) months from the date of issuance and/or approval if
substantial progress has not been made toward completion of the development activity as it was
approved. Planned Unit Developments (POD and site plans shall be null and void twelve (12)
months from the date of approval if substantial progress h not been made toward completion of the
development activity as it was approved.
39
The building official may grant any number of ninety (90) day extensions to a building permit holder
for a building permit, if just cause can be given to justify the extension and if progress toward
completion of project can be shown.
2. Abandonment of Permitted Projects. Any project for which a building permit has been issued and
where an accessory or principal building has only been partially constructed at the end of one (1)
year and for which application for extension has not been submitted, may be subject to being
considered as an unsafe and illegal building and may be subject to the provisions of Section 102.4 of
the Southern Standard Building Code and any other applicable provisions of this or any other
ordinance of the city.
11-905 - Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. In order to ensure that a building,
structure, or addition has been constructed in accordance with the approved sketch, site, or plan and
will be occupied by a use lawful within the zoning district in which it is located, the building official shall
a final inspection upon notification by the owner or occupant that a premises is ready to be occupied.
Within six (6) work days of such application, the building official shall make a final inspection of the
property in question, and shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the building/structure is found to
conform to the provisions of this ordinance, the approved plan and the statements made in the
application for the building permit. If such a certificate is refused, the building official shall state such
refusal in writing with the cause. No land building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be use
until such a Certificate of Occupancy has been granted.
11-906 - Violations. Any person whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee, or otherwise who
violates any provision of this ordinance, permits any such violation, fails to comply with any of the
provisions or requirements hereof, including any conditions, stipulations, or safeguards attached to any
permit, variance, special exception, or other such final authorization or approval hereunder, or who
erects, constructs or reconstructs any building or structure, or uses any land in violation of any written
statement or plan submitted and approved pursuant to this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
11-907 – Penalties. Any persons violating any provision of the ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
11-908 - Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the
building official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who
w be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation;
or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure or land.
40
CHAPTER 10
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
SECTION
11-1001
11-1002
11-1003
11-1004
11-1005
Creation and Appointment
Procedure
Appeals
Powers
Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-1001. -Creation and Appointment. A board of zoning appeals is hereby established in accordance
with Section 13-7-205, Tennessee Code Annotated. The Harriman Municipal/Regional Planning
Commission is hereby designated as the board of zoning appeals and the terms of the members of the
board of zoning appeals shall be concurrent with the terms of the members of the Harriman
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission.
11-1002 - Procedure. Meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman
or by a majority of the membership and at such other times as the board may determine Such chairman,
or in his/her absence, the acting chairman, m administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
Al meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact; shall take all evidence necessary to justify or explain its action, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official action, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board
and shall be a public record.
11-1003 - Appeals. An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person, firm or
corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board, or bureau affected by any
decision of the staff planner and/or building official based in whole or part on provisions of this
ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided the rules of the board, by
filing with the staff planner and building official and with the board of zoning appeals a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. The staff planner and/or building official shall transmit forthwith to the
boa all papers constituting the record upon which the action app was taken. The board shall fix a
reasonable time for the he of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due no to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney.
11-1004 – Powers. The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers:
1. Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is
error in an order, or requirement, permit decision, determination or refusal made by the building
official or other administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this
ordinance.
2. Special Exceptions. To hear and decide special exception this ordinance as noted in Chapter 8.
3. Variance. To hear and decide applications for variance from the terms of this ordinance, but only
where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at
the time of adoption of this ordinance was a lot of record; or where by reason of exceptional
41
topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situations or condition a piece of
property, the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would result in exceptional
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
provided t such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting variance, the board
may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other feature the
proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this
ordinance. Before any variance is granted it shall be shown that special circumstances are attached
to the property which do not generally apply to other property in the neighborhood.
11-1005 - Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals. In exercising the aforementioned powers, the board
of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end
shall have all powers of the building official. The concurring vote a majority of the board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matte upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance, or to authorize any variance from the terms of this ordinance.
42
CHAPTER 11
HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION
11-1101
11-1102
11-1103
11-1104
11-1105
Creation and Appointment
Procedure
Powers and Duties
Jurisdiction
Review and Decisions
11-1101 - Creation and Appointment. In accordance with Chapter 13-7-104, Tennessee Code
Annotated, a Historic Zoning Commission is hereby established. The City Council shall create a five (5)
member Historic Zoning Commission which shall consist of a representative of a local patriotic or
historical organization; an architect, if available; and a member of the planning commission, at the time
of his appointment. The remaining members shall be appointed from the community in general.
Historic Zoning Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Harriman and shall
be confirmed by the City Council. Appointments to membership on the Historic Zoning Commission
shall be arranged so that the term of one member s expire each year and his successor shall be
appointed in like manner in terms of five (5) years. All members shall serve without compensation.
11-1102 - Procedure. The Historic Zoning Commission shall adopt by-laws which shall at least establish a
regular meeting time and place, establish the manner of voting, set procedure for the recordation of
procedures, and may address any additional matters relating to the conduct of the Historic Zoning
Commission as the Historic Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
11-1103 - Powers and Duties. The Harriman Historic Zoning Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
1. To review all projects within any historic district require the issuance of a permit before such
projects can be lawfully commenced within the City of Harriman, and following such review, grant,
grant with conditions or deny a certificate of appropriateness; and further review any projects not
requiring a permit, but which the building official has been authorized to review by the Harriman
Historic Zoning Commission within its "Design Review Guidelines," and for which he has ref to issue
a certificate of appropriateness, and thereafter to grant, grant with conditions, or deny certificate of
appropriateness.
2. To adopt design review guidelines for each classification of historic district established in the City by
which all projects subject to review in such historic districts are to be reviewed in order that the
building official and/or Harriman Historic Zoning Commission may make a determination as to the
granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness.
3. To recommend to the planning commission the establishment of historic zones; and to review the
recommendations of the planning commission, or any other group or person, for the establishment
or change in boundaries of any historic zone.
11-1104 - Jurisdiction. For the projects for which the building official is authorized to grant or grant with
conditions a certificate of appropriateness, the building official shall render a decision within five (5)
43
working days of the date on which he received sufficient data on which to make a judgement regarding
the project's appropriateness. For projects which require review by the Harriman Historic Zoning
Commission, a those other projects which the building official refers to it for review, the Harr an Historic
Zoning Commission shall render decision to grant, grant with conditions, or deny a certificate of
appropriateness within thirty (30) days of the date of the meeting at which sufficient data is available
concerning the project to make a judgement regarding its appropriateness.
11-1105 - Review of Decisions. Any person who may be aggrieved by any final order of judgement of
the Historic Zoning Commission may have such order or judgement reviewed by the courts by the
procedure of statutory certiorari, as provided for in Title 27, Chapter 8, Tennessee Code Annotated.
44
CHAPTER 12
AMENDMENTS
SECTION
11-1201
11-1202
11-1203
Procedure
Approval by Planning Commission
Introduction of Amendment
11-1201 - Procedure. The city council may amend the regulations, boundaries, or any provision of this
ordinance. Any member of the city council may introduce such amendment, or any official, board, or
any other person may present a petition the city council requesting an amendment or amendments to
this ordinance.
11-1202 - Approval by Planning Commission. No such amendment shall become effective unless the
same be first submitted for approval disapproval, or suggestions to the planning commission. If the
planning commission disapproves after such submission, it shall require the favorable vote of a majority
of the entire membership of the city council to become effective.
11-1203 - Introduction of Amendment. Upon the introduction of an amendment of this ordinance or
upon the receipt or a petition to amend this ordinance, the city council shall publish a notice of such
request for an amendment, together with the notice of t set for hearing by the city council of the
requested change. Said notice shall be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the City of
Harriman, Tennessee. Said hearing by the city council shall take place not sooner than fifteen (15) days
after the date of publication of such notice.
45
CHAPTER 13
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
SECTION
11-1301
11-1302
11-1303
Conflict with Other Ordinances
Validity
Effective Date
11-1301 - Conflict with Other Ordinances. In the case of conflict between this ordinance or any part
thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the City of Harriman, the most
restrictive shall in all cases apply.
11-1302 - Validity. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other
section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional.
11-1303 - Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, the
public welfare demanding it.
Certified by Planning Commission
Passed on First Reading
Passed on Second Reading
Approved and Signed in Open Meeting
Attest:
/S/
City Recorder Mayor
46
APPENDICES
47
APPENDIX B
CERTIFICATE OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
We hereby certify that this Planned Unit Development (PUD) been found to comply with the zoning and
PUD regulations of t Harriman Municipal/Regional Planning Commission, with the exception of such
alterations or variances, if any, as noted the minutes of the Harriman Municipal/Regional Planning
Commission and the Harriman Board of Zoning Appeals.
Date Chairman Harriman Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
Date Secretary Harriman Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
CERTIFICATE OF PUD APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT
I·(we) hereby certify that I (we)understand that the approval of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall
expire twelve (12) months after the date of approval.
Date Applicant
Date Applicant
48
APPENDIX C
CERTIFICATE OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL
We hereby certify that this site plan has been found to comply with the zoning and site plan regulations
of the Harriman Municipal/Regional Planning Commission, with the exception of such variances, if any,
as noted in the minutes of the Harriman Board of Zoning Appeals.
Date Chairman Harriman Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
Date Secretary Harriman Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
CERTIFICATE OF SITE PLAN APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT
I (we)hereby certify that I (we) understand that the approval of a site plan shall expire twelve (12
)months after the date approval unless a building permit has been issued and substantial progress has
been made toward completion of the project.
Date Applicant
Applicant
49
APPENDIX D
F-1 Flood Hazard District Regulations
50
HARRIMAN MUNICIPAL FLOODPLAN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
(D Level)
ARTICLE 1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
Section A. Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code
Annotated delegated responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety, and gen welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Harriman, Tennessee
Mayor and City Council, does ordain as follows:
Section B. Findings of Fact
1. The Harriman Mayor and City Council wishes to main eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program an order to do so must meet the requirements of 60.3(d) of Federal Insurance
Administration Regulations found at 44 CFR Ch. 1 (10-1-88 Edition) and subsequent amendments.
2. Areas of Harriman are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental service extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of w adversely affect the
public health, safety and gen welfare.
3. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect obstructions in floodplains, causing increases
in f heights and velocities; and by uses in flood hazard a which are vulnerable to floods; or
construction which inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or other unprotected from flood
damages.
Section C. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public heal safety and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This Ordinance is designed
to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water erosion hazards, or which cause in damaging
increases erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood
damage;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which
accommodate flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damage, and;
51
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers will unnaturally divert flood waters or which
may increase flood hazards.
Section D Objectives
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodable areas;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of flood prone
areas;
7. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that prop is in a floodable area; and,
8. To establish eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in Ordinance shall be interpreted as to give
them the meaning have in common usage and to give this Ordinance its reasonable application.
"Accessory Structure" shall represent a subordinate structure the principal structure and, for the
purpose of this sect shall conform to the following:
1. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation.
2. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
3. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to flow of floodwaters.
4. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to pre flotation which may result in damage to other
structures.
5. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equip shall be elevated or floodproofed.
"Act" means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that are incorporated in 42
U.S.C. 4001-4128.
52
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a
building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any
walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls is new construction.
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the' Building Official’s interpretation of any provision of this
Ordinance or a request for a variance.
"Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Area of Special Flood-related Erosion Hazard" is the land within a community which is most likely to be
subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard
area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
"Area of Special Flood Hazard” is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM.
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, Al-30, AE or A99.
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
"Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade {below ground level) on all sides.
"Breakaway Wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing
damage to the elevated portion of the building supporting foundation system.
"Building", for purposes of this section, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for
any occupancy or storage. (See "structure")
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
"Elevated Building" means a non-basement building (i) built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means pilings, columns (posts
and piers), (ii) and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
or D, "elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
53
"Emergency Flood Insurance Program" or "Emergency Program" means the program was implemented
on an emergency basis in accord with section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a
first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
"Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not per se
covered under the Program.
"Exception" means a waiver from the provisions of this Ordinance which relieves the applicant from the
requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this
Ordinance.
"Existing Construction” any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the
effective date of this Ordinance.
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this
ordinance.
"Existing Structures" see "Existing Construction"
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means the preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or
pouring of concrete pads).
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
1. the overflow of inland or tidal waters;
2. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
"Flood Elevation Determination" means a determination by the Administrator of the water surface
elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of
occurrence in any given year.
"Flood Elevation Study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination
of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood-re erosion hazards.
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map ( FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the flood related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zone A, M, and/or E.
54
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
"Flood Insurance Study" is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The report contains flood profiles as well as the Flood Boundary Map and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone Area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see definition of "flooding").
"Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works and floodplain management regulations.
"Flood Protection System" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to
reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
"Flood-related Erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body
of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
"Flood-related Erosion Area" or "Flood-related Erosion Prone Area" means a land area adjoining the
shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high
water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
"Flood-related Erosion Area Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and flood plain management regulations.
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
"Floor" means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in
concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not
include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
55
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in above a flood level for purposes of floodplain
manage "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors could contribute to flood
heights greater than the h calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
"Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and
ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
"Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
"Levee System" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of Ordinance.
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
56
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a
community issued by the Agency.
"Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference
for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term is
synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
"New Construction" any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of this Ordinance. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of this
Ordinance.
"100-year Flood" see "Base Flood".
"Person" includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any
other entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
"Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
1. built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
"Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height.
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
"Special Hazard Area" means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
erosion hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99 or AH.
57
"Start of Construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"State Coordinating Agency" (Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development,
Local Planning Assistance Office) means the agency of the state government, or other office
designated by the Governor of the State or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to
assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program in that state.
"Structure", for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or
infrastructures.
"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or; (2)
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure".
"Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions" is where the repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50
percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance which permits construction in a
manner otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the
58
elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this Ordinance is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
"Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in
the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas.
ARTICLE 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section A. Application
This Chapter shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of Harriman, Tennessee.
Section B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified on the Harriman, Tennessee, Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Community - 47527 -, Panel Numbers 0001 0003;
Effective Date: September, 1984 and any subsequent amendments or revisions, are adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. These areas shall be incorporated into the
Harriman, Tennessee Zoning Map.
Section C. Requirement for Development Permit
A development permit shall be required in conformity with this Chapter prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
Section D. Compliance
No structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Section E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easement, covenant, or deed
restriction. However, where this Ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Section F. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum
requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit
nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Section G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does
59
not imply that land outside the flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Harriman, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Section H. Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements,
including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or
special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by
law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Harriman, Tennessee from taking such other lawful actions to
prevent or remedy any violation.
ARTICLE 4. ADMINISTRATION
Section A. Designation of Building Official
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Section B. Permit Procedures
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Building Official on forms furnished by him
prior to any development activity. The development permit may include, but is not limited to the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment,
drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Application stage
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all
buildings.*
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be floodproofed,
where base flood elevation data is available.*
c. Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed
building will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Article 4. Section B.2, where base
flood elevation data is available.*
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
* (see 2. below)
2. Construction Stage
60
Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data are not available, the Building Official shall
record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. The elevation of the lowest floor
shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building and the highest adjacent
grade. USGS Quadrangle maps may be utilized when no more detailed reference exists to establish
reference elevations.
Within all flood zones where base flood elevation data are utilized, the Building Official shall require
that upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, whichever
is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Building Official a certification of
the elevation of the lowest floor, or flood-proofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in
relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a
registered land surveyor, professional engineer, or architect and certified by same. When floodproofing
is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct
supervision of, a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior
to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Building Official shall review
the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by
the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.
Section C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Building Official
Duties of the Building Official shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of all development permits to assure that the requirements of this Ordinance have been
satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
2. Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific
federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided
and maintained on file with the development permit. This shall include Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
3. Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community
Development, Local Planning Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submission of evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
4. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade, whichever is
applicable) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings,
in accordance with Article 4 Section B.2.
5. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade, whichever is
applicable) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed,
in
accordance with Article 4. Section B.2.
6. When flood-proofing is utilized, the Building Official shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with Article 4. Section B .2.
61
7. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions) the Building Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Article 6.
8. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency then the Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source,
including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the Community FHBM
or FIRM meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(Optional additional requirement)
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where
alternative data is not available, the Building Official shall require the lowest floor of a building to
be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least (2J two feet above the highest adjacent grade
(lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance). All
applicable data including the highest adjacent grade elevation and the elevations of the lowest
floor of flood-proofing shall be recorded as set forth in Article 4. Section B.
9. All records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the
Building Official and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined
files.
10. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any water course
is maintained.
ARTICLE 5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Section A. General Standards
In all flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure;
2. Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of overthe-
top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable
state requirements for resisting wind forces;
3. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;
62
4. New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
5. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of flood waters into the system;
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding;
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with
the provisions of this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained
in this Chapter; and,
10. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance
with the provision of this Ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity
is not
extended.
Section B. Specific Standards
These provisions shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard as provided herein;
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, including A
zones, Al-30 zones, AE zones, AO zones, AH zones and A99 zones, and has provided a regulatory
floodway, as set forth in Article 3. Section B, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building
(or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated no lower than
one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters
shall be provided in accordance with standards of Article 5. Section B.3.
2. Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or non-residential building shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no
lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones
may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the
required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water,
and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided
to the Building Official as set forth in Article 4. Section B.2.
63
3. Elevated Building. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that
include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry
and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
a. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer
or architect or meet the following minimum criteria.
i. Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
b. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate
rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall
comply with the provisions of Article 5. Section B. of this Chapter.
4. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles
a. All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in
expansions of existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new
construction, including elevations and anchoring.
b. All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision must be elevated so that:
i. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foat above
the level of the base flood elevation on a permanent foundation;
ii. The manufactured home must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and,
iii. In or outside of an existing or new manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an
expansion of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, on which a manufactured
home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any manufactured home
placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of Article 5. Section B.4.b.i. and
ii, above.
c. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
64
i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
iii. The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including
anchoring and elevation requirements of Article 5. Section B.4.a. or b.i. and ii, above.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached structures.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided, the provisions of Article 4. Section C.8. shall be utilized for all requirements relative to the
base flood elevation or floodways.
Section C. Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard Zones Al-30 and AE With Established Base
Flood Elevation But Without Floodways Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3. Section B, where streams exist
with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been provided, (zones Al-30 and AE) the
following provisions apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be
located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
2. New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to
elevations established in accordance with Article 5, Section B.
Section D. Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3, Section B, are areas designated
as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one to three feet (1'- 3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated, at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall:
65
a. have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade . If no depth number is
specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade; or,
b. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above
that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
Section E. Standards For Areas Protected by Flood Protection System (A-99 Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3. Section B. are areas of the
100-year flood protected by a flood protection system which is under construction but where base
flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been determined. With these areas (A-99 Zones)
the following provisions apply:
1. All provisions of Article 4. and Article 5. Section A. and H. shall apply.
Section F. Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard With Established Base Flood Elevation And
With Floodways Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3. Section B, where streams exist
with base flood data and floodways provided, the following provisions apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other
developments shall be located within designated floodways, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
encroachments or new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge at any point within the community. The engineering certification should
be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
2. If Article 5. Section F. 1. Above is satisfied, new construction or substantial improvements of
buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Article 5.
Section B.
Section G. Standards For Unmapped Streams (optional)
Located within Harriman, Tennessee are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are
neither indicated nor base flood data or floodways have been provided. Adjacent to such streams the
following provisions shall apply:
1. In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no encroachments including fill material or
structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream along
66
each side of the stream, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the locality.
2. When flood elevation data is available, new construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Article 4. Section
B.2.
Section H. Standards for Subdivision Proposals
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood-prone area, any
such proposals shall be reviewed to ensure that:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than fifty
lots and/or five acres.
ARTICLE 6. VARIANCE PROCEDURES
The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special flood hazard.
Section A. Board of Zoning Appeals
1. The Harriman Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this Chapter.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition) upon
a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
3. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;
67
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent
facility;
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
g. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and for that area;
h. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
i. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site, and;
j. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
4. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this Ordinance, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this Ordinance.
5. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
Section B. Conditions for Variances
1. Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary,
considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the
variance is the minimum relief necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of
the building.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, {ii) a determination
that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and (iii) a determination
that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or Ordinances.
3. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property.
68
4. The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
1
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND JURISDICTION
A. Purpose
Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once
land has been cut up into streets, lots and blocks and publicly recorded, the
correction of the defects is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or
later becomes a public responsibility, in that roads and streets must be maintained
and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The
welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in many important respects. It
is therefore to the interest of the public, the developer and the future owners that
subdivision be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules
and proper minimum standards.
The following subdivision standards guiding the planning commission are
designed to provide for the harmonious development of the planning region to
secure a coordinated layout and adequate provision for traffic and also to secure
adequate provision for light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, and
sewer. And other sanitary facilities.
B. Authority
These subdivision regulations are adopted and may be amended under authority
granted by Sections 13-4-301 through 13-4-309, Tennessee Code Annotated. The
planning commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in these statutes as
prerequisite to the adoption of such standards, having a certified copy of the
Major Street and Road Plan in the office of the Register of Roane County,
Tennessee on September 29, 1964.
C. Jurisdiction
These regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land within the Harriman
Planning Region as established by resolution of the Tennessee State Planning
Commission. Within these regulations the term “subdivision” shall mean the
division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or divisions for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdividing or to the land or are subdivided. Any owner of land within this
area wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission, a plat of
the subdivision according to the procedures outlined in Article II, which plat shall
conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Article III. Improvements
shall be installed as required by Article IV of these standards.
All property meeting the definition of “subdivision” which lies within the
corporate limits of Harriman, Tennessee. In accordance with 13-4-301,
Tennessee Code Annotated, the following divisions of property are considered to
be subdivisions and therefore must meet the provisions of these regulations: a
division where one (1) or more of the resulting lots is less than five (5) acres in
size; divisions where a new means of access or public water or public sewer is
required, regardless of the size of any or all of the lots; further division of lots
2
created by previous subdivision activity; and rearrangement of lot lines,
easements, rights-of-way, and similar changes to previously recorded plats. Any
owner of land within the city wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the
planning commission a plat of the subdivision prepared in accordance with
applicable provisions of Articles II, III, and IV of these regulations. Questions
regarding whether or not proposed land division activities are subdivisions should
be directed to the planning staff.
3
ARTICLE II
PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of two (2) separate
steps. The initial step is the preparation and submission to the planning commission of a
preliminary sketch plat of the proposed subdivision. The second step is the preparation
and submission to the planning commission of a final plat together with required
certificates. This final plat becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the
county register when duly signed by the secretary of the planning commission.
The subdivider shall consult early and informally with the planning commission and its
technical staff for advice and assistance before the preparation of the preliminary sketch
plat and its formal application for approval. This will enable him to become thoroughly
familiar with theses regulations, the Major Street and Road Plan and other official plans
or public improvements which might affect the area. Such informal review should
prevent unnecessary and costly revisions.
A. General
1. Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction of the planning
commission who wishes to subdivide such land into two (2) or more lots,
site, or divisions for purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or
building development, or who wishes to resubdivide for this purpose, shall
submit a plat of such proposed subdivision to the planning commission for
approval and shall obtain such approval prior to the filing of the
subdivision plat for record. Any such plat of subdivision shall conform to
the minimum standards of design for the subdivision of land as set forth in
Article III of these standards and shall be presented in the manner
specified in the following sections of this Article. No plat of a subdivision
of land within the area of planning jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded
by the county register without the approval of the planning commission as
specified herein.
2. In order to secure review and approval by the planning commission of a
proposed subdivision, the prospective subdivider shall, prior to the making
of any street improvements or installations of utilities, submit to the
planning commission a preliminary sketch plat as provided in Section B of
this Article. On approval of said preliminary plat the subdivider may
proceed with the site preparation and construction of improvements. At
such time as all required improvements have been installed or appropriate
security provided to guarantee the installation of such improvements, the
subdivider may present a final plat to the planning commission. The final
plat shall be prepared in accordance with Section C of this Article. Upon
receiving final approval and the certifying signature of the planning
commission secretary, the subdivider may record the plat in the office of
the county register of deeds and may thereafter sell, transfer or otherwise
negotiate for the sale of property within the subdivision.
4
B. Preliminary Plat
1. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered, the subdivider shall drawn to a scale of not less than one (1)
inch equals one hundred (100) feet. deliver to the Building Official, five
(5) copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on sheets
no larger than 24 x 36 inches.
2. The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design as set
forth in Article III and the general requirements for the construction of
public improvements as set forth in Article IV and shall include the
following information:
a. The proposed subdivision's name and location, the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner(s), and the name of the designer of the
plat who shall be a registered land surveyor. (Resolution Number
03-01, October 27, 2003).
b. Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale.
c. The location of all existing and platted property lines, existing
streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, sewers, bridges,
culverts, drain pipes, water mains, and any public utility easements
or lines, detention basins, the present zoning classification if any
on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining land, and the
names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions.
d. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, water, gas, fire hydrants,
streetlights, and electricity) showing feasible connections to the
existing or any proposed utility systems. When such connections
are not practicable, any proposed individual water supply and/or
sewage disposal system must be approved by the city or county
health department.
e. Erosion control and drainage plan prepared by an engineer or
landscape architect. (see Article IV, B, 1)
f. The proposed street names, and the locations and dimensions of
proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, and other open spaces,
reservations, lot lines, building setback lines and utilities. The
proposed locations, dimensions, and names of proposed streets,
easements, parks, and other open space reservations, lot lines,
building setback lines, and utilities. Profiles of all streets showing
the natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals twenty (20) feet vertical shall be required.
g. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet except
when specifically not required by the planning commission.
h. The total acreage of the land to be subdivided and the area of each
lot.
5
i. Location sketch map showing relationship of subdivision site to
the surrounding area.
j. If any portion of the land being subdivided is below the elevation
of the Regional (105,000 cfs) Flood on Emory River as defined in
Article III, Section E, then limit of such flood shall be shown.
subject to flood as defined in Article III, Section F, the area subject
to flood shall be shown and all applicable provisions met for the
Harriman Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
3. A subdivider may omit the submission of a preliminary plat, submitting
only a final plat if all the following conditions are met:
a. The proposed subdivision does not contain more than five (5) lots.
b. All public improvements as set forth in Article IV are already
installed or because of the nature of the development deemed not
necessary by the planning commission. Any construction,
installation, or improvement of any public improvements shall
require submission of a preliminary plat as prescribed by Section B
above.
c. The subdivider has consulted informally with the planning
commission and/or planning staff for advice and assistance before
preparation of a final plat and its formal application for approval.
4. Within thirty (30) days after the planning commission meeting at which a
preliminary plat is considered, the planning commission shall approve or
deny approval of the plat or approve the plat subject to modifications. If
the plat is approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required
modifications shall be set out in the minutes of the commission, or if
approval is denied, reasons for denial shall be similarly stated in the
minutes of the commission.
5. One (1) copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained in the planning
commission files, one (1) copy shall be provided to the planning staff, and
one (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider at the time of approval or
denial with any notations as to required changes, if any.
6. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may proceed with
the installation of public improvements. A revised preliminary plat shall
be submitted to the planning commission for approval should any
substantial changes be proposed to the subdivision following preliminary
plat approval. Substantial changes shall be, but shall be not limited to,
changes in location of street right-of-way, decrease or increase in
waterline size, or changes in location or capacity of stormwater
management facilities.
7. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not be construed as assuring
approval of the final plat.
8. The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based
thereon is submitted within twelve (12) months from the date of such
6
approval unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
planning commission.
7
C. Preliminary Plat Checklist
Name of Subdivision ______________________________________________________
Location ____________________________ Civil Dist. ______ Zoning Dist. ______
Owner ___________________________ Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Agent ___________________________ Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Surveyor _________________________ Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Plat Checklist
( ) Plat submitted 10 days prior to meeting _________
( ) Five (5) copies of plat submitted Date
( ) Scale not less than 1" = 100'
( ) Meet minimum standards in Article III and requirements of Article IV
( ) Name, ( ) location, & ( ) acreage of subdivision
( ) Location sketch map
( ) Date, ( ) magnetic north point, & ( ) graphic scale
( ) Name(s) & ( ) address(es) of property owners
( ) Name & ( ) address of surveyor
( ) Names of adjacent property owners, ( ) streets, & ( ) subdivisions
( ) Locations & dimensions of existing and proposed property lines, ( ) utilities,
( ) easements, ( ) drainage facilities, buildings, water courses, railroads, sewers, bridges,
culverts, drain pipes, water mains, and any public utility easements or line.
( ) Proposed names, locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements,
parks, and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines, and utilities.
( ) Building setback lines
( ) Contour lines at five (5) foot intervals
( ) Indicate property subject to flood
( ) Surveyor signature that roads less than fourteen percent grade or identified and shown
greater than fourteen percent grade
( ) Engineering road profiles
( ) Tax map and parcel number & ( ) deed book and page number of the property
Variances Requested:
1) ____________________________________________________ Approved?_____
2) ____________________________________________________ Approved?_____
3) ____________________________________________________ Approved?_____
( ) This plat was approved on ____________ subject to the following conditions:
( ) This plat was denied approval on ____________ for the following reasons:
8
D. Final Plat
1. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided however, that such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
2. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered, the subdivider shall deliver to the Harriman City Hall, the
original and five (5) copies together with an street profiles or other plans
that may be required by the planning commission.
3. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet on sheets no larger than 24 x 36 inches in size. When more than one
sheet is required, an index sheet shall be provided.
4. The final plat shall show:
a. The lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, building setback lines,
lots numbered in numerical order, lot areas, reservations for
easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for
other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and any
limitations.
b. Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground
the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line,
boundary line, block line, and building line, whether curved or
straight, and including true north point. This shall include the
radius, central angle and tangent distance for the centerline of
curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary
of curved streets.
c. All dimensions to the nearest one hundredth (100th) of a foot and
angles to the nearest minute.
d. Location and description of monuments. (see Article IV, A)
e. The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and
the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property.
f. Date plat was prepared, name of subdivision, name of owner(s),
civil district, deed book and page number, graphic scale, and true
north point.
g. Location sketch map-showing site in relation to the surrounding
area.
h. If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flood, as
defined in Article III, F, information shall be submitted, as outlined
in that section of these regulations and the Harriman flood damage
prevention ordinance.
i. Street numbers, if assigned by the property numbering authority.
9
5. The following certificates shall be presented on the final plat: (see
following page)
a. Certification showing that applicant is the landowner and dedicates
streets, right-of-ways, and other sites, as may be applicable, for
public use.
b. Certification by surveyor or engineer as to accuracy of survey and
plat and placement of monuments.
c. Certification by the utility provider that the water supply system
meets requirements of the controlling state agency.
d. Certification by the county department of environmental health
that the subsurface sewage disposal system(s) is approved or that
the public sewerage system meets requirements of the controlling
state agency.
e. Certification by the appropriate city authority and an approved
independent street testing firm that all streets and appurtenances
have been installed in accordance with established standards.
f. Certification for recording by planning commission secretary. The
signature of the planning commission secretary shall not be placed
on the plat until final plat approval has been granted and all other
required certifying signatures obtained.
g. Certification of approval for street names and numbering to be
signed by the Roane County E-911 Director. Resolution R-1007-
2, 10/17/07.
6. When the plat has been approved by the planning commission (1) copy
will be returned to the subdivider, with the approval of the planning
commission certified thereon, for filing with the county register as the
official plat of record. The original tracing containing all required
certificates will be returned to the subdivider for his records. One copy
will be retained in the records of the planning commission and two copies
will be provided the Utilities Department.
7. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove this final plat
within thirty (30) days after its submission. Failure of the planning
commission to act on this final plat within these thirty (30) days shall be
deemed approval of it. If the plat is disapproved the grounds for
disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission.
8. Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute
the acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other public
way or ground. The subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining from
the city’s governing body its formal acceptance of any public street or
other facility.
10
E. Final Plat Checklist
Name of Subdivision ______________________________________________________
Location _______________________________Civil Dist. ______ Zoning Dist. ______
Owner ___________________________Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Agent ___________________________ Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Surveyor _________________________ Address ___________________ Tel. ________
Plat Checklist
( ) Plat submitted 10 days prior to meeting Date _______
( ) Five (5) copies of plat (and street profiles if required) submitted
( ) Plat drawn to 1" = 100' ( ) on 24"X36" sheets (or as approved)
( ) Class I survey
( ) Name, & ( ) location, & ( ) acreage, & ( ) title of subdivision.
( ) Date, ( ) magnetic north point, ( ) graphic scale, & ( ) location sketch map
( ) Locations & descriptions of all ( ) monuments, ( ) iron pins-new and old, ( )
drainage facilities, & ( ) utilities
( ) Locations and descriptions of ( ) property lines, ( ) easements shown, ( ) building
setback lines shown, & ( ) road rights-of-way
( ) Names of adjacent property owners, ( ) streets, & ( ) subdivisions
( ) All subdivision lots numbered consecutively
( ) Building setback lines
( ) Lots numbered in numerical order
( ) Dimensions to nearest 100th
( ) Name(s) and address(es) of owner(s)
( ) Location sketch map
( ) Property subject to flood
( ) Certificate of ownership & dedication
( ) Certificate of accuracy
( ) Certificate of approval of water & sewage systems (state)
( ) Certificate of approval of streets (road superintendent)
( ) Certificate of approval of utilities (utility district)
( ) Certificate of approval of street names (E911 director)
( ) Certification of flood prone areas (surveyor)
( ) Certificate of approval for recording
Variances Requested:
1) ________________________________________________ Approved?______
2) ________________________________________________ Approved?______
3) ________________________________________________ Approved?______
( ) This plat was approved on ____________ subject to the following conditions:
( ) This plat was denied approval on ____________ for the following reasons:
11
F. Subdivision Certification Forms (Examples provided below):
1. CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
This is to certify that the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon
hereby adopt this subdivision plat and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, or
other public ways and open space to public or private use as noted.
____________ _____________________________________
Date Owner(s)
2. CERTIFICATION OF ACCURACY OF SURVEY
I certify that the plat shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey to
the accuracy required by the Harriman Regional Planning Commission, and, that
monuments have been placed as shown hereon in accordance with the
specifications of the Harriman Regional Planning Commission.
____________ _____________________________________
Date Registered Land Surveyor
3. CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF WATER SYSTEMS
I certify that the water system installed, or proposed for installation along with the
financial guarantee provided, fully meets requirements of the State of Tennessee.
____________ _____________________________________
Date Authorized Representative of Utility Provider
12
4a. CERTIFICATION OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM (public or
community system)
I certify that the sewage disposal system installed, or proposed for
installation along with the financial guarantee provided, fully meets the
requirements of the State of Tennessee and is approved as shown with all
restrictions/conditions as noted. (not required if 4b is applicable)
______________ ___________________________________
Date Authorized Signature of Utility Provider
4b. CERTIFICATION OF SUBSURFACE DISPOSAL (septic
system)*
Subdivision is approved for subsurface sewage disposal.
Owner/developer shall obtain from the appropriate county department of
environmental health a permit for each lot prior to any construction on the
property. The permit shall establish the maximum size dwelling and the
specific location of the primary and the secondary disposal areas.
Owner/developer shall not do any construction or mutilation (cutting or
filling) of the so designated primary and secondary disposal area without
the prior approval of the appropriate county department of environmental
health.
____________ ____________________________________
Date Authorized Representative of Roane County
Department of Environmental Health
*Planning commission will accept substitute or additional language of the county
department of environmental health.
13
5. CERTIFICATION OF STREETS
I certify that streets and related appurtenances installed, or proposed for
installation along with the financial guarantee provided, fully meet the
specifications established by the Harriman Regional Planning Commission.
____________ ______________________________________
Date Authorized Representative of City
6. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR STREET NAMES AND
NUMBERING
I certify the street name(s) and numbering depicted on this plat have been
approved and comply with the street addressing policies of the Roane County E-
911 Department
____________ _________________________________________
Date E-911 Director
(Resolution Number R1007-2, October 17, 2007).
7. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
I certify that this plat has been found to comply with the subdivision regulations
for the Harriman Regional Planning Commission, with the exception of such
variances, if any, which are noted in the minutes of that planning body. All
improvements have been installed or an acceptable surety posted in order to
assure completion. This plat is approved for recording in the office of the county
register of deeds.
____________ ____________________________________
Date Secretary, Harriman Regional Planning
Commission
14
ARTICLE III
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
A. Streets
1. Conformity to the Major Street and Road Plan.
The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official
Major Street and Road Plan.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System.
The proposed street system shall extend existing streets or projects. They
shall be extended at a width no less than the required minimum width.
3. Street Elevations.
No street shall be approved if it is more than two (2) feet below elevation
of flood as defined in Section E of this article. The planning commission
may require where necessary profiles and elevations of streets in areas
subject to flood. Fill may be used for streets provided such fill does not
unduly increase flood heights. Drainage openings shall be so designed as
to not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights.
4. Street Widths.
The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line,
shall be as shown on the Major Street and Road Plan, or if not shown on
such plan, shall not be less than as follows:
a. Arterial Streets or Highways 80-100 feet,
or as may be required.
Arterial streets and highways are those to be used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic and will be located on the Major Street and Road
Plan.
b. Collector Streets 60 feet
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major system of arterial streets and highways and include the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for major circulation within such a development.
15
c. Minor Residential Streets 50 feet
Minor streets are those, which are used primarily for, access to the
abutting residential properties and designed to discourage their use
by through traffic.
d. Marginal Access Streets 50 feet
Marginal access streets are minor streets, which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
e. Dead-End Streets (cul-de-sac) 50 feet
Cul-de-sacs are permanent dead-end streets or courts designed so
that they cannot be extended in the future.
f. Alleys (if approved) 20 feet
Alleys are minor public ways used primarily for service access to
the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
In cases where topography or other physical conditions make a street of
the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may
modify the above requirements. Through proposed neighborhood or local
business areas the street widths shall be increased ten (10) feet on each
side to provide for movement of vehicles into and out of necessary offstreet
parking areas without interference to traffic.
5. Additional Width on Existing Streets.
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-ofway
to meet the above minimum street width requirements.
a. The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the
subdivision is on both sides of the existing street.
b. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing
street, (½) one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from
the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided.
6. Restriction of Access.
When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning
commission may require such lots to be provided with frontage on a
marginal access street.
7. Street Grades
Grades on major streets and roads shall not exceed seven (7) percent.
Grades on other streets may exceed seven (7) percent but not ten (10)
percent.
16
8. Horizontal Curves
Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of
a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On
streets sixty (60) feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature
shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet and on other streets not less
than one hundred (100) feet.
9. Vertical Curves
Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed
so as to afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, said
distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be
four and one-half (4 ½) feet above the pavement surface, to an object four
(4) inches high on the pavement. Profiles of all proposed roads showing
natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals twenty
(20) feet vertical, may be required by the planning commission.
10. Intersections
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible. No
intersection, however, shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees.
Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than twenty (20)
feet, except that where the angle of street intersection is less than seventyfive
(75) degrees, a greater curb radius may be required. Wherever
necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius
without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width,
the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set
back sufficiently to permit such construction.
11. Tangents
A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
12. Street Jogs
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall not be allowed.
13. Dead-End Streets
a. Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end
permanently closed shall be no more than five hundred (500) feet
long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at
the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least eighty (80) feet and a street right-of-way
diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet or the planning
commission may approve an alternate design.
b. Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to
provide for future street access to adjoining property, proposed
17
streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property. Such
streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a
roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet.
14. Private Streets and Reserve Strips
There shall be no private street platted in any subdivision. Every lot in
subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. No
private streets shall be platted in any subdivided property. There shall be
no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of
such strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions
approved by the planning commission.
15. Street Names
Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case
shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, way,
place or court. Through its index list of street names on file the planning
commission can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication. The Roane
County E-911 Office shall sign the final plat certifying street names and
numbering. Resolution R1007-2, 10/17/07.
16. Alleys
Alleys may be required in the rear of all lots used for business purposes,
and shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider
produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for
alleys.
B. Blocks
1. Length
Blocks shall not be less than four hundred (400) nor more than twelve
hundred (1200) feet in length, except as the planning commission
considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of
street pattern. In blocks over eight hundred (800) feet in length the
planning commission may require one (1) or more public crosswalks of
not less than ten (10) feet in width to extend entirely across the block at
locations deemed necessary.
2. Width
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots, except where
reverse frontage on major streets and roads is provided or where prevented
by topographical conditions or size of the property; in which case the
planning commission will approve a single row of lots of minimum depth.
18
C. Lots
1. Adequate Building Sites
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flood as
defined in Section E of this Article and outside the limits of any existing
easement or building setback lines required in Subsection 4 of this section.
2. Arrangement
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a public
street or road, which is not less than fifty (50) feet in width.
3. Minimum size
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such as the planning
commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use
contemplated. Where public water and sanitary sewer systems are
reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such system and
provide a connection or connections to each lot. Where a public sewer is
not accessible, an alternate method of sewerage disposal may be used, if it
meets all applicable public health regulations. Where a public water
supply is not accessible, a water well or other source may be used upon
approval by the planning commission.
a. Residential lots served by public water and sanitary sewer systems
shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet wide at the building
setback line, nor less than seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet
in area.
b. Residential lots not served by public water and/or sanitary sewer
systems shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet wide at the
building setback line nor less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet in area. Provided however greater area may be required by the
planning commission as indicated by data from percolation tests
and investigations or as determined by the city or county health
officer.
c. Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial
properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service
and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated. Platting of individual lots should be avoided in
favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes.
4. Building Setback Lines
a. The minimum depth of building setback lines from the street shall
not be less than thirty (30) feet and, in the case of corner lots, thirty
(30) feet from the side street.
19
b. In the case of electric transmission lines where easement widths
are not definitely established, there shall be a minimum building
setback line from the center of the transmission line as follows:
Voltage of Line Minimum Building Setback
46 kV 37 ½ feet
69 kV 50 feet
161 kV and over 75 feet
5. Corner Lots
Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the additional sideyard
requirements of the zoning ordinance or building setback lines
outlined above.
6. Water
A water supply system shall be constructed to serve all lots shown on the
subdivision plat with water for domestic and fire protection. No waterline
shall be less than six (6) inches in diameter. The planning Commission
may require that collector lines be larger than six (6) inches.
Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no lot is more than one thousand
(1,000) feet from an operable hydrant. (Resolution Number 03-04,
November 24, 2003).
7. Sanitary Sewers
When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public
sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to
serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system.
Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system,
they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic
tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the city or
county health officer.
20
D. Public Use and Service Areas
Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably located and of
adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or neighborhood use as well as
public service areas.
1. Public Open Spaces
Where a school, neighborhood park, recreation area, or public access to
water frontage is shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted
by the planning commission and is located in whole or in part in the
applicant's subdivision, the planning commission may require the
dedication or reservation of such open space within the subdivision up to
and including a total of ten (10) percent of the gross area or water frontage
of the plot for park, school, or recreation purposes.
2. Easements for Utilities and Drainage
Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the planning
commission shall require easements, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in
width, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and
heat mains, or other utility lines, along rear lot lines or side lot lines if, in
the opinion of the planning commission, such action is desirable.
Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the lines or
across lots, where necessary, for the extension of existing or planned
utilities.
Where a subdivision or lot is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving, or protecting such drainage easement.
3. Community Assets
In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features, such as
large trees and watercourses, historical sites, and similar community assets
which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property.
E. Suitability of the Land
1. Land Physically Unsuitable for Subdivision
a. Because of flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations,
and other such features which may endanger health, life, or
property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate
excessive expenditure of public funds for supply and maintenance
of services, and
b. Which other public agencies concerned have investigated and
found in the best interest of the public not suitable for the type of
platting and development proposed shall not be approved for
subdivision unless adequate methods are formulated by the
developer for meeting the problems created by subdivision of such
21
land. Such land within any plat shall be set aside for such uses as
shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
2. Land Unsuitably Located for Subdivision
The planning commission shall not approve what it considers to be
scattered or premature subdivision of land which would endanger health,
safety or property because of lack of or adverse effect on water supply,
schools, proper drainage, good transportation, other public services or
public funds for the supply or maintenance of such services.
F. Land Subject to Flood
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall
not be platted for residential occupancy, or for any other uses that may increase
flood hazard, endanger health, life or property, or aggravate erosion. Such land
within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living
conditions. In applying this provision land below the elevation of the Regional
(105,000 cfs) Flood shall be considered subject to flood. The elevation(s) shall be
determined from the chart, “High Water Profiles, Emory River, Vicinity of
Harriman, Tennessee,” (Tennessee Valley Authority, September 1964) and the
map, “Floodway District, Emory River at Harriman, Tennessee,” (Harriman
Planning Commission and Tennessee State Planning Commission, October 1959),
which are made a part of these regulations.
G. Large Tracts or Parcels
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such
parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future and
for logical further resubdivision.
H. Group Housing Developments (Resolution Number 90-7-1, 7-13-90-1, 7/9/90)
A comprehensive group housing development, including large scale construction
of housing units and mobile home sites together with necessary drives and ways
of access, may be approved by the planning commission, although the design of
the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements, if
departure from the foregoing standards can be make without destroying their
intent.
1. Planned Unit Development
For the purpose of these regulations, a planned unit development shall be a
planned residential, commercial, or industrial development or any
combination approved by the planning commission, professionally
designed as a unit on a parcel of land that may have separate ownership of,
or acceptable lease arrangements and property in joint ownership. A
planned unit development shall have ample open space provisions for the
benefit and use of the residents. The open space shall be permanent and
established in an appropriate legal manner. Planned unit developments
may include condominiums, mobile home parks, and similar group
building developments formally or informally divided for development.
22
a. Planned unit developments shall generally comply with the
standards established in these regulations, however, the uniqueness
of each proposed development may require special consideration
of these standards and they may be modified, without destroying
the intent, by the planning commission to achieve appropriate
design arrangements.
b. The final site plan shall contain the location of proposed structures,
roads, drives, parking, utilities, drainage, open space areas, and all
other requirements established for final approval.
c. A planned unit development plat shall show appropriate
subdivision of properties.
d. No freestanding building shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to
any other freestanding building and no closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to any exterior property line.
e. Each development shall have a pedestrian circulation system plan
and the walkways shall be improved a minimum of four (4) feet in
width.
f. Any planned unit development shall meet all requirements of the
municipal or regional zoning ordinance.
g. All planned unit developments within the corporate limits of a
municipality shall be served by a sanitary sewer. An alternate
system may be considered by the planning commission provided it
shall be first approved by the Roane County Health Department
and reviewed by appropriate review authorities. Outside
municipalities, the planning commission shall receive a favorable
report from the health department prior to granting a final
approval.
h. A final landscaping plan shall be required. Landscaping shall be
designed to lessen noise, improve the visual appearance, and create
a pleasing environment.
i. A final open space plan shall be required. The open space shall be
permanent and established through appropriate legal documents
which shall be submitted with the plan. The documents shall show
the manner or way in which the open space is owned and how it
will be maintained. The open space plan shall also show all open
space improvements such as swimming pools, tennis courts, golf
courses, and similar open space uses.
j. Changes and modifications in the final planned unit development
plan shall be submitted to the planning commission as a revision
request of the approved planned unit development.
2. Mobile Home Parks
A proposed mobile home park shall be considered as a development
informally dividing a land parcel into mobile home sites or spaces for the
23
purpose of renting or leasing and it shall be considered as a planned unit
development and plats shall be submitted to the planning commission for
preliminary and final approval.
3. Mobile Home Subdivision
The planning commission may approve a subdivision with lots designed
and established exclusively for mobile homes. These developments shall
comply with the following standards in addition to those established
herein.
a. The minimum land parcel to be considered for a proposed mobile
home subdivision shall be two (2) acres.
b. The minimum lot size shall be in accordance with the designated
zoning classification.
c. The minimum setbacks and yard requirements shall be the same as
those established in these regulations.
d. Appropriate certificates shall be affixed to the final plat and
appropriate legal documents shall be recorded to assure the
planning commission that the proposed development shall be
developed and utilized as mobile home lots exclusively.
I. Variances
Variances may be granted under the following conditions:
1. Where the subdivider can show that strict adherence to these regulations
would cause unnecessary hardship, or
2. Where the planning commission decides that there are topographical or
other conditions peculiar to the site, and departure from these regulations
will not destroy their intent. Any variance thus authorized shall be stated
in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning
on which the departure is justified set forth.
J. Zoning or Other Regulations
No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance
shall be approved unless it conforms to such ordinance.
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions
noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other
official regulations, the highest standard shall apply.
24
ARTICLE IV
DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL
A perfectly prepared and recorded subdivision or plat means little to a prospective lot
buyer until he can see actual physical transformation of raw acreage into lots suitable for
building purposes and human habitation. Improvements by the subdivider spare the
community from a potential tax liability. The following tangible improvements are
required before final plat approval in order to assure the physical reality of a subdivision
which approval and recordation will establish legally.
A. Required Improvements
Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve streets and
alleys, and to install curbs, monuments, sewers, storm water inlets and water
mains, in accordance with specifications established by the Harriman Regional
planning commission. The adopted requirements, whether in local regulations or
in the following standards, shall govern.
1. Monuments or Corner Markers
a. Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) inches
square, three (3) feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street
corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of
curve in each street. The top of the monuments shall have an
indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set
flush with the finished grade.
b. All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than
three-fourths (3/4) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches
long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade.
2. Grading
All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded by the subdivider so that
pavements and sidewalks can be constructed to the required cross-section.
Deviation from the above due to special topographical conditions will be
allowed only with special approval of the planning commission. Where
streets are constructed under or adjacent to existing electric transmission
lines, the nearest edge of the pavement shall be a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet from any transmission line structure and all grading for the street shall
be done in a manner which will not disturb the structure or result in
erosion endangering the structure. In the case of electric transmission
lines, the clearance from the pavement to the nearest conductor shall meet
the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code.
a. Preparation: Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area
shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable
materials and all trees not intended for preservation.
b. Cuts: In the case of cuts and fills, the entire right of way width to a
cross section of 20% grade from the edge of pavement when
underground electric distribution lines are to be installed. All tree
25
stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a
depth of two (2) feet below the subgrade. Rock, when
encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of twelve (12) inches
below subgrade. All topsoil shall be removed a minimum of two
(2) feet below the subgrade and back filled with suitable material.
No grading shall be done when ground is frozen or muddy unless
mud is removed and disposed of outside of streets.
c. Fill: All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the
construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed.
Excess materials including organic materials, soft clays, etc. shall
be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in
layers not to exceed twelve (12) inches loose and compacted by a
sheep's foot roller with a minimum compaction of 95%. The
filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller
shall be mechanically tamped, and where water is used to assist
compaction the water content shall not exceed the optimum of
moisture.
d. Inspections: During the construction of any subdivision roads in
the area of planning jurisdiction, where such roads will be public
roads to be maintained by the City of Harriman, the developer
and/or his contractor shall be required to provide certification by a
professional engineer for each required inspection. Such roads
shall meet or exceed the standards required by these subdivision
regulations adopted by the City of Harriman. The following
inspections and/or approvals by the certified professional engineer
shall be required:
(a) After clearing and stripping.
(b) Approval of the drainage plan.
(c) After grading and drainage are completed.
(d) After the stone base is in place, and
(e) During and after application of all asphaltic materials.
The developer or his representative will be responsible for
notifying the engineer for each inspection. When the plat is
submitted to the municipal planning commission for final
approval, the engineer shall make a final inspection. His findings
and recommendations as to approval of the roads shall be reported
in writing to the municipal planning commission. In lieu of road
improvements being completed upon request for final approval of
the plat, the municipal planning commission shall ask the advice of
the engineer in regard to the amount of the bond, certified check,
or other means of guarantee shall not be released by the municipal
planning commission until the recommendations of the engineer
have been obtained as to the acceptability of the roads upon
completion of construction.
26
3. Storm Drainage
An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes,
culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided
for the proper drainage of all surface water.
Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow, and
shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required
slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s
formula, but in no case shall the pipe be less than twelve (12) inches.
Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade, and shall be laid on a
firm base but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with the spigot end pointing
in the direction of the flow and with the ends fitted and matched to provide
tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at a
sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact,
and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than one (1) foot below the
roadbed.
B. Road Design Standards
1. Pavement Base
After preparation of the subgrade, (minimum compaction of 95%) the
roadbed shall be surfaced with material required by local standards; but of
not lower classification than crushed rock, stone or gravel. The size of the
crushed rock or stone shall be that generally known as "crusher run stone"
from two and one-half inches down including dust sufficient to bond stone
together. Spreading of the stone shall be done uniformly over the area to
be covered by means of appropriate spreading devices and shall not be
dumped in piles. After spreading, the stone shall be rolled until
thoroughly compacted and bonded together. The base shall be thirty-two
(32) feet wide to allow for two (2) foot wide shoulders on both sides of
pavement surface. The compacted thickness of the stone roadway shall be
as follows for the area zoned:
Residential 6"
Commercial 8"
Industrial 10"
2. Prime Coat
After a thoroughly compacted base has been established, a prime coat
shall be applied as specified in Appendix II of these regulations.
3. Binder
A binder course consisting of asphaltic concrete (307-B) shall be required
for all roadways as follows:
Residential 2.5"
Commercial 3.0
Industrial 3.0"
27
4. Wearing Surface
The wearing surface shall meet specifications as provided in Appendix I
and the following thickness:
Residential 1.5"
Commercial 2.0
Industrial 2.0"
5. Minimum Pavement Widths and Cross Section
Minimum pavement widths between curbs shall be as follows:
Minor Residential Streets 30 feet
Marginal Access Streets 30 feet
Cul-de-sac 30 feet
Collector streets 36 feet
Arterial Streets and Highways as may be required; not
usually paved by developer
6. Curbs and Gutters
The subdivider may provide permanent six (6) inch concrete curbs with
twenty-four (24) inch integral concrete gutters; standard rolled curb and
gutters; or other construction approved by the planning commission. The
commission may exempt the placement of curbing on cul-de-sacs,
marginal access streets, and loop streets depending on the length of said
streets and topography of the area.
7. Sidewalks
Sidewalks are not required, but if provided shall meet the following
requirements:
Sidewalks shall be located not less than one (1) foot from the property line
to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other
planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. In single
family residential areas concrete sidewalks shall be four (4) feet wide and
four (4) inches thick. In multi-family or group housing developments
sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. In
commercial areas sidewalks shall be ten (10) feet wide and four (4) inches
thick.
8. Installation of Utilities and Driveways
After grading is compacted and approved and before any base is applied,
all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service
connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the
length of the road and to the edge of the pavement. All driveways for
houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. Sewer and
water service connections shall be provided for each lot by the subdivider.
28
C. Guarantee in Lieu of Completed Improvements
The Planning Commission is under no obligation to accept guarantees in lieu of
actual completion of physical improvements. The commission may require that
all improvements shall be installed prior to granting final approval. It may permit
the posting of bonds or letters of credit under circumstances it finds favorable to
the general public welfare.
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission unless
one of the following conditions is met:
1. All physical improvements to the subdivision have been constructed to the
requirements of these regulations and certified by the approved authority.
2. A security or performance bond has been provided to the planning
commission as assurance that all physical improvements to the subdivision
will be made in the event of default by the subdivider.
a. When bonds are permitted, the developer shall submit his/her cost
estimates to the Harriman Regional Planning Commission in
advance of the meeting and in conjunction with the final plat
submission. No final plat approval shall be granted where the
bonds are made out incorrectly, inadequate bond amounts are
noted, or the bonds were not submitted in advance with the plat ten
(10) calendar days prior to the planning commission meeting.
b. The commission shall require three (3) bids from companies
authorized to conduct business in the State of Tennessee, for each
public improvement bonded; water, sewer, roads, drainage. Or, the
commission may accept the written cost estimates of the
appropriate utility department, highway department, and the
certifying engineer for drainage improvements.
c. The highest estimate (or portions of estimates in the case of
multiple improvements) shall be used as the basis for setting the
performance bond amount. The bond amount shall be calculated
as 120% of the highest estimate.
d. There shall be separate bonds submitted to and in the name of the
Harriman Regional Planning Commission for water, sewer,
drainage, and road construction. No bonds shall be accepted that
are not in the name of the Harriman Regional Planning
Commission.
e. All bonds shall be for at least one (1) year. The developer may
extend the bond for an additional year with the commission’s
approval. The planning commission may order the cashing of any
bonds at any time that the commission thinks the developer may
default or the improvements may not be made. No notification of
the developer is required prior to the commissions cashing in the
bond.
29
f. Performance bonds, which are submitted in lieu of the completed
improvements, shall be in cash or made by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in the State of Tennessee. In the
case of a surety company, the performance bond shall be prepared
according to the form as provided in the Appendix.
g. No bond shall be reduced unless the improvement has been
accepted into the water, sewer or road system.
h. No bond shall be released or reduced based on a contractor’s
statement that the improvements have been completed. Nor shall a
bond be released or reduced for the reason that the contractor has
been paid or is awaiting payment.
3. Acceptable Bonds
a. Developer’s Surety Company Completion Bond
A surety bond from the subdivider to the Planning Commission for
the county in the full amount of the estimated cost of installing
improvements required under these regulations.
b. Developer’s Cash Completion Bond.
A certified check in the full amount of the estimated cost of
installing all required improvements.
c. Escrow Agreement.
An escrow agreement in the full amount of the estimated cost of
installing required improvements.
4. Letter of Credit
A letter of credit is acceptable provided that the banking lender certify that
the bank or lending institution shall be liable for all improvements
required on the final plat. The letter of credit must also state that the
planning commission may cash the letter of credit in upon submittal of the
planning commission’s minutes.
a. The amount of the letter of credit shall be the estimated cost of all
improvements, established by the approving authority, i.e., road
superintendent, utility district, and other authorities, as approved
by the planning commission. The amount of the letter of credit
may be amended to reflect changes in the costs of required
improvements as they are completed.
b. The letter of credit shall be effective for a period of one (1) year.
The period may be extended if both the commission and the
subdivider agree to such an extension and the commission
determines that an extension will not adversely affect the public
interest.
30
5. Record Keeping
The Planning Commission Secretary shall keep a complete record of all
outstanding bonds. A copy of the record shall be kept with the Planning
Commission files in City Hall. The record shall include the following
information:
a. Date bond amount was set
b. Bond amount
c. Name(s) of developer(s)
d. Name of subdivision
e. Description of improvements covered by bond
f. Indication of Performance or Maintenance bond
g. Date of required notification (60 days prior to expiration)
h. Date of bond expiration
Record of letters of notification shall be kept as part of the Planning
Commission Secretary’s files.
31
ARTICLE V
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOALTIONS
A. General
The enforcement of these regulations and penalties for the unapproved
recordation or transfers of land are provided by state law in the authority granted
by Public Acts of the State of Tennessee.
B. Enforcement
1. No plat or plan of a subdivision of land into two or more lots located
within the area of planning jurisdiction shall be admitted to the land
records of Roane County or be received or recorded by the register of
deeds until said plat or plan has received final approval in writing by the
planning commission, as provided in Section 13-4-302, Tennessee Code
Annotated.
2. No board, public officer, or authority shall light any street, or lay or
authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, or the construction of other
facilities or utilities in any street located within the area of the city’s
planning jurisdiction unless such street shall have been accepted, opened,
or otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to the
adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its
location and lines to a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the
planning commission, as provided in Section 13-4-307, Tennessee Code
Annotated.
C. Penalties
1. No county register of deeds shall receive, file, or record a plat of a
subdivision within the municipality without the approval of the planning
commission as required in Section 13-4-303, Tennessee Code Annotated,
and any county register so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law.
2. Section 13-4-306, Tennessee Code Annotated, provides that whoever
being the owner or agent of the owner of any land, transfers or sells or
agrees to sell or negotiates to sell, such land by reference to or exhibition
of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having
submitted a plat of such subdivision to the planning commission and
obtained its approval as required before such plat be recorded in the office
of the appropriate county register, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by the law.
The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
32
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt
the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its municipal
attorney or other official designated by the City Council, may enjoin such
transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction.
3. Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of the
subdivision regulations shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure,
and the building commissioner and/or the city attorney or other official
designated by the City Council may bring action to enjoin such erection or
cause it to be vacated or removed as provided in Section 13-4-308,
Tennessee Code Annotated.
33
ARTICLE VI
ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
A. Before adoption of these subdivision regulations, a public hearing as require by
Section 13-4-303, Tennessee Code Annotated, was afforded any interested person
or persons. Notice of such hearing was announced in a local paper, being of
general circulation within the area of planning jurisdiction, and stating the time
and place for the hearing.
B. These rules and regulations and any amendment thereto shall be in full force and
effect from and after their adoption and effective date.
Adopted: September 29, 1964
Effective: October 1, 1964
Don K. Bridges
Secretary, Harriman Regional Planning Commission
Shirley Needham
Chairman, Harriman Regional Planning Commission
34
APPENDIX I
ONE COURSE ASPHALTIC CONCRETE WEARING SURFACE
(PLANT MIXED)
A. Description
This wearing surface shall consist of aggregate and bituminous material mixed in
a central plant, constructed on the prepared base in accordance with these
specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and typical cross sections
as shown on the accepted drawings.
B. Materials
1. Liquid asphalt for the tack coat shall be grade RC-2.
2. Asphalt cement to be used in the asphaltic concrete shall be uniform in
character, free from water and shall not foam when heated to 350o F., and
shall meet the following requirements for penetration:
3. Penetration at 77o F., 100 grams, 5 seconds - 100 to 120
4. No mineral matter other than that naturally contained in the asphalt shall
be present.
5. Aggregate shall consist of fine gravel and sand, disintegrated granite, or
other similar granular materials. The portion of the material retained on a
No. 4 sieve shall be known as coarse aggregate, and that portion passing a
No. 4 sieve shall be known as filler.
6. The materials shall be graded and proportioned as follows:
Sieve Designation Passing Square Mesh Sieve
1 inch 100
3/4 inch 85-100
No. 4 60-95
No. 10 45-80
No. 200 5-15
Asphalt by Weight 4-8
C. Construction Methods
1. Apply Tack Coat:
Immediately before placing the bituminous mixture, the existing surface
shall be cleaned of loose or deleterious material by sweeping with a power
broom and hand broom. The surface shall be thoroughly dry before
applying the tact coat. When the existing surface has been put in proper
condition, a tack coat shall be applied to the surface at the rate of 0.1
gallon per square yard by a power distribution of approved type, having a
pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square inch. The
35
bituminous mixture shall be spread and finished immediately after the tack
coat has been applied. The finished thickness shall not be less than two
(2) inches and shall not weigh less than two hundred twenty (220) pounds
per square yard per inch of compacted thickness.
2. Spreading and Finishing:
Where cement, concrete, or masonry edging is not specified on the
accepted plans, suitable side forms or wood or steel shall be firmly
fastened in place and shall be true to line and grade as shown on the
accepted plans. These forms shall remain in place until initial compaction
has been obtained. The bituminous mixture shall be delivered on the job
at a temperature of not less than 250o F. Whenever practical, the mixture
shall be spread by means of an approved mechanical self-powered paver,
capable of spreading the mixture true to the line and grade and crown as
shown on the accepted plans and cross sections. When the mixture is to
be spread by hand, it shall be deposited outside the area on which it is to
be spread. Immediately thereafter it shall be distributed into place by
means of hot shovels and spread with hot rakes in a loose layer of uniform
density and correct depth. Loads shall not be dumped and distributed any
faster than they can be properly handled by the shovelers and rakers. The
raking shall be carefully and skillfully done in such a manner that after the
first passage of the roller over the raked mixture a minimum amount of
back patching will be required.
Placing of the mixture shall be as continuous as possible, and the roller
shall pass over the unprotected edge of the freshly laid mixture only when
the laying of the course is to be discontinued for such length of time as to
permit the mixture to become chilled.
Longitudinal and transverse joints shall be well bonded and sealed. If
necessary to obtain this result, the joints shall be cut back to the full depth
of the previously laid course, painted with hot asphalt, and heated. Before
placing the mixture against them, all contact surfaces of curbs, gutters,
headers, manholes, etc., shall be painted with a thin uniform coating of hot
asphalt cement or asphalt cement dissolved in naphtha.
After spreading, the mixture shall be thoroughly compacted by a threewheel
power driven roller, weighing not less than ten (10) tons, as soon
after being spread as it will bear the roller without undue displacement.
Rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed toward the center
width of the rear wheel. The pavement shall then be rolled diagonally in
two directions with a tandem roller, weighing not less than ten (10) tons;
the second diagonal rolling shall cross the lines of the first. Along curbs,
headers, manholes, and similar structures and at all places not accessible
to the roller, thorough compaction must be secured by means of hot
tampers and at all contacts of this character the joints between these
structures and the surface mixture must be effectively sealed.
3. Seasonal Limits: No asphalt material shall be laid when the temperature
of the air is 50o F. and falling nor during unfavorable weather conditions.
36
APPENDIX II
PRIME COAT REQUIREMENTS
A. After a thoroughly compacted and broomed base has been established, a prime
coat shall be applied as follows:
B. Between April and November 15 at a temperature of 35 degrees or above, tar
grade RT-2 or RT-1 inclusive, or MC-1 or MC-2, shall be applied at the rate of
four-tenths (4/10) gallon per square yard of base surface. The stone chips graded
from one-half (1/2) inch down to number eight (8) with no dust shall be applied at
the rate of ten (10) to fifteen (15) pounds per square yard, rolled until thoroughly
compacted and left to cure for such time as the road engineer may direct but not
less than seven (7) days.
37
APPENDIX III
PERFORMANCE BOND FORM
KNOW ALL MEN by these presents:
WHEREAS ____________________________________ Principal herein is the
owner and developer of the ___________________________, Harriman, Tennessee, and
______________________________________, a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Tennessee (hereafter called the "surety"), and
WHEREAS, the plans and specifications of said subdivision showing the location,
construction and installation of streets, roads, curbs and utilities and other improvements
therein have been filed with the Harriman Regional Planning Commission for final
approval, and which are referred to and made a part of this instrument, as if fully copies
and set forth therein, and
WHEREAS, the Principal herein does hereby obligate itself and does agree to
complete the construction and installation of all streets, roads, sidewalks, curbs, and
utilities, and all other improvements in the said subdivision in accordance with the said
plans and specifications now on file, pending final approval by the said planning
commission.
NOW, THEREFORE, the ________________________________, as Principal
and _____________________________________, as Surety, do hereby firmly bind the
Harriman Regional Planning Commission for and on behalf of Harriman, Tennessee, in
the sum of $_________ conditioned upon the performance by the Principal of its
undertaking herein, and its completion of said _________________________________
Subdivision in the construction of all the streets, sidewalks, roads, curbs, and all other
improvements therein called for by the plans thereon and same to be completed on or
before the ______ day of _______________, 20___, and upon the completion thereof this
obligation to be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
If the Principal fails to complete the construction, and the improvements of said
subdivision as shown and provided for by said plans and specifications herein referred to
within the time herein specified, the Commission may in its discretion extend the time for
the completion of said work by order duly made and entered by the said Commission for
a period of from thirty (30) days to ninety (90) days.
WITNESS our hands this the ____ day of ____________________, 20 _______.
WITNESS:
_______________________________________
PRINCIPAL
By: ___________________________________
_______________________________________
SURETY
By: ___________________________________
15-1
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
3. SPEED LIMITS.
4. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
5. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
6. PARKING.
7. ENFORCEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS2
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc.
15-103. Reckless driving.
15-104. One-way streets.
15-105. Unlaned streets.
15-106. Laned streets.
15-107. Yellow lines.
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic control signs, etc.
15-109. General requirements for traffic control signs, etc.
1Charter reference
Specifically Article II, section 18(47).
Municipal code references
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16, chapter 1.
Driving under the influence: title 11, chapter 2.
2State law references
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-10-307, the following
offenses are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a state
court or a court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or
drugged, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, section
55-10-401; failing to stop after a traffic accident, as prohibited by
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-10-101 et seq.; driving while
license is suspended or revoked, as prohibited by Tennessee Code
Annotated, section 55-7-116; and drag racing, as prohibited by
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-10-501.
Change 4, March 11, 2014 15-2
15-110. Unauthorized traffic control signs, etc.
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic control signs, etc.
15-112. School safety patrols.
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion.
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles.
15-116. Backing vehicles.
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles.
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise.
15-119. Vehicles and operators to be licensed.
15-120. Passing.
15-121. Motorcycles, motor driven cycles, motorized bicycles, bicycles, etc.
15-122. Delivery of vehicle to unlicensed driver, etc.
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such vehicle is
equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and such other
equipment as is prescribed and required by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55,
chapter 9. (1974 code, sec. 9-101)
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc. Except for necessary
access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven upon any
street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose.
15-103. Reckless driving. Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no
person, including operators of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
15-104. One-way streets. On any street for one-way traffic with posted
signs indicating the authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering
access thereto, no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated
direction. (1974 code, sec 9-109)
15-105. Unlaned streets. (1) Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient
width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street except:
(a) When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
(b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the city for
one-way traffic.
(2) All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
Change 4, March 11, 2014 15-3
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or
when preparing for a left turn. (1974 code, sec 9-110)
15-106. Laned streets. On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
On two (2) lane and three (3) lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four
(4) or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall be available for use except
that traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary.
15-107. Yellow lines. On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of
any lane line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone,
and no operator shall drive his vehicle or any part thereof across or to the left
of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from such
street. (1974 code, sec. 9-112)
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic control signs, etc.1 It shall be unlawful for
any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to violate or fail to comply with any
traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state or
the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
willfully to violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police
officer.
Vehicles having in excess of ten (10) wheels and weighing in excess of
fifteen (15) tons be restricted from accessing certain streets or sections of certain
streets as so designated by proper signage, without special approval from the
police department. (1974 code, § 9-113, as amended by Ord. #0311-02, April
2011)
15-109. General requirements for traffic control signs, etc. All traffic
control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform to the latest revision
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
published by the U. S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and
1Municipal code reference
Stop signs, yield signs, flashing signals, pedestrian control signs,
traffic control signals generally: §§ 15-505--15-509.
15-4
location throughout the city. This section shall not be construed as being
mandatory but is merely directive.
No decision by city council shall be made regarding the placement of any
traffic control sign, signal, marking or device, or the particular kind or type of
traffic control signal, sign, marking or device to be placed, until the same has
been referred to the City of Harriman board of police for its study, report and
recommendation. The board of police, in fulfilling its responsibilities designated
herein, shall work in conjunction with the chief of police and the street and
sanitation department supervisor. Upon the completion of its study, the board
of police shall make its report and recommendation to the city council, at which
time the city council shall have the power to act thereon. (Ord. 1047)
15-110. Unauthorized traffic control signs, etc. No person shall place,
maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of
vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or
signal. (1974 code, sec, 9-115)
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic control signs, etc. When a
traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the presumption
shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by the proper city
authority. (1974 code, sec. 9-117)
15-112. School safety patrols. All motorists and pedestrians shall obey
the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned
under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with
instructions; provided, that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction
shall at the time be wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for
giving signals. (1974 code, sec. 9-117)
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions. Except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1974 code, sec.
9-120)
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion. It shall be unlawful for any
person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any
other vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place.
15-5
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
to ride, or for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle being operated on a
street, alley, or other public way or place, to permit any person to ride on any
portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
section shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of lawful
duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. (1974 code, sec.
9-121)
15-116. Backing vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same
unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1974 code, sec. 9-122)
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles. Whenever the load or any
projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or body
thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in such
position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not
less than twelve (12) inches square. Between one-half (½) hour after sunset and
one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of the flag a
red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two
hundred (200) feet from the rear of such vehicle. (1974 code, sec. 9-123)
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any person
to cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, "racing" the
motor, or causing the "screeching" or "squealing" of the tires on any motor
vehicle. (1974 code, sec. 9-124)
15-119. Vehicles and operators to be licensed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of the "Tennessee Motor
Vehicle Title and Registration Law" or the "Uniform Motor Vehicle Operators'
and Chauffeurs' License Law." (1974 code, sec. 9-125)
15-120. Passing. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of
15-6
sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street
in overtaking or passing on the right.
When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and
unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. (1974 code, sec.
9-126)
15-121. Motorcycles, motor driven cycles, motorized bicycles, bicycles, etc.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of the application of this section, the
following words shall have the definitions indicated:
(a) "Motorcycle." Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle
for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or motorized
bicycle.
(b) "Motor-driven cycle." Every motorcycle, including every
motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) brake
horsepower, or with a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding one
hundred and twenty-five cubic centimeters (125cc);
(c) "Motorized bicycle." A vehicle with two (2) or three (3)
wheels, an automatic transmission, and a motor with a cylinder capacity
not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters which produces no more than
two (2) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a
maximum design speed of no more than thirty (30) miles per hour on
level ground.
(2) Every person riding or operating a bicycle, motor cycle, motor
driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city applicable to the driver or operator
of other vehicles except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application to bicycles, motorcycles, motor driven cycles, or motorized bicycles.
(3) No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven
cycle or motorized bicycle shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person
upon such vehicle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.
(4) No bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall
be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
(5) No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle or
motorized bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the
rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
15-7
(6) No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate any
motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle while any other person is a
passenger upon said motor vehicle.
(7) Each driver of a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized
bicycle and any passenger thereon shall be required to wear on his head a crash
helmet of a type approved by the state's commissioner of safety.
(8) Every motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized bicycle operated
upon any public way within the corporate limits shall be equipped with a
windshield or, in the alternative, the operator and any passenger on any such
motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motorized bicycle shall be required to wear
safety goggles, faceshield or glasses containing impact resistent lens for the
purpose of preventing any flying object from striking the operator or any
passenger in the eyes.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride on any vehicle
in violation of this section, and it shall also be unlawful for any parent or
guardian knowingly to permit any minor to operate a motorcycle, motor driven
cycle or motorized bicycle in violation of this section.
15-122. Delivery of vehicle to unlicensed driver, etc. (1) Definitions.
(a) "Juvenile" as used in this chapter shall mean a person less
than eighteen years of age, and no exception shall be made for a juvenile
or who has been emancipated by marriage or otherwise.
(b) "Adult" shall mean any person eighteen years of age or older.
(c) "Custody" means the control of the actual, physical care of
the minor, and includes the right and responsibility to provide for the
physical, mental, moral and emotional well being of the juvenile.
"Custody" as herein defined, relates to those rights and responsibilities
as exercised either by the juvenile's parent or parents or a person granted
custody by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) "Automobile" shall mean any motor driven automobile, car,
truck, tractor, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motorized bicycle, or
vehicle driven by mechanical power.
(e) "Drivers license" shall mean a motor vehicle operators
license or chauffeurs license issued by the State of Tennessee.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any adult to deliver the possession of or the
control of any automobile or other motor vehicle to any person, whether an adult
or a juvenile, who does not have in his possession a valid motor vehicle operators
or chauffeurs license issued by the Department of Safety of the State of
Tennessee, or for any adult to permit any person, whether an adult or a juvenile,
to drive any motor vehicle upon the streets, highways, roads, avenues,
parkways, alleys or public thoroughfares in the City of Harriman unless such
person has a valid motor vehicle operators or chauffeurs license as issued by the
Department of Safety of the State of Tennessee.
15-8
(3) It shall be unlawful for any parent or person having custody of a
juvenile to permit any such juvenile to drive a motor vehicle upon the streets,
highways, roads, parkways, avenues or public ways in the city in a reckless,
careless, or unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to violate the ordinances
of the city.
Change 3, April 10, 2007 15-9
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY VEHICLES1
SECTION
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined.
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-203. Following emergency vehicles.
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc.
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined. Authorized emergency
vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such ambulances
and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of police. (1974
code, sec. 9-102)
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.2 (1) The
exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only
when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds an audible signal by
bell, siren, or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
(1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle,
except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need
not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions herein
stated.
(3) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this title; proceed past a red or stop signal or
stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the intersection is clear;
exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations governing direction
of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1974 code, sec.
9-103)
1Municipal code reference
Emergency services responders: title 20, ch. 2.
2Municipal code reference
Operation of other vehicle upon the approach of emergency vehicles:
section 15-501.
15-10
15-203. Following emergency vehicles. No driver of any vehicle shall
follow any authorized emergency vehicle apparently travelling in response to an
emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1974 code, sec. 9-104)
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to drive over any hose lines or other equipment of the fire department except in
obedience to the direction of a fireman or policeman. (1974 code, sec 9-105)
15-11
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-301. In general.
15-302. At intersections.
15-303. In school zones.
15-301. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating
other speed limits, in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply. (1974 code,
sec. 9-201)
15-302. At intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets. (1974 code, sec. 9-202)
15-303. In school zones. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, section
55-8-152, the city shall have the authority to enact special speed limits in school
zones. Such special speed limits shall be enacted based on an engineering
investigation; shall not be less than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and shall be in
effect only when proper signs are posted with a warning flasher or flashers in
operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such special speed
limit enacted and in effect in accordance with this paragraph.
In school zones where the board of commissioners has not established
special speed limits as provided for above, any person who shall drive at a speed
exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour when passing a school during a recess
period when a warning flasher or flashers are in operation, or during a period
of forty (40) minutes before the opening hour of a school, or a period of forty (40)
minutes after the closing hour of a school, while children are actually going to
or leaving school, shall be prima facie guilty of reckless driving. (1974 code, sec.
9-203, modified)
15-12
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-401. Generally.
15-402. Right turns.
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways.
15-405. U-turns.
15-401. Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any
turning movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any
other vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in
safety and signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.1 (1974 code, sec. 9-301)
15-402. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1974 code, sec. 9-302)
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. (1974 code, sec.
9-303)
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1974 code, sec. 9-303)
15-405. U-turns. U-turns are prohibited. (1974 code, sec. 9-305)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, sec. 55-8-143.
15-13
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc.
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection.
15-504. At railroad crossings.
15-505. At "stop" signs.
15-506. At "yield" signs.
15-507. At traffic control signals generally.
15-508. At flashing traffic control signals.
15-509. At pedestrian control signals.
15-510. Stops to be signaled.
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.1 Upon the
immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, the
driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of
any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer. (1974 code, sec. 9-401)
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc. The drivers of all vehicles
emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways, or buildings shall stop such
vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any sidewalk or street. They shall
not proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street until they can safely do so
without colliding or interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles. (1974
code, sec. 9-402)
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection. No driver shall enter any
intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating
without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting street or
crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (1974 code, sec. 9-403)
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges of emergency vehicles: this title, chapter 2.
15-14
15-504. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1974 code, sec. 9-404)
15-505. At "stop" signs. The driver of a vehicle facing a "stop" sign shall
bring his vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he can proceed
through the intersection in safety. (1974 code, sec. 9-405)
15-506. At "yield" signs. The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right
of way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where "yield"
signs have been posted. (1974 code, sec. 9-406)
15-507. At traffic control signals generally. Traffic control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors
only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or "Go":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone, or "Caution":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
15-15
(3) Steady red alone, or "Stop":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go"
is shown alone. Provided, however, that generally a right turn on a red
signal shall be permitted at all intersections within the city, provided
that the prospective turning car comes to a full and complete stop before
turning and that the turning car yields the right of way to pedestrians
and cross traffic traveling in accordance with their traffic signal.
However, said turn shall not endanger other traffic lawfully using said
intersection. A right turn on red shall be permitted at all intersections
except those clearly marked by a "No Turns On Red" sign, which may be
erected by the city at intersections which the city decides require no right
turns on red in the interest of traffic safety.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Steady red with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length
short of the signal. (1974 code, sec 9-407)
15-508. At flashing traffic control signals. (1) Whenever an illuminated
flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal placed or erected
in the city it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(a) "Flashing red (stop signal)." When a red lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked,
or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(b) "Flashing yellow (caution signal)." When a yellow lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
15-16
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in section 15-504 of this code. (1974 code, sec. 9-408)
15-509. At pedestrian control signals. Wherever special pedestrian
control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" have been
placed or erected by the city, such signals shall apply as follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
(2) "Wait or Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk
or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. (1974 code, sec. 9-409)
15-510. Stops to be signaled. No person operating a motor vehicle shall
stop such vehicle, whether in obedience to a traffic sign or signal or otherwise,
without first signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law,1 except in an emergency. (1974 code, sec. 9-410)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-8-143.
15-17
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION
15-601. Generally.
15-602. Angle parking.
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-604. Where prohibited.
15-605. Loading and unloading zones.
15-606. Presumption with respect to illegal parking.
15-607. Parking regulated on portions of Roane Street and certain cross
streets.
15-608. Parking regulated in front of Roane Medical Center.
15-609. Penalties for violations of sections 15-607 and 15-608.
15-601. Generally. No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended
on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor,
removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward
the nearest curb or gutter of the street.
Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street within
this city shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately parallel to
and within eighteen (18) inches of the right edge or curb of the street. On
one-way streets where the city has not placed signs prohibiting the same,
vehicles may be permitted to park on the left side of the street, and in such cases
the left wheels shall be required to be within eighteen (18) inches of the left edge
or curb of the street.
Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person
shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley within the fire
limits between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. or on any other public
street or alley for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours without the
prior approval of the chief of police.
Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except
to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on
a public street. (1974 code, sec. 9-501)
15-602. Angle parking. On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the city for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person shall
angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has a
length in excess of twenty-four (24) feet. (1974 code, sec. 9-502)
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park a
vehicle in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies
15-18
more than one such space or protrudes beyond the official markings on the
street or curb designating such space unless the vehicle is too large to be parked
within a single designated space. (1974 code, sec. 9-503)
15-604. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of
any sign placed or erected by the state or city, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk; provided, however, a bicycle may be parked on a
sidewalk if it does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of
pedestrian or other traffic;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(9) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted;
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(11) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
(12) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(13) In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being
reserved for the physically handicapped, unless, however, the person driving the
vehicle is (a) physically handicapped, or (b) parking such vehicle for the benefit
of a physically handicapped person. A vehicle parking in such a space shall
display a certificate of identification or a disabled veteran's license plate issued
under Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-8-160(c).
(14) In the right of way of U.S. Highway 27, except where designated
for parking. (1974 code, sec. 9-504, modified)
15-605. Loading and unloading zones. No person shall park a vehicle for
any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the city as a
loading and unloading zone. (1974 code, sec. 9-505)
15-606. Presumption with respect to illegal parking. When any
unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this chapter,
there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
is responsible for such illegal parking. (1974 code, sec. 9-512)
15-19
15-607. Parking regulated on portions of Roane Street and certain cross
streets. Notwithstanding any other sections in this chapter, the operators of
motor vehicles will be permitted to park on Roane Street between Morgan Street
and Crescent Street for a period of time not to exceed two (2) hours. The
operators of motor vehicles will also be permitted to park for a period of time not
to exceed two (2) hours on all side streets which intersect Roane Street in that
area of the city which is bounded on the west by Morgan street on the east by
Crescent Street. on the north by Devonia Street and on the south by Trenton
Street. Parking for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours is hereby declared
to be unlawful. There is excepted from this section the residential portion of
Morgan Street between Roane Street and Devonia Street. Parking is not limited
or restricted on Sundays and legal holidays except on Devonia Street between
Walden Street and Queen Street.
This chapter will apply only between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. (as added
by ord. 832, modified)
15-608. Parking regulated in front of Roane Medical Center. It is hereby
declared to be unlawful to park on Devonia Street between Walden Street and
Queen Street at any time except under the following conditions.
(1) The operators of motor vehicles who are visiting friends who are
patients in the Roane Medical Center will be permitted to park for a period of
time not to exceed two (2) hours.
(2) Relatives who are rendering assistance to patients of the Roane
Medical Center will be permitted to park for as long as they desire upon
condition that they obtain and display on the windshield of their vehicle a
parking permit which will be furnished without charge at the business office of
the Roane Medical Center upon request.
(3) Parking across the street or on the north side of Devonia Street
between Walden Street and Queen Street will be unlawful at anytime. (as
added by ord. 832, modified)
15-609. Penalties for violation of sections 15-607 and 15-608. Any one
who parks in violation of section 15-607 or section 15-608 shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and upon conviction shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 832, modified)
15-20
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-702. Failure to obey citation.
15-703. Illegal parking.
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-705. Deposit of drivers license in lieu of bail.
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.1 When a police officer halts a traffic
violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take such
person into custody under arrest, he shall take the name, address, and
operator's license number of said person, the license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall
issue to him a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him in the city court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving the
written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful for any alleged
violator to give false or misleading information as to his name or address. (1974
code, sec. 9-601)
15-702. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1974 code, sec. 9-602)
15-703. Illegal parking. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver
is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner
to answer for the violation within thirty (30) days during the hours and at a
place specified in the citation. (1974 code, sec. 9-603, modified)
1Municipal code references
Issuance of citations in lieu of arrest and ordinance summonses in
non-traffic related offenses: title 1, chapter 4.
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, section 7-63-101 et seq.
15-21
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles. Members of the police department are
hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary for the security of the vehicle or
to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the streets and impound any
vehicle whose operator is arrested, any vehicle which is a hazard to normal
traffic, or which has been parked for more than one (1) hour in excess of the time
allowed for parking in any place, or which has been involved in two (2) or more
violations of this title for which citation tags have been issued and the vehicle
not removed. Any impounded vehicle shall be stored until the owner or other
person entitled thereto claims it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership or
right to possession, and pays all applicable fees and costs of impoundment and
storage, or until it is otherwise lawfully disposed of. (1974 code, sec. 9-604,
modified)
15-705. Deposit of drivers license in lieu of bail. (1) Deposit allowed.
Whenever any person lawfully possessing a chauffeur's or operator's license
theretofore issued to him by the Tennessee Department of Safety, or under the
driver licensing laws of any other state or territory or the District of Columbia,
is issued a citation or arrested and charged with the violation of any city
ordinance or state statute regulating traffic, except those ordinances and
statutes, the violation of which call for the mandatory revocation of a operator's
or chauffeur's license for any period of time, such person shall have the option
of depositing his chauffeur's or operator's license with the officer or court
demanding bail in lieu of any other security required for his appearance in the
city court of this city in answer to such charge before said court.
(2) Receipt to be issued. The officer, or the court demanding bail, who
receives any person chauffeur's or operator's license as herein provided, shall
issue to said person a receipt for said license upon a form approved or provided
by the Tennessee Department of Safety.
(3) Failure to appear - disposition of license. In the event that any
driver who has deposited his chauffeur's or operator's license in lieu of bail fails
to appear in answer to the charges filed against him, the clerk or judge of the
city court accepting the license shall forward the same to the Tennessee
Department of Safety for disposition by said department in accordance with
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, section 55-7-401 et seq.
16-1
1Municipal code reference
Motor vehicles: title 15.
2Municipal code reference
See Appendix C for utility/street cut guidelines and application forms.
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. STREET CUTS.
2. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
3. RAILROADS.
4. STREET NAMES.
5. STREET NUMBERS.
6. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
STREET CUTS2
SECTION
16-101. Permit required.
16-102. Applications.
16-103. Fee.
16-104. Deposit or bond.
16-105. Safety restrictions on excavations.
16-106. Restoration of streets, etc.
16-107. Insurance.
16-108. Time limits.
16-109. Supervision.
16-110. Driveways.
16-101. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others, including utility districts to make any
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place, or to tunnel under any
street, alley, sidewalk or public place without having first obtained a permit as
herein required, and without complying with the provisions of this chapter; and
it shall also be unlawful to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit;
provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground
facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained
16-2
beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
business day on which the office of the public works director is open for
business, and the permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was
begun. Harriman Utilities and all franchised utilities shall be given a blanket
permit annually, but must notify the public works director on such form as he
shall require each time a cut or bore is made.
16-102. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
public works director, or such person as he may designate to receive such
applications, and shall state thereon the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation,
association, or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws relating to the work to be done. Such application shall be approved or
rejected by the public works director within twenty-four (24) hours of its filing.
(1974 code, sec. 12-102, modified)
16-103. Fee. The fee for such permits shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). This fee is to cover the cost of inspection of backfill, and an asphalt
patch of up to forty-eight (48) square feet. Any excavation larger than that shall
require an additional fee to be determined by the public works director.
Harriman Utilities, as a part of the City of Harriman, is hereby
authorized to perform and certify the backfilling inspections for work performed
by their own crews. Repairs done by contractors of Harriman Utilities shall be
inspected by the city. Since Harriman Utilities will save the city's cost of
inspection, the fee for their permits using their own crews shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Repair permits for their contractors shall remain at one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (1974 code, sec. 12-103, modified)
16-104. Deposit or bond. No such permit shall be issued unless and until
the applicant therefor has deposited with the city a cash deposit. The deposit
shall be in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if no pavement is involved
or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the excavation is in a paved area and shall
insure the proper restoration of the ground and pavement, if necessary. Where
the amount of the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the cost of restoration,
the public works director may increase the amount of the deposit to an amount
he deems adequate to cover the cost. From this deposit shall be deducted the
expense to the city of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement, and of
making the refill if this is done by the city or its contractor. The balance shall
be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is
completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. The public works
director shall waive the bond requirements for Harriman Utilities and any
utility company franchised by the City of Harriman or the State of Tennessee.
16-3
In lieu of a deposit the applicant may deposit with the city clerk a surety
bond in such form and amount as the public works director shall deem adequate
to cover the costs to the city if the applicant shall fail to make proper
restoration. (1974 code, sec. 12-104, modified)
16-105. Safety restrictions on excavations. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, or others making any excavation or tunnel shall do so according to
the terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing the work to
be done. Barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and
property from injury by or because of the excavation being made. If any
sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users,
as required in the Uniform Manual for Traffic Control Devices. (1974 code, sec.
12-105, modified)
16-106. Restoration of streets, etc. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, or others making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public place in this city shall restore the street, alley,
sidewalk, or public place to its original condition following guidelines
established by the public works director. However, the asphalt resurfacing shall
be done by the city, but shall be paid for promptly upon completion by such
person, firm, corporation, association, or others for which the excavation or
tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable delay in restoring the street, alley,
sidewalk, or public place, the city shall give notice to the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others that unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled
properly within a specified reasonable period of time, the city will do the work
and charge the expense of doing the same to such person, firm, corporation,
association, or others. If the conditions of the above notice have not been met
within the specified time, the work shall be done by the city, an accurate account
of the expense involved kept, and the total cost shall be charged to the person,
firm, corporation, or others making the excavation or tunnel. Reasonable time
for repair is defined as forty-eight (48) hours from the time the excavation
begins. Utility companies may request a time extension if line repair requires
it. If requested by the applicant, the city shall make the sidewalk repairs and
charge the full expense thereof to the applicant.
Any person, firm, corporation, association, or others making any bore
under any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place in this city shall restore the
street, alley, sidewalk, or public place to its original condition if boring results
in any damage to the original condition. Said repairs shall be made following
guidelines established by the public works director. If the necessary repairs are
not made within a reasonable time as set out by the public works director, the
work shall be done by the city, an accurate account of the expenses involved
kept, and the total cost charged to the person, firm, corporation, or others
making the bore.
16-4
If the public works director makes any changes in the guidelines
authorized in this chapter for repair of the streets, sidewalks, or other public
places, then the city council shall be notified in writing of the change(s) at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The notification shall explain fully the
reasons for the changes. (1974 code, sec. 12-106, modified)
16-107. Insurance. In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond
hereinbefore required to insure that proper restoration is made, each person
applicant for an excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating
that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which might arise from or out of the
performance of the work, either by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly
or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive
hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations. The amount of
the insurance shall be prescribed by the city clerk in accordance with the nature
of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury shall not be less than $150,000 for each person and $350,000 for each
accident, and for property damages not less than $50,000 for any one (1)
occurrence, and a $75,000 aggregate. (1974 code, sec. 12-107, modified)
16-108. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the length
of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the
restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill is made
ready for paving by the city. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time
limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the public
works director. (1974 code, sec. 12-108, modified)
16-109. Supervision. The public works director or his designees shall
inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city, and shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to him or his
designees at least two (2) hours before the work of refilling any such excavation
or tunnel commences. The public works director or his designees are hereby
authorized to issue stop work orders on any job where the excavation or refilling
is not being carried out safely, or in compliance with this chapter and the
guidelines for restoration required in § 16-106. (1974 code, sec. 12-109,
modified)
16-110. Driveways. No one shall cut, build, or maintain a driveway
across a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the public works
director. Such a permit will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is
to be so located or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian
and/or vehicular traffic. No driveway shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width
16-5
at its outer or street edge and when two (2) or more adjoining driveways are
provided for the same property a safety island of not less than ten (10) feet in
width at its outer or street edge shall be provided. Driveway aprons shall not
extend out into the street.
All new constructions or replacement of driveway drainage culverts shall
have minimum dimensions of 15 inches in diameter for metal corrugated pipe
or 12 inches in diameter for concrete pipe, and twenty (20) feet in length, and
shall be constructed in a manner not to impede adequate drainage along the
road right-of-way. Such minimum requirements may be increased by the city
on any installation when it determines that drainage flows warrant larger
dimensions. (1974 code, sec. 12-110, modified)
16-6
1Charter reference
Article II, section 18(48).
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS1
SECTION
16-201. Specifications for sidewalks.
16-202. Notice to owner of abutting property to build or repair.
16-203. Service of notice, filing, etc.
16-204. Information to be shown in notice.
16-205. Duty of owner upon receipt of notice.
16-206. Failure of owner to comply with notice--city to advertise for bids
and have work done.
16-207. Expenses paid by city to constitute charge against owner and lien
against property.
16-208. Materials not to be piled in gutters or sewers: use of streets.
16-209. Walkways to be kept open; removal of surplus and refuse material.
16-201. Specifications for sidewalks. The city council shall specify the
size, width, materials, construction standards, and other requirements for all
sidewalks constructed or repaired within the city. (1974 code, sec. 12-201)
16-202. Notice to owner of abutting property to build or repair.
Whenever in the opinion of the city council it is to the public interest and
convenience that a sidewalk or pavement shall be built or repaired along the
front of or adjoining any lot or part of lot in the city, the city council shall, by
resolution, cause to be served upon the owner of such lot or part of lot, or agent
in charge of such property, a written or printed notice specifying with
reasonable certainty the work to be done and require the same to be built, made,
or repaired within thirty (30) days after service of such notice. (1974 code, sec.
12-202)
16-203. Service of notice, filing, etc. The service of the notice required by
the preceding section may be made by the marshal or any policeman of the city,
a copy of the notice being delivered to the proper parties and the original
endorsed by such officer to show when and upon whom served and returned and
filed with the city clerk.
In case the owner of such property is a nonresident of the city, the city
clerk shall forward a copy of such notice by registered mail to such nonresident
to his post-office address if it be known. The city clerk shall keep a copy of the
notice mailed. In case such address cannot be ascertained by diligent inquiry,
16-7
such notice shall be published in one issue of some newspaper published in the
city. In all cases the original notice shall be filed in the office of the city clerk
and kept by him as part of the records of the city and, in case of mailed or
published notice as above required, the city clerk shall endorse thereon the
manner and time of service. In case of a published notice as above provided, the
city clerk shall require from the publisher proof, by affidavit, of the fact of
publication which shall be attached and kept as part of the records. Such
affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. (1974 code, sec.
12-203)
16-204. Information to be shown in notice. The notice to be given under
the provisions of the two preceding sections shall contain the names of owners
and the number of feet fronting or adjoining each lot along such sidewalk or
pavement required to be constructed or repaired, naming the particular streets
on which such property is located. A substantial compliance with these
requirements shall be sufficient. (1974 code, sec. 12-204)
16-205. Duty of owner upon receipt of notice. It shall be the duty of the
owner of any property designated, upon being notified as provided in this
chapter, to proceed at once to construct or repair such sidewalk or pavement
according to the specifications herein provided. (1974 code, sec. 12-205)
16-206. Failure of owner to comply with notice--city to advertise for bids
and have work done. If, at the expiration of the time in which the owners are
required by the notice to do the work, as contemplated by this chapter, they
shall have failed to do the same, as required by resolution of the city council and
this chapter, it shall be the duty of the regular street committee of the city to
advertise for five (5) consecutive days by written or printed notices posted in at
least three (3) public places in the city, for the lowest and best bidder to
construct the walk required in the notice given to such bidder to construct the
walk required in the notice given to such defaulting owner. The person or
contractor to whom the work may be awarded shall build or repair the same as
required by resolution and this chapter. The street committee shall have power
to reject any or all bids. (1974 code, sec. 12-206)
16-207. Expenses paid by city to constitute charge against owner and lien
against property. Construction or repairs of sidewalks, under the provisions of
the preceding section, shall be made at the expense of the city and the costs of
such improvements fronting or adjoining the property of such defaulting owner
shall be ascertained and the amount thereof shall constitute a charge against
such property to secure the amount so expended. The lien may be enforced in
any court of competent jurisdiction, or, at the election of the city, suit may be
brought for the collection of such amount as in the case of any other debt. (1974
code, sec. 12-207)
16-8
16-208. Materials not to be piled in gutters or sewers; use of streets. No
material resulting from the construction or repair of sidewalks shall be piled in
the gutters or sewers and not more than one-fourth of the street shall be used
in prosecuting the work. (1974 code, sec. 12-208)
16-209. Walkways to be kept open; removal of surplus and refuse
material. In the construction or repair of sidewalks, a sufficient walkway shall
be kept open to permit the public to enter or leave any premises in front of
which work is going on. Surplus and refuse material shall be removed by the
contractor within ten (10) days after the completion of the work. (1974 code, sec.
12-209)
16-9
CHAPTER 3
RAILROADS
SECTION
16-301. Maintenance of crossings.
16-302. Warning to be given at crossings.
16-303. Warning devices or flagmen may be required at crossings.
16-304. Obstruction of traffic.
16-305. Company orders in violation of chapter.
16-301. Maintenance of crossings. all railroad companies operating
trains across the streets and alleys of the city shall lay and keep in good repair
the pavement at all such street and alley crossings. The elevation of the rails
shall not be altered without prior approval of the city council. The surface of
such pavement shall be on a level with the top of the rails of the tracks and shall
be laid between the rails and for a width of at least three feet on the outside of
each outside rail of such tracks. The whole shall be laid so as to make a smooth
and even surface. When two or more tracks are closer together than twenty feet,
pavement shall be laid in the space between each track by the railroad
companies. (Ord. 865, sec. 3)
16-302. Warning to be given at crossings. No person shall operate any
railroad train across any street or alley without giving a warning of its approach
as required by state law. (Ord. 865, sec. 3)
16-303. Warning devices or flagmen may be required at crossings. When
the City Council shall deem it necessary, for the safety of travel on the public
streets and alleys of the city crossing a railroad, to have warning devices or
flagmen at such crossings, the city council shall, by resolution, declare its
determination of such necessity and require the railroad company owning or
maintaining the railroad tracks at such crossing to install and maintain the
required warning devices or flagmen. The city shall notify the railroad company
operating or maintaining the railroad tracks at such crossing of such
determination by serving upon the resident agent of such company a copy of
such resolution. Such resolution shall specify each crossing to be protected by
such warning devices or flagmen, the method of protection to be provided and
the hours during which such protection is to be provided. Such resolution shall
also specify the date after which such protection is to be provided. (Ord. 865,
sec. 3)
16-304. Obstruction of traffic. It shall be unlawful for any conductor,
engineer or other employee of any railroad company operating within the city
to obstruct the street as and alleys or prevent the free passage of traffic for
16-10
longer that five minutes at any one time while operating a railroad engine, train
or car. (Ord. 865, sec. 3)
16-305. Company orders in violation of chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any railroad official to issue or cause to be issued any order providing for the
violation of any provision of this chapter or requiring any railroad employee to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 865, sec. 3)
16-11
1This map apparently has been amended by the following ordinances, of
record in the city clerk's office, which close streets and alleys, or portions
thereof: 733, 734, 740, 768, 770, 777A, 783, 793, 903, 905, 910, 917, 940, and
945.
CHAPTER 4
STREET NAMES
SECTION
16-401. Street names.
16-402. Administration.
16-403. Roadway designations.
16-404. Assignment of new street names.
16-405. Penalties.
16-401. Street names. The public streets of the City of Harriman,
Tennessee hereby assigned the names by which they are identified on the map
identified by the title Harriman Street Naming and Property Numbering
Systems,1 which is filed at the offices of the city clerk and the building inspector.
This map, all explanatory matter thereon, and the attached street index,
including the sheet entitled "Roadway Designation," is hereby adopted and made
a part of this ordinance. (Ord. 836, sec. 1)
16-402. Administration. The Harriman Street Department is hereby
held responsible for the erection and maintenance of street markers identifying
each public street within the corporate limits of the City of Harriman,
Tennessee. (Ord. 836, sec. 2)
16-403. Roadway designations. The following designations are used to
identify roadways in the City of Harriman:
(1) Avenues and streets. Avenues--(North-South), Streets--(East-West)
Orientation: Roadways which are usually 1,500 feet or longer, or, when shorter,
those which future extension potential.
(2) Drives. Usually winding roadways of any length with future
extension possibilities. Drives may or may not dead-end.
(3) Roads. Usually a long roadway traversing a large portion of the
city and usually ending outside the corporate limits.
(4) Lanes. Usually 1,500 feet or shorter which usually connect two
parallel roadways and in rare instances may dead-end.
16-12
(5) Places and ways. Place--(North-South, Way--(East-West): Short
dead-end roadways usually less than 1,000 feet with little or no future extension
possibilities.
(6) Circles. Cul-de-sacs of less than 500 feet and loops of any length.
Future extension not usually probable.
(7) Courts. Very short roadways usually ending at a parking area or
short dual-directional roadways with little or no future extension probability.
(Attachment to Ord. 836)
16-404. Assignment of new street names. No new street shall be
accepted by the city nor municipal improvements made therein or thereon until
such streets have been named as hereinafter set out. If they are extensions of
existing streets, the existing names shall be continued, and if not extensions,
names recorded shall not duplicate or closely approximate names already
assigned.
Names of streets in the City of Harriman shall hereafter be and remain
as shown on said map unless officially changed by specific ordinance passed
subsequent to this date. Further an index of official street names is to be kept
on record in the office of the city clerk of the City of Harriman.
16-405. Penalties. It is hereby unlawful for any person to knowingly
and/or willfully do damage to any street marker. Any person found guilty in
appropriate courts of doing damage to street markers shall be punished and
deemed guilty of a code violation, and may be fined and required to bear the
costs of correcting such damage. (1974 code, sec. 12-314, modified)
16-13
CHAPTER 5
STREET NUMBERS
SECTION
16-501. Uniform numbering system.
16-502. Assignment of numbers.
16-503. Administration.
16-504. Penalties.
16-501. Uniform numbering system. A uniform system of numbering
properties and principal buildings, as shown on the map identified by the title
Harriman Street Naming and Property Numbering System, which is filed in the
offices of the city building inspector and the city clerk, is hereby adopted for use
in the City of Harriman, Tennessee. This map and all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 837, sec. 1)
16-502. Assignment of numbers. (1) All properties or parcels of land
within the corporate limits of Harriman, Tennessee shall hereafter be identified
by references to the uniform numbering system adopted herein, provided; all
existing numbers of property and buildings not now in conformity with
provisions of this chapter shall be changed to conform to the system herein
adopted within six months from the date of passage of this chapter.
(2) A separate number shall be assigned for each 25 feet of frontage.
(3) Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the
frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is
occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front
entrance of such principal building shall bear a separate number.
(4) Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal
building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as
to be visible from the street on which the property is located. Such numerals
may be obtained from the city building inspector, as provided in section 16-303.
(Ord. 837, sec. 2)
16-503. Administration. (1) The city building inspector shall be
responsible for maintaining the numbering system. In the performance of this
responsibility he shall be guided by the provisions of section 16-502 of this
chapter.
(2) The building inspector shall keep a record of all numbers assigned
under this ordinance.
(3) The building inspector shall issue to any property owner in
Harriman a set of numerals for each principal building or separate front
entrance to such building. In doing so, he shall issue only numerals for the
number assigned to such building under the provisions of this chapter.
16-14
Provided, however, that the building inspector may issue additional numerals
in accord with the official numbering system whenever a property has been
subdivided, a new from entrance opened, or undue hardship has been worked
on any property owner. (Ord. 837, sec. 3)
16-504. Penalties. Violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and
may be punished by the general penalty provisions in this municipal code of
ordinances. (Ord. 837, sec. 4, modified)
16-15
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-601. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-602. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated.
16-603. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
16-604. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-605. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted.
16-606. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-607. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-608. Obstruction of drainage ditches.
16-609. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc.
16-610. Parades, etc., regulated.
16-611. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks.
16-612. Fires in streets, etc.
16-601. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. No person
shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or right of
way for the purpose of storing, selling, or exhibiting any goods, wares,
merchandise, or materials or otherwise so as to unreasonably interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (1974 code, sec. 12-301)
16-602. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful
for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his property
to project out over any street or alley at a height of less than fourteen (14) feet.
(1974 code, sec. 12-302)
16-603. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on his
property any tree, hedge, billboard, or other obstruction which prevents persons
driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection. (1974 code, sec. 12-303)
16-604. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs, awnings,
or other structures which project over any street or other public way shall be
erected subject to the requirements of the building code. (1974 code, sec.
12-304)
16-605. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted. It shall
be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or sign across or
above any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by the city
council. (1974 code, sec. 12-305)
16-16
16-606. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property
to allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley, or
sidewalk except when required by statute. (1974 code, sec. 12-306)
16-607. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any
street, alley, or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud, or other objects or
materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or interfere
with the use of such public ways and places for their intended purposes.
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any streets, roads, alleys, or ways
within the City of Harriman, Tennessee, unless such vehicle is so constructed
or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom.
Any vehicle hauling crushed coal or other crushed materials within the
City of Harriman shall be so loaded as to have a six (6) inch minimum free board
on sides and ends.
The police department of the City of Harriman is hereby authorized and
directed to stop and prevent vehicles from entering or using the streets of the
City of Harriman except in compliance with the above provisions.
Any person who owns or operates or who authorizes the operation of a
vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Harriman whose contents shall
slip, drop, leak, or otherwise escape therefrom, whether said person or persons
shall be otherwise deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this section,
shall be liable to the City of Harriman for the cost to said city of cleaning or
removing such materials from its streets, walks, or property abutting thereon.
unless said person or persons shall immediately and without delay proceed to
carefully clean or have cleaned said contents from said streets in a manner
acceptable to the police department of the City of Harriman. (1974 code, sec.
12-307)
16-608. Obstruction of drainage ditches. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public
right of way. (1974 code, sec. 12-308)
16-609. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. The occupants
of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk clean.
Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are required to remove
all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk. (1974 code, sec.
12-309)
16-610. Parades, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful for any club,
organization, or similar group to hold any meeting, parade, demonstration, or
exhibition on the public streets without some responsible representative first
16-17
securing a permit from the city clerk. No permit shall be issued by the city clerk
unless such activity will not unreasonably interfere with traffic and unless such
representative shall agree to see to the immediate cleaning up of all litter which
shall be left on the streets as a result of the activity, furthermore, it shall be
unlawful for any person obtaining such a permit to fail to carry out his
agreement to immediately clean up the resulting litter. (1974 code, sec. 12-310)
16-611. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull, or place any vehicle
across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as to unreasonably interfere with
or inconvenience pedestrians using the sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful for
any person to knowingly allow any minor under his control to violate this
section. (1974 code, sec. 12-312)
16-612. Fires in streets, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to set or
contribute to any fire in any public street, alley, or sidewalk. (1974 code, sec.
12-313)
Change 5, July 5, 2016 17-1
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. REFUSE STORAGE AND COLLECTION.
CHAPTER 1
REFUSE STORAGE AND COLLECTION
SECTION
17-101. Refuse defined.
17-102. Premises to be kept clean.
17-103. Containers.
17-104. Location of containers.
17-105. Disturbing containers.
17-106. Collection.
17-107. Collection vehicles.
17-108. Disposal.
17-109. Refuse not to be collected unless properly stored.
17-110. Refuse from construction, demolition, or repairs.
17-111. Dumping in streams, sewers, and drains prohibited.
17-112. Fee schedule.
17-113. Penalties for non-compliance.
17-114. Private disposal of debris.
17-115. City disposal of debris.
17-101. Refuse defined. Refuse shall mean and include garbage, rubbish,
leaves, brush, and refuse as those terms are generally defined except that dead
animals and fowls, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and similar
materials are expressly excluded therefrom and shall not be stored therewith.
(Ord. 1023)
17-102. Premises to be kept clean. All persons within the city are
required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from
accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
1023)
1Municipal code reference
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 17-2
17-103. Containers. (1) Residential refuse containers shall be
constructed of strong and durable material, shall be rodent and insect proof, and
shall not be readily corrodible. They shall have a capacity of not more than
thirty-two gallons and not less than twenty gallons and, when filled, shall weigh
not more than seventy-five (75) pounds. Residential refuse containers shall be
equipped with handles on both sides to facilitate emptying. They shall be
equipped with tight fitting lids or covers to preclude the free access of flies and
insects and to prevent the containers from collecting water during rain or snow.
The lids or covers shall be kept in place at all times except when refuse is being
deposited therein or removed therefrom by the collector.
(2) Refuse containers shall be maintained in good order and repair.
Any container that may have a ragged or sharp edge or other defects liable to
injure the persons collecting the contents thereof shall be replaced. The city
sanitation department will affix to any defective container a tag identifying such
defects and giving the owner proper notice that the container must be replaced.
When a person fails to repair or replace containers after notice has been given,
further collection will be discontinued until proper containers have been
provided. The collectors will exercise every effort to protect the container from
damage as a result of unloading or loading, but the city will not be held liable
for such damages.
(3) Public housing, business, mobile home parks and multi-family
dwelling with more than four thirty-two gallon containers shall have a container
for mechanical pickup.
(4) The Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation shall determine
based on economic considerations and the efficiency of collection the size,
location and service provided for all containers furnished by the customer.
Hereinafter, all containers shall be replaced by the customer at customer's cost.
All containers will be emptied in a minimum of once each week.
(5) Each customer(s) will be notified in writing the size, location,
frequency of service and the names of other customers that are assigned to share
the container. The customer(s) will be responsible for preventing litter from
accumulating around the container. The customer shall notify the city of anyone
other than the assigned users that may be putting refuse into the container.
(6) Business and industrial establishments not served by a city-owned
receptacle shall provide a sufficient number of containers to fully contain all
refuse accumulated between collection periods. The size of the containers shall
not exceed the size authorized for residential users.
(7) Refuse containers must be located outside of buildings. They shall
be placed where they will not become a traffic or fire hazard and will be
accessible to city sanitation employees.
(8) Collections scheduled for business and industrial establishments
furnishing their own containers will be served by the residential collection crew
on the same days as the residential customers in the vicinity.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 17-3
(9) Containers shall be placed at the curb or edge of pavement on the
designated collection day and removed on the same day.
(10) Containers shall be placed back of the curb or between the edge of
the pavement and the roadway ditch if there is sufficient space.
(11) Property abutting on a public alley shall place the containers not
more than five feet from the property line. If the back property is fenced, the
containers shall be placed on the alley side of the fence. If sufficient space is not
available between the fence and the alley the containers may be placed inside
the fence if easy access to the containers is provided.
(12) Exceptions to alley service may be made by the DPW if it is
impractical using sanitation department collection equipment or containers can
not be served because of some physical barrier.
(13) The Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation shall have the
discretion to modify the requirements of containers, number, size limitations,
and frequency of pickup in cases of multi-family dwelling and for business and
industrial use. However any multi-family dwelling, trailer park or public
housing shall have a conforming receptacle for mechanical pickup.
(14) The Superintendent of Streets and Sanitation shall have the
authority to access a service charge to any customer requiring more pickup than
reasonable for the type of business being operated. Public housing, business,
mobile home parks and multi-family dwelling with more than four thirty-two
gallon containers shall have a container for mechanical pickup. (Ord. 1023)
17-104. Location of containers. Where alleys are used by the city refuse
collectors, containers shall be placed on or within six (6) feet of the alley line in
such a position as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the alley. Where
streets are used by the city refuse collectors, containers shall be placed adjacent
to and back of the curb, or adjacent to and back of the ditch or street line if there
be no curb, at such times as shall be scheduled by the city for the collection of
refuse therefrom. As soon as practicable after such containers have been
emptied they shall be removed by the owner to within, or to the rear of, his
premises and away from the street line until the next scheduled time for
collection. (Ord. 1023)
17-105. Disturbing containers. No unauthorized person shall uncover,
rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse
containers belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. (Ord. 1023)
17-106. Collection. All refuse accumulated within the corporate limits
shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of under the supervision of the
superintendent of streets and sanitation. Collections shall be made regularly
in accordance with an announced schedule. (Ord. 1023)
Change 5, July 5, 2016 17-4
17-107. Collection vehicles. The collection of refuse shall be by means of
vehicles with beds constructed of impervious materials which are easily
cleanable and so constructed that there will be no leakage of liquids draining
from the refuse onto the streets and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection
vehicles shall utilize closed beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the
scattering of refuse over the streets or alleys. (Ord. 1023)
17-108. Disposal. The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person
in any place, public or private, other than at the site or sites designated for
refuse disposal by the city council is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 1023)
17-109. Refuse not to be collected unless proverly stored. In no case will
it be the responsibility of the city sanitation department to shovel or pick up
from the ground any accumulation of refuse. (Ord. 1023)
17-110. Refuse from construction, demolition, or repairs. In no case will
it be the responsibility of the city sanitation department to collect refuse
resulting from construction, demolition, or repairs of buildings, structures, or
appurtenances and private tree businesses. The property owner/contractor, or
the person having same in charge, shall be responsible for the disposal of such
refuse. (Ord. 1023)
17-111. Dumping in streams, sewers, and drains prohibited. It shall be
unlawful to dump refuse in any form into a stream, ditch, storm sewer, sanitary
sewer, or other drain. (Ord. 1023)
17-112. Fee schedule. Charges for collection of refuse as defined herein
are determined by a fee schedule approved by the city council. Revisions and
exceptions to the fee schedule will be approved by the city council.
Charges for the collection of refuse shall be billed on a monthly basis to
coincide with the billing period prescribed by the Harriman Utility Board for
electric, gas, water and sewer charges. Further, and unless otherwise
prescribed by the city council, all charges for the collection of refuse shall be
included as part of the monthly bill mailed to those customers to whom this
chapter applies, and said refuse collection charges shall be itemized thereon.
Charges for the collection of refuse not paid on or before the due dates
defined herein are delinquent. Any person failing or refusing to pay said
charges when due shall be liable for interest on such delinquent charges from
the due date at the rate of five percent (5%) per billing period of the first $250.00
owed thereon, plus one percent (1%) of any remaining balance over $250.00
owed thereon. Such interest shall become a part of the charges herein required
to be remitted.
When charges for the collection of refuse are not paid when due and are
delinquent, the Harriman Utility Board is further authorized to include the
Change 5, July 5, 2016 17-5
amounts thereof owing on any collection notice sent or delivered by the utility
to those customers to whom this chapter applies; however, the failure or refusal
of any such customer to pay the refuse collection charge shall not be a reason or
cause for the discontinuation of utility services. (Ord. 1046)
17-113. Penalties for non-compliance. Violations of this chapter shall be
punished in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this municipal
code of ordinances. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may
enforce the provisions of this chapter by instituting legal proceedings for
damages, to collect any charges due and owing the city hereunder, plus interest
thereon, and/or to enjoin the violation of it provisions, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, and such court may grant a judgment for the charges then due and
owing, plus interest thereon, a temporary or permanent injunction restraining,
prohibiting or otherwise enjoining and violation of the provisions of this chapter,
and/or other relief, including the awarding of damages, to which the city may
prove itself entitled. (Ord. 1046, as replaced by Ord. #0714-01, July 2014)
17-114. Private disposal of debris. Debris generated from the following
activities will not be picked up by the city and such debris must be removed and
properly disposed of by the owner at his/her/its expense:
(1) Debris from contracted renovations and/or repairs.
(2) Debris from repairs, evictions and abandonments, etc. by owners,
companies or corporations that lease out more than one (1) single family rental
home.
(3) Debris from repairs, evictions and abandonments, etc. by owners,
companies or corporations that own multi-unit apartment complexes.
(4) Debris from repairs, evictions, and abandonments, etc. by owners,
companies or corporations operating storage facilities. (as added by Ord.
#0714-01, July 2014)
17-115. City disposal of debris. The City of Harriman will continue to
pick up debris from all activities not covered by § 17-114, subject to the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to § 17-112. (as added by Ord. #0714-01, July 2014)
18-1
1Municipal code reference
Building, plumbing, electrical, gas and other utility codes: title 12.
2Ordinances, resolutions, etc., establishing such rates can be found in the
office of the city clerk.
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. HARRIMAN UTILITY BOARD.
2. GENERAL SEWER REGULATIONS.
3. SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
4. CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.
CHAPTER 1
HARRIMAN UTILITY BOARD
SECTION
18-101. Creation; membership, organization, and jurisdiction, etc.
18-102. Fluoridation of water supply.
18-103. Violation of board's rules and regulations.
18-101. Creation; membership, organization, and jurisdiction, etc. A
board of public utilities to be known as the "Harriman Utility Board" is hereby
created and shall have five (5) members who shall be appointed and organized
in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 7, chapter 52. The
Harriman Utility Board shall have such jurisdiction over the city's electric
system, waterworks, sewage works, and gas system as has heretofore been
vested in the city council, and/or any other local board or commission, but shall
in all respects be subject to and governed and controlled by the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 7, chapter 52.
The Harriman Utility Board is specifically given the right to revise and
set the rates charged for electricity, water, sewer service, and gas. The
Harriman Utility Board is also given the right to set the miscellaneous charges
in providing utility services to its customers.2 (1974 code, sec. 13-101, amended
by ords. 807 and 874)
18-102. Fluoridation of water supply. The Harriman Utility Board is
hereby authorized and instructed to make plans for the fluoridation of the water
supply of the City of Harriman; to submit such plans to the Department of
Public Health of the State of Tennessee for approval; and, upon approval, to add
18-2
such chemicals as fluoride to the water supply in accordance with such approval
as will adequately provide for the fluoridation of said water supply.
The cost of such fluoridation will be borne by the revenues of the
waterworks. (1974 code, sec. 13-102)
18-103. Violation of board's rules and regulations. It shall be unlawful
to violate any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the Harriman Utility Board.
Any person violating any such rule or regulation, in addition to being fined
under the general penalty clause for this code, shall be subject to having his
utility service discontinued in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Harriman Utility Board. (1974 code, sec. 13-103)
18-3
1Municipal code reference
Plumbing regulations: title 12.
Wastewater treatment: this title, chapter 2.
The regulations in this chapter governing the disposal of sewage and
human excreta are recommended by the Tennessee Department of Health and
Environment for adoption by cities in the interest of public health.
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL SEWER REGULATIONS1
SECTION
18-201. Definitions.
18-202. Places required to have sanitary disposal methods.
18-203. When a connection to the public sewer is required.
18-204. When a septic tank shall be used.
18-205. Registration and records of septic tank cleaners, etc.
18-206. Use of pit privy or other method of disposal.
18-207. Approval and permit required for septic tanks, privies, etc.
18-208. Owner to provide disposal facilities.
18-209. Occupant to maintain disposal facilities.
18-210. Only specified methods of disposal to be used.
18-211. Discharge into watercourses restricted.
18-212. Pollution of ground water prohibited.
18-213. Enforcement of chapter.
18-214. Carnivals, circuses, etc.
18-215. Violations.
18-201. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation of this chapter.
(1) "Accessible sewer." A public sanitary sewer located in a street or
alley abutting on the property in question or otherwise within two hundred (200)
feet of any boundary of said property measured along the shortest available
right-of-way.
(2) "Health officer." The person duly appointed to such position having
jurisdiction, or any person or persons authorized to act as his agent.
(3) "Human excreta." The bowel and kidney discharges of human
beings.
(4) "Sewage." All water-carried human and household wastes from
residences, buildings, or industrial establishments.
(5) "Approved septic tank system." A watertight covered receptacle of
monolithic concrete, either precast or cast in place, constructed according to
plans approved by the health officer. Such tanks shall have a capacity of not
18-4
less than 750 gallons and in the case of homes with more than two (2) bedrooms
the capacity of the tank shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the
Tennessee Department of Health and Environment as provided for in its 1967
bulletin entitled "Recommended Guide for Location, Design, and Construction
of Septic Tanks and Disposal Fields." A minimum liquid depth of four (4) feet
should be provided with a minimum depth of air space above the liquid of one
(1) foot. The septic tank dimensions should be such that the length from inlet
to outlet is at least twice but not more than three (3) times the width. The
liquid depth should not exceed five (5) feet. The discharge from the septic tank
shall be disposed of in such a manner that it may not create a nuisance on the
surface of the ground or pollute the underground water supply, and such
disposal shall be in accordance with recommendations of the health officer as
determined by acceptable soil percolation data.
(6) "Sanitary pit privy." A privy having a fly-tight floor and seat over
an excavation in earth, located and constructed in such a manner that flies and
animals will be excluded, surface water may not enter the pit, and danger of
pollution of the surface of the ground or the underground water supply will be
prevented.
(7) "Other approved method of sewage disposal." Any privy, chemical
toilet, or other toilet device (other than a sanitary sewer, septic tank, or sanitary
pit privy as described above) the type, location, and construction of which have
been approved by the health officer.
(8) "Watercourse." Any natural or artificial drain which conveys water
either continuously or intermittently. (1974 code, sec. 8-202)
18-202. Places required to have sanitary disposal methods. Every
residence, building, or place where human beings reside, assemble, or are
employed within the corporate limits shall be required to have a sanitary
method for disposal of sewage and human excreta. (1974 code, sec. 8-203)
18-203. When a connection to the public sewer is required. Wherever an
accessible sewer exists and water under pressure is available, approved
plumbing facilities shall be provided and the wastes from such facilities shall be
discharged through a connection to said sewer made in compliance with the
requirements of the official responsible for the public sewerage system. On any
lot or premise accessible to the sewer no other method of sewage disposal shall
be employed. (1974 code, sec. 8-203)
18-204. When a septic tank shall be used. Whenever water-carried
sewage facilities are installed and their use is permitted by the health officer,
and an accessible sewer does not exist, the wastes from such facilities shall be
discharged into an approved septic tank system.
No septic tank or other water-carried sewage disposal system except a
connection to a public sewer shall be installed without the approval of the health
18-5
officer or his duly appointed representative. The design, layout, and
construction of such systems shall be in accordance with specifications approved
by the health officer and the installation shall be under the general supervision
of the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment. (1974 code, sec.
8-204)
18-205. Registration and records of septic tank cleaners, etc. Every
person, firm or corporation who operates equipment for the purpose of removing
digested sludge from septic tanks, cesspools, privies, and other sewage disposal
installations on private or public property must register with the health officer
and furnish such records of work done within the corporate limits as may be
deemed necessary by the health officer. (1974 code, sec. 8-205)
18-206. Use of pit privy or other method of disposal. Wherever a sanitary
method of human excreta disposal is required under section 8-202 and watercarried
sewage facilities are not used, a sanitary pit privy or other approved
method of disposal shall be provided. (1974 code, sec. 8-206)
18-207. Approval and permit required for septic tanks, privies, etc. Any
person, firm, or corporation proposing to construct a septic tank system, privy,
or other sewage disposal facility, requiring the approval of the health officer
under this chapter, shall before the initiation of construction obtain the approval
of the health officer for the design and location of the system and secure a
permit from the health officer for such system. (1974 code, sec. 8-207)
18-208. Owner to provide disposal facilities. It shall be the duty of the
owner of any property upon which facilities for sanitary sewage or human
excreta disposal are required by section 18-202, or the agent of the owner to
provide such facilities. (1974 code, sec. 8-208)
18-209. Occupant to maintain disposal facilities. It shall be the duty of
the occupant, tenant, lessee, or other person in charge to maintain the facilities
for sewage disposal in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and no refuse
or other material which may unduly fill up, clog, or otherwise interfere with the
operation of such facilities shall be deposited therein. (1974 code, sec. 8-209)
18-210. Only specified methods of disposal to be used. No sewage or
human excreta shall be thrown out, deposited, buried, or otherwise disposed of,
except by a sanitary method of disposal as specified in this chapter. (1974 code,
sec. 8-210)
18-211. Discharge into watercourses restricted. No sewage or excreta
shall be discharged or deposited into any lake or watercourse except under
18-6
conditions specified by the health officer and specifically authorized by the
Tennessee Stream Pollution Control Board. (1974 code, sec. 8-211)
18-212. Pollution of ground water prohibited. No sewage, effluent from
a septic tank, sewage tank, sewage treatment plant, or discharges from any
plumbing facility shall empty into any well, either abandoned or constructed for
this purpose, cistern, sinkhole, crevice, ditch, or other opening, either natural
or artificial, in any formation which may permit the pollution of ground water.
(1974 code, sec. 8-212)
18-213. Enforcement of chapter. It shall be the duty of the health officer
to make an inspection of the methods of disposal of sewage and human excreta
as often as is considered necessary to insure full compliance with the terms of
this chapter. Written notification of any violation shall be given by the health
officer to the person or persons responsible for the correction of the condition,
and correction shall be made within forty-five (45) days after notification. If the
health officer shall advise any person that the method by which human excreta
and sewage is being disposed of constitutes an immediate and serious menace
to health such person shall at once take steps to remove the menace. Failure to
remove such menace immediately shall be punishable under the general penalty
clause for this code. However, such person shall be allowed the number of days
herein provided within which to make permanent correction. (1974 code, sec.
8-213)
18-214. Carnivals, circuses, etc. Whenever carnivals, circuses, or other
transient groups of persons come within the appropriate limits such groups of
transients shall provide a sanitary method for disposal of sewage and human
excreta. Failure of a carnival, circus, or other transient group to provide such
sanitary method of disposal and to make all reasonable changes and corrections
proposed by the health officer shall constitute a violation of this section. In
these cases the violator shall not be entitled to the notice of forty-five (45) days
provided for in the preceding section. (1974 code, sec. 8-214)
18-215. Violations. Any person, persons, firm, association, or corporation
or agent thereof, who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
under the general penalty clause for this code. (1974 code, sec. 8-215)
18-7
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE ORDINANCE
SECTION
18-301. Definitions.
18-302. Use of public sewers required.
18-303. Private sewage disposal.
18-304. Building sewers and connections.
18-305. Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharge.
18-306. Control of prohibited wastes.
18-307. Wastewater discharge permits, generally.
18-308. Wastewater sampling and analysis.
18-309. Industrial self-monitoring and reporting requirements.
18-310. Enforcement procedures.
18-311. Provision of service.
18-312. User charge.
18-313. Industrial waste surcharge.
18-301. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) "Act" of "the Act" - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act of 1977.
(2) "Approval authority" - The State of Tennessee, Department of
Environment and Conservation, Division of Water Pollution Control or any
authorized representative.
(3) "A.S.T.M." - The American Society for Testing and Materials.
(4) "Authorized representative of industrial user" - Either:
(a) A principal executive officer of at least the level of
vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
(b) A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership, or proprietorship respectively; or
(c) A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
(5) "BOD" - Used in sewage or industrial waste shall designate its
biochemical oxygen demand and shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of the organic matter of said sewage or industrial
wastes under standard laboratory procedure in 5 days at 20 C, expressed in
milligrams per liter. It shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods
described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association.
18-8
(6) "Building sewer" - A sewer conveying wastewater from the
premises of a user to the POTW. A building sewer ends at the tap on the city
main sewer transition main.
(7) "C" - Celsius degrees.
(8) "Categorical user" - Any discharger subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
(9) "City" - The City of Harriman or the City Council of Harriman,
acting through the manager.
(10) "Manager" - The Manager of the Harriman Utility Board.
(11) "Control authority" - The Harriman Utility Board, City of
Harriman, Tennessee acting through the HUB manager or his representative.
(12) "Customer" - Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group who are the beneficiaries of the water and sewer service or
who are utilizing the water and/or sewer system of the City of Harriman.
(13) "EPA" - The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(14) "Garbage" - Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
(15) "Holding tank waste" - Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
(16) "Indirect discharge" - The discharge or introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33
USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system) for treatment before direct discharge to the waters of the State of
Tennessee.
(17) "Industrial user" - A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulation issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Act.
(18) "Industrial wastewater" - The wastewater from industrial
processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
(19) "May" - is permission; "Shall" - is mandatory.
(20) "Mg/l" - Milligrams per liter.
(21) "National pretreatment standards" or "pretreatment standards" -
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
and in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to the
industrial users.
(22) "NPDES permit" - The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System as defined in Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92-500).
(23) "Person" - Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
government entity, or other legal entity, or legal representative, agent or
assigns. The masculine gender shall mean to include the feminine, the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
18-9
(24) "ph" - The negative logarithm or the log of the reciprocal of the
concentration of hydrogen ions in gram moles per liter of solution as determined
by acceptable laboratory procedures.
(25) "Pretreatment" - The treatment of wastewater by the user before
introduction into the publicly owned system.
(26) "Pretreatment standards" - All applicable rules and regulations
contained in the Code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal
Register, under Section 307 of Public Law 92-500.
(27) "Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" - A treatment works
as defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is owned in this instance by the City
of Harriman. This definition includes any sewer that conveys wastewater to the
treatment works.
(28) "Sewage" - A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
(29) "Shall" - is mandatory; "May" - is permissive.
(30) "Significant industrial user" - Any categorical user and any other
industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who:
(a) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
work day, or
(b) has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the city's
wastewater treatment system, or
(c) has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to
Section 307 of the Act or state statutes and rules, or
(d) is found by the city, Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), or the State of Tennessee to have the potential through its
discharge to significantly impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, the wastewater treatment system, the
quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated
by the system.
(31) "Significant noncompliance" - A violation of this chapter, the
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit, or applicable state and/or federal
pretreatment standards which meet one or more of the following conditions:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all of the
measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same
pollutant parameter.
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violators defined here as
those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements for
each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable TRC. The TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils,
and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.
18-10
1New definition. This definition is required by the State Department of
Environment and Conservation to be incorporated into the document. It has
considerable importance, as it defines the types of violations to the Sewer User
Ordinance which required the POTW to take specific actions.
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines
has caused alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public).
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under this
chapter.
(e) Failure to meet within 90 days after the schedule date a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance.
(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations which the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
Such violations are required to be published annually by 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2).1
(32) "Standard methods" - The testing methods approved for use in
40CFR 136 as appropriate.
(33) "Storm water" - Any flow occurring during or immediately following
any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
(34) "Superintendent" - The HUB Manager for the City of Harriman,
Tennessee, or his designee primarily responsible for wastewater discharges.
(35) "Toxic pollutant" - Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in the regulations promulgated by the administrator or Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317.
(36) "TKN" - The Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen content of sewage or
industrial waste. The quantity of TKN shall be determined by one of the
acceptable methods described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public
Health Association.
18-11
(37) "User" - Any person discharging wastes to the City of Harriman
POTW.
(38) "Waste" - Any waste, including sewage and any other waste
substances, liquid, solid, or gases that are radioactive, associated with human
habitation, or human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing,
or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of disposal.
(39) "Wastewater" - Domestic sewage and industrial wastewaters
discharged to the City of Harriman POTW together with any groundwater,
surface water, and storm water that may be present.
(40) "WPCF" - The Water Pollution Control Federation, 601 Wythe
Street, Alexandria, VA 22314-1994.
(41) "Miscellaneous terms" - Terms not otherwise defined herein shall
be defined as shown in the latest edition of STANDARD METHODS or other
appropriate federal or state guidelines and regulations.
(42) "Accessible sewer" - A public sanitary sewer located in a street or
alley abutting on the property in question or otherwise within two hundred (200)
feet of any boundary of said property measured along the shortest available
right-of-way. (Ord. 1000, )
18-302. Use of public sewers required. (1) Disposal waste. It shall be
unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of Harriman,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, or other objectional waste.
(2) Direct discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful to discharge to
any natural outlet within the City of Harriman, or any area under, the
jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where a
federal or state discharge permit has been duly issued and is currently valid for
such discharge.
(3) New private disposal systems prohibited. Except as hereinafter
provided or as otherwise permitted by chapter or regulation, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(4) City's right to require sanitary facilities. The owner, tenant or
occupant of all houses, buildings, improvements or properties used for
residential, commercial, industrial or recreational and all other human
occupancy purposes which abut upon a street, road, right-of-way or other public
way containing a public sanitary sewer shall upon demand by the city install
suitable toilet facilities therein and connect the same directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and shall cease
to use any other means for the disposal of sewage, waste, wastewater, and other
polluting matter, provided however the city may waive such requirement in
specific cases where it has determined that public sewer service to any
18-12
particular individual user(s) would be unduly difficult or expensive and that
alternative measures of disposal would not be hazardous to public health.
(5) Harriman utility board's right to require sewer hookup. The
owner, tenant or occupant of all houses, buildings, improvements or properties
used for residential, commercial, industrial or recreational and all other human
occupancy purposes which abut upon a street, road, right-of-way or other public
way containing a public sanitary sewer shall upon demand by the city connect
such house, building, improvement or property with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and shall cease to use any other
means for disposal of sewage, waste, wastewater or other polluting matter,
provided however the Harriman Utility Board may waive such requirement in
specific cases where it has determined that public sewer service to any
particular individual user(s) would be unduly difficult or expensive and that
alternative measures of disposal would not be hazardous to public health.
(6) Disposal of private waste by truck. The superintendent shall
designate the locations and times where vacuum or "cess pool" trucks may be
discharged, and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste in his absolute
discretion where it appears that the waste could interfere with the effective
operation of the treatment works or any sewer line or appurtenance thereto.
The owner or operator of a truck shall, upon request, provide a manifest to the
POTW that states the source of the domestic waste they wish to discharge, the
volume of wastewater from each source, and whether any industrial waste is
included in the wastewater.
(7) Holding tanks. No person shall discharge any other holding tank
waste into the POTW unless he shall have applied for and have been issued a
permit by the superintendent. Unless otherwise allowed under the terms and
conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate
discharge. The permit shall state the specific location of discharge, the time of
day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge, and shall limit the
wastewater constituents and characteristic of the discharge. Such user shall
pay any applicable charges or fees therefor, and shall comply with the conditions
of the permit issued by the superintendent. Provided, however, no permit will
be required to discharge domestic waste from a recreational vehicle holding tank
provided such discharge is made into an approved facility designed to receive
such waste. (Ord. 1000, )
18-303. Private sewage disposal. The disposal of sewage by means other
than the use of the available public sanitary sewage system shall be in
accordance with local, county and state law. The disposal of sewage by private
disposal systems shall be permissible only in those instances where service from
the available public sanitary sewage system is not available, or where such is
otherwise permitted by city ordinance or regulations. (Ord. 1000, )
18-13
18-304. Building sewers and connections. (1) Connections of building
sewers to POTW. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the control authority. The
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the control
authority.
(2) Costs of installation. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the property
owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(3) Separate sewers required. A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building.
(4) Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and
test by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(5) Construction controls for new sewers. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back filling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or
in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(6) Sewer entrances to private facilities. Whenever possible, the
building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(7) Extraneous water prohibited. No person shall make connection of
roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources
of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(8) Quality of construction. All connections to the city system shall be
made gas tight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the control authority or his representative
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made by or under the supervision of the control
authority.
(9) Inspection of sewers. The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the control authority or his representative when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made by or under the supervision of the control authority.
18-14
(10) Excavation safety. All excavations for building sewer installation
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public. Property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city.
(11) Condition of private sewers. Users shall be responsible for the
integrity of building sewers on his property. If it is determined that these lines
are faulty or in a bad state of repair, such that extraneous storm water can enter
the POTW, the city may require the customer to repair his pipes. If the pipes
are not repaired within the time period allowed by the city, service shall be
terminated.
(12) Grease traps. All cafes, restaurants, motels, hotels, or other
commercial food preparation establishments shall install a grease trap on the
kitchen waste line, provided however, all existing cafes, restaurants, motels,
hotels, or other commercial food preparation establishments shall be required
to construct a grease trap, at the owner's expense within ninety (90) days after
notification by the city, if and when the control authority determines that a
grease problem exists which is capable of causing drainage or operational
problems to structures or equipment in the city sewer system, or if such is
otherwise required by city ordinance, state or federal law. The city shall retain
the right to inspect and approve installation of the grease trap facility. The
grease trap must precede the septic tank on the kitchen waste line if a septic
tank is used. The grease trap must be designed in accordance with current
engineering standards and shall be easily accessible for cleaning. Grease traps
shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the facility so as to prevent a
stoppage of the city sewer. If the city employees are required to clean out the
city sewer lines as a result of a stoppage resulting from a clogged grease trap,
the property owner or operator shall be required to pay the costs of the city labor
and materials required to clean out the sewer lines. The installation of grease
traps shall be in accordance with section 18-306(2) of this chapter.
(13) Alteration to and obstructions to city sewers. No person shall
obstruct entrance to or operation of the City Sanitary Sewer System. Existing
manholes are to be kept uncovered and accessible at all times. In the event that
construction involving the filling of an area around a manhole occurs, the owner
of the property, or the person causing the construction to be accomplished shall
bear all costs associated with the required adjustment of the sewer manholes.
Filling or grading of a property such that storm water concentrates at a manhole
will not be permitted. The city reserves the right to enter onto its easements at
all times to maintain its system and to remove or cause to be removed all
obstructions to said entrance, and furthermore to assess the costs of the removal
of obstructions against the owner thereof.
(14) Maintenance of building sewers. The owner of a building sewer is
responsible for the maintenance (and replacement, if required) of the building
sewer from his building to the tap on the city main sewer line. (Ord. 1000, )
18-15
18-305. Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharge.
(1) Requirements of wastewater permits. (a) No person shall
discharge or cause to be discharged into the City of Harriman POTW any
wastewater other than domestic sewage resulting from normal human
habitation including food preparation activities unless he holds a
wastewater discharge permit as defined in section 18-307 of this
document. This section shall not apply to existing sources until they are
notified of its requirement in writing.
(b) Persons discharging radionuclides only in addition to
domestic sewage are required to obtain a wastewater treatment permit
unless:
(1) Material discharged is characterized by a half-life of
less than ten days, and a lack of significant alpha activity; and
(2) At no point along the collection system is activity
more than double background levels at the surface with all
manholes closed and the system functioning normally; and
(3) No more than 500 micro curries of material are
discharged per hour measured at the point of discharge into the
wastewater collection system to a maximum of 3500 micro curries
per day.
It is the responsibility of the discharging party to arrange
for verification of these limits within five days of a written request
to do so by the city.
(c) The control authority may waive the requirement for a
wastewater discharge permit on a case-by-case basis for dischargers
whose effluent does not violate the criteria for domestic sewage as
established by the controlling agency and who, furthermore, are not
categorical users. Notwithstanding the following, existing non-permitted
dischargers or dischargers who have had the permit requirement waived
may be required to obtain a discharge permit upon sixty days notification
by the controlling authority based on the observed character of the user's
operations or his waste stream or suspected impact on the WWTP or
other factors which the control authority may define.
(d) In order to avoid wastewater influent to the treatment plant
which creates adverse effects, or interferes with any wastewater
treatment or collection processes, or creates any hazard in receiving
waters or results in the city being in violation of applicable effluent
standards, including sludge disposal standards, the control authority
shall establish and amend wastewater effluent limits as deemed
necessary. Limits for certain parameters are set as protection criteria for
the POTW. Discharge limits for industrial users will be set in discharge
permits as outlined in section 18-307 of this chapter. Such limits will be
calculated based on the anticipated ability of the plant to absorb specific
wastewater constituents without violation of its NPDES permit, safety of
18-16
the public, and/or disruption of plant operations including sludge
disposal; not to exceed, however, federal limits where applicable.
(2) Prohibitions on wastewater discharge. Regardless of permit status,
no person shall discharge or cause to allow to be discharged into the City of
Harriman POTW or any connected treatment facilities any waste which
contains any of the following:
(a) Oils and grease - Fats, wax, grease or oils of more than one
hundred (100) mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees
and 150 degrees F (0 degrees and 65 degrees C) at the point of discharge
into the system.
(b) Explosive mixtures - Liquids, solids, or gases which by
reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient to cause a fire
or exploding hazard or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to
the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive readings on
an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer
system, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten
percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (L.E.L.). Prohibited materials
included, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, exylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(c) Noxious materials - Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or
gases, which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are or may be
sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
(d) Improperly shredded garbage - Garbage that has not been
ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles are 1/2 inch or
less in greatest dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under
flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers.
(e) Radioactive wastes - Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration that they are in noncompliance with regulations
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and
which will or may cause damage or hazards to the POTW or personnel
operating the system.
(f) Solid or viscous wastes - Solid or viscous wastes which will
or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or other interference with
the proper operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are
not limited to, grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops,
waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining
or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar substances.
18-17
(g) Excessive discharge rate - Wastewaters at a flow rate which
is excessive relative to the capacity of the treatment works or which could
cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency; or wastewaters containing such concentrations or quantities
of pollutants that their introduction into the treatment works over a
relatively short time period (sometimes referred to as "slug" discharges)
would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency.
(h) Toxic substances - Any toxic substances, chemical elements
or compounds, phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, or
any other substances in amounts which may interfere with the biological
processes or efficiency of the treatment works, or that will pass through
the treatment works in concentrations which would cause the POTW to
exceed it's NPDES permit limits.
(i) Unpolluted waters - Any unpolluted water including, but not
limited to, water from cooling systems or of storm water origin, which will
increase the hydraulic load of the POTW.
(j) Discolored materials - Wastes with objectionable color not
removable by the treatment process.
(k) Corrosive wastes - Any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the POTW. All wastes discharged to the public sewer
system must have a pH value in the range of six (6) to nine (9). Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to acids, sulfides, concentrated
chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react with
water to form acidic products.
(l) Thermal discharge - Heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in or cause damage to the POTW resulting in
interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature
at the treatment plant exceeds 40 C (104 F). Under no conditions may
the temperature at the point of discharge exceed 120 F.
(m) Human hazard - Any wastewater which causes hazard to
human life or creates a public nuisance.
(3) Limitation on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge
or convey or cause to be discharged or conveyed to the public sewer any
wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity that will:
(a) Not be amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment
only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(b) Constitute a hazard to human or animal life or to the stream
or water course receiving the treatment plant effluent.
(c) Exceed limits as set forth in his wastewater discharge
permit or violate the federal pretreatment standards.
18-18
1Note that these requirements are for violations of section 18-305 and are
distinct from enforcement provisions of the chapter in general (see section
18-310).
2This ability is a federal requirement, which is included here in order to
fill the title.
(d) Cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit,
pass-through limits, or other applicable receiving water standards, or
cause interference with plant operations.
(e) Contain any water or wastes whose strength or other
characteristics exceed the limits for normal wastewater which may be
established by the control authority. (Ord. 1000, )
18-306. Control of prohibited wastes. (1) Regulatory actions.1 If
wastewaters containing any substance in excess concentrations as described in
section 18-305 of this chapter are discharged or proposed to be discharged into
the sewer system of the City of Harriman or to any sewer system tributary
thereto, the city shall take any action necessary to:
(a) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
(b) Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant
modifications will eliminate the discharge of such substances to a degree
as to be acceptable to the Harriman Utility Board.
(c) Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow
equalization, necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable
characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these
rules and regulations or federal pretreatment standards and any other
applicable requirements promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307 of the Clean Water Act of 1977.
(d) Require the person or discharger making, causing or
allowing the discharge to pay any added cost of handling and treating
excess loads imposed on the POTW. Nothing herein authorizes
discharges, otherwise prohibited, upon payment of cost therefore.
(e) Discontinue sewer service to the discharger until such time
as the problem is corrected.2
(f) Take such other remedial action provided by law as may be
deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Submission of plans. Where pretreatment or equalization of
wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of its POTW is required by the
City of Harriman; plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information
relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall be submitted to the
control authority for review and approval. Approval shall in no way exempt the
discharge of such facilities from compliance with any applicable code, or
18-19
ordinance, rule or regulation of any governmental unit or the city. Any
subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control
facilities shall not be made without due notice to, and approval of, the control
authority.
(3) Pretreatment facilities operations. If pretreatment or control of
waste flows is required, such facilities shall be effectively operated and
maintained by the user at his expense, subject to the requirements of these rules
and regulations and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(4) Reporting of accidental discharges. If an accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated pollutants to the POTW occurs, the industrial facility
responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the Control Authority
so that corrective action may be taken to protect the POTW. In addition, a
written report addressed to the control authority detailing the date, time and
cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the
discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges, shall be filed
by the responsible industrial facility within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of
the accidental discharge.
(5) Right of entry. Agents of the City of Harriman, the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC), and/or EPA, upon
presentation of credentials shall be permitted to enter all properties of the
contributing industry for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing. (Ord. 1000, )
18-307. Wastewater discharge permits, generally. (1) Permits required.
All persons proposing to connect to or discharge into the sanitary sewer system
any material other than normal domestic waste shall be considered an
industrial user and must obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the control
authority before connecting to or discharging into the sanitary sewer. All
existing industrial users connected to or discharging into the city's sanitary
sewer must obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days after notice
from the city.
(2) Permit application. Industrial users seeking a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the control authority an
application in the form prescribed by the control authority, and accompanied by
the applicable fees. The applicant shall be required to submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(a) Name, address, and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget) number of applicant;
(b) Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but
not limited to, those mentioned in section 18-305 as determined by a
laboratory approved by the control authority;
(d) Time and duration of discharge;
18-20
(e) Average and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation;
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials, processes and types of materials which
are or could be discharged;
(h) Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of
production;
(i) Number and type of employees, and hours of work;
(j) All Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation and Environmental Protection Agency permits required;
and,
(k) Any other information included in the survey form or as may
be deemed by the control authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
(4) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user
charges and fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge
permits shall be uniformly enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter,
and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits must contain all items
required by federal regulation; and further, may include but not necessarily be
limited to the following:
(a) Requirements that the industrial user comply with any and
all pretreatment standards and requirements either local, state or
federal;
(b) The average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(c) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulation and equalization;
(d) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling
facilities and schedules for said installation;
(e) Requirements for installation and operation of pretreatment
systems or process modifications and schedule for said installations;
(f) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types,
and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(g) Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;
18-21
(h) Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the control authority and affording
the city access thereto;
(i) Requirements that the city maintain the right to enter onto
the premises for inspection of operations including process areas, storage
areas, spill containment areas, pretreatment areas, and any such other
portions of the premises which may be deemed appropriate by the
controlling authority; and,
(j) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control
authority to insure compliance with this chapter and state and federal
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(5) Duration of permits. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less
than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The permittee must
apply for a renewal permit not more than ninety (90) days nor less than thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of his valid permit. If the user is not notified
by the control authority of permit expiration, the permit shall be considered
extended for thirty days at a time up to a total of one additional year. The terms
and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the
control authority during the life of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified hereinbefore are modified and changed. The user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(6) Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premise,
or a new or changed operation. (Ord. 1000, )
18-308. Wastewater sampling and analysis. (1) Analysis of industrial
wastewater. All of the parameters listed in the discharge permit as authorized
under section 18-307 are to apply at the point where the industrial wastes are
discharged into the POTW unless otherwise noted. Any chemical or mechanical
corrective treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion
before the wastes reach the specified point. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of all industrial wastes shall be those set forth in 40 CFR part 136
or, if otherwise approved, in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public
Health Association, "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste"
published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the "Annual Book of
Standards, Part 23, Water, Atmosphere Analysis" published by the American
Society for Testing and Materials; however, alternate methods for the analysis
of industrial wastes may be used subject to mutual agreement between the
control authority and the producer of such wastes. The frequency and duration
18-22
of the sampling of any industrial waste shall be determined by the control
authority.
(2) Control manhole. When required by the control authority, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
control authority. The manhole shall be installed by the user at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The
control authority shall have access and use of the control manhole as may be
required for their monitoring of the industrial discharge. (Ord. 1000, )
18-309. Industrial self-monitoring and reporting requirements.
(1) Discharge reports. In order to effectively administer and enforce
the provisions of these regulations, the control authority shall require discharge
reports, sampling reports, test analyses, and periodical reports of wastewater
discharge.
(2) Monitoring programs. (a) The control authority shall require of
users such technical or monitoring programs, including the submission
of periodic reports, as it deems necessary and as are required by law. The
user shall pay all applicable charges for the monitoring program, in
addition to the sewage disposal and other charges established by the City
of Harriman.
(b) The monitoring program shall require the discharger to
conduct a sampling and analysis program of a frequency and type
specified by the control authority to demonstrate compliance with
prescribed wastewater discharge limits. The discharger may either:
(1) Conduct his own sampling and analysis program
provided he demonstrates to the control authority that he has the
necessary qualifications and facilities to perform the work; or,
(2) Engage a private laboratory, approved by the control
authority.
(c) In the event that the control authority suspects that a
violation of any part of this chapter or of the user's wastewater discharge
permit is occurring, it may take samples for the purpose of monitoring of
the discharge. Should this monitoring verify that a violation is occurring,
the costs of the monitoring and associated laboratory fees will be borne
by the discharger. Should no violation be found, the costs will be at the
expense of the control authority.
(d) Sampling report requirements (403.12(g)(2)). If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
18-23
results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.
(e) Sampling frequency report (403.12 (g)(5)). If an industrial
user subject to the reporting requirement in paragraph (e) of this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the control
authority, using the procedures prescribed in paragraph (g)(4) of this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(f) Signatory requirements for industry (403.12(l)). Signatory
requirements for industrial user reports. The reports required by
paragraphs (b), (d) and (e) of this section shall include the certification
statement as set forth in 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be signed as follows:
(1) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial
user submitting the reports required by paragraphs (b), (d) and (e)
of this section is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph,
a responsible corporate officer means:
(A) A president, secretary, treasurer, or
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar
policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation, or
(B) The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial
user submitting the reports required by paragraphs (b), (d) and (e)
of this section is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
(3) By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in paragraph (1)(1) or (1)(2) of this section if:
(A) The authorization is made in writing by the
individual described in paragraph (1)(1) or (1)(2);
(B) The authorization specifies either an individual
or a position having responsibility for the overall operation
of the facility from which the industrial discharge
originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator
of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(C) The written authorization is submitted to the
control authority.
(4) If an authorization under paragraph (1)(3) of this
section is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility,
18-24
or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
paragraph (1)(3) of this section must be submitted to the control
authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
(g) Industrial user notification requirements (403.12(p)).
(1) The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR
part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user. An identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, and estimation of
the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected
to be discharged during the following twelve months. All
notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date
of this rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the
effective date of this rule shall provide the notification no later
than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted
under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirements in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the
self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e).
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of
paragraph (p)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which
they discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of hazardous
wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified
in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.
18-25
(3) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001
of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste
or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the
industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under paragraph
(p) of this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous
wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical. (Ord. 1000, )
18-310. Enforcement procedures. (1) Administrative enforcement
remedies. (a) Notification of violation. Whenever the superintendent finds
that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, or a wastewater
permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent or his agent may
serve upon said user written notice of the violation (NOV). If required in
the NOV, a written explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted to the superintendent within the time frame
specified, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation.
(b) Consent orders. The superintendent is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with a user responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken
by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and
effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to section 18-310(1)(d)
below.
(c) Show cause hearing. The superintendent may order any
user which is in violation of or causes or contributes to violation of this
chapter or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Ten (10) days
prior notice shall be given, if practical. Such notice may be served on any
principal executive, general partner, corporate officer, site manager, or
other person listed in pretreatment document submitted by the user as
18-26
a contact. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed,
immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
(d) Compliance order. When the superintendent finds that a
user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance or a permit or
order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued or penalties imposed unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances
have been installed and are properly operated or other improvements as
specified are carried out. Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring, disconnection of unauthorized
sources of flow, and management practices.
(e) Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds
that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit
or order issued hereunder, the superintendent may issue an order to
cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to:
(1) Comply forthwith.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action
as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge.
(f) Administrative penalties. Notwithstanding any other
section of this chapter, any user who is found to have violated any
provision of this chapter, or permits and orders issued hereunder, shall
be assessed a penalty in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur
or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such
assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service
charge and the superintendent shall have such other collection remedies
as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges and penalties
shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. Industrial
users desiring to dispute such penalties must file a request for the
superintendent to reconsider the penalty within 10 days of being notified
of the fine. Where the superintendent believes a request has merit, he
shall convene a hearing on the matter with 15 days of receiving the
request from the industrial user.
(g) Emergency suspensions. (1) The superintendent may
suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of
an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or
18-27
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW,
or the environment.
(2) Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a users failure
to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has
passed, unless termination proceedings are initiated against the
user.
(3) An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or
in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence to the superintendent prior to the date of the hearing
described in paragraph (2) above.
(h) Revocation of permit. The superintendent may revoke the
permit of any user who continually violates the conditions of his permit
or this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, or for any of
the following violations:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or,
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the users premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(i) Appeal of administrative penalties. Upon issuance of any
administrative order or penalty, the user shall be notified that he shall
be entitled to a hearing upon such order or penalty. Request for such
hearing must be made within seven (7) days of notification of the
administrative action. The hearing will be held before the HUB manager
and shall be heard within seven (7) days of the request for hearing. At
the hearing, the superintendent or his representative shall represent the
controlling authority. The controlling authority and the customer shall
be entitled to present evidence relevant and material to the penalty and
to examine and cross examine witnesses. HUB may be represented by an
attorney, if the user so chooses. The HUB manager shall render a
decision within seven (7) days upholding or overturning the
administrative order or penalty. Notwithstanding the following,
Emergency Suspensions are described in section 18-310(1)(g) are effective
18-28
immediately upon issuance, and right to appeal is contingent on
compliance by the user.
(2) Judicial remedies. If any person discharges sewage, industrial
wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the
superintendent, through the city attorney, may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the applicable court.
(a) Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues
to violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued
hereunder, the superintendent, through counsel, may petition the court
for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may
be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of
the user. The superintendent shall have such remedies to collect these
fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges.
(b) Civil penalties. (1) Any user who has violated or continues
to violate this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder,
shall be liable to the superintendent for actual damages incurred
by the POTW. In addition to damages, the superintendent may
recover reasonable attorneys fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with the enforcement, activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(2) The superintendent shall petition the court to impose,
assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability,
the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the
violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit
gained through the users's violation, corrective actions by the user,
the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
(3) Criminal actions. (a) Any industrial user who willfully or
negligently violates any provision of this chapter or any orders or permits
issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by penalty and imprisonment to the full extent allowed by
law.
(b) Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a
penalty and imprisonment to the full extend allowed by law.
(4) Affirmative defenses. (a) Treatment upsets. (1) Any industrial
user which experiences an upset in operations that places it in a
temporary state of non-compliance, which is not the result of
18-29
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation, shall inform the superintendent
thereof immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where
such information is given orally, a written report thereof shall be
filed by the user within five days. The report shall contain:
(A) A description of the upset, its cause(s), and
impact on the discharger's compliance status.
(B) The duration of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance
is continuing, the time by which compliance is reasonably
expected to be restored.
(C) All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of such an upset.
(2) An industrial user which complies with the
notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall have
an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the
superintendent for any noncompliance with this chapter, or an
order or permit issued hereunder by the user, which arises out of
violations attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the
period of the documented and verified upset.
(b) Treatment bypasses. (1) A bypass of the treatment system
is prohibited unless all of the following conditions are met:
(A) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(B) There was no feasible alternative to the
bypass, including the use of auxiliary treatment or retention
of the wastewater; and
(C) The industrial user properly notified the
superintendent as described in paragraph (2) below.
(2) Industrial users must provide immediate notice to the
superintendent upon discovery of an unanticipated bypass.
If necessary, the superintendent may require the industrial
user to submit a written report explaining the cause(s), nature,
and duration of the bypass, and the steps being taken to prevent
its recurrence.
(3) An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which
does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure
efficient operation of the treatment system. Industrial users
anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the superintendent at
least 10 days in advance. The superintendent may only approve
the anticipated bypass if the circumstances satisfy those set forth
in paragraph (1) above.
18-30
(5) Remedies nonexclusive. Use of any remedy herein contained shall
not preclude utilization of any other remedy available at law or in equity nor
shall it preclude revocation of permits as provided for herein. (Ord. 1000, )
18-311. Provision of service. (1) Application for service. Prior to use of
the POTW, prospective users shall be required to sign an application for service
and/or the control authority's standard form of contract before service is
supplied. Users requiring the installation of special equipment by the control
authority may be required to sign a form of contract guaranteeing a minimum
charge for such period of time as may be required by the control authority, but,
in the absence of a completed application or contract, the usage by the user shall
bind the user to the terms of the control authority's standard form of
application. If for any reason user, after signing application or contract for
services, does not take the service, he shall reimburse the control authority for
the expense incurred by reason of its endeavor to furnish such service.
(2) Temporary service. Any user requiring temporary service may be
required to pay all costs as determined by the control authority for connection
and disconnection incidental to the supplying and removal of service in addition
to the regular sewer rate charges.
(3) Billing. All bills for sewer service will be rendered monthly as a
part of the regular monthly water billing and shall be computed using the
applicable rates or charges in effect at the billing date. Billings will be
computed and stated on a net and a gross basis. Such billings shall be payable
in the net amount only if paid within the discount period stated on the bill;
otherwise the bill is payable in the gross amount. Should the final date for
payment of the bill at the net rate fall on a Sunday or holiday, the business day
next following the final date will be held as the last day to obtain the net rate.
Remittance of net rate payment received by mail after the time limit for
payment of said net rate will be accepted by the control authority if the incoming
envelope bears United States Post Office date stamp of the final date for
payment of the net amount, or any date prior thereto. Failure to receive bill
shall not release user from his obligation to make payment nor extend the
discount date. No user shall be entitled to pay any bill at the net rate while
such user is delinquent in payment of any obligation for sewer service owed the
control authority by such user. In the event sewer service bills are not paid on
or before the discount date, water service may be discontinued upon five (5)
days' written notice to user and not again resumed until all bills are paid. The
control authority shall not be liable for damages on account of such
discontinuance of service, even though payment of such bills be made on the
same day either before or after service is actually discontinued.
(4) Point of delivery - water service. The sewer service rates are based
upon the supplying of water service to an entire premises through a single
delivery and metering point. If water service is rendered to any user or premise
18-31
through more than one delivery point, the control authority will bill each such
delivery point as a separate service.
(5) Discontinuance of service. The control authority, as the distributor
of water, may disconnect its water and/or sewer service and may refuse to
reconnect water or sewer service for a violation of this chapter, for failure to
comply with any of its Water Rules and Regulations, for violation of any
provision of the user's application or contract with the control authority for
sewer service furnished. Discontinuance of service by the control authority for
any cause as stated in this chapter shall not release the user from liability for
water or sewer service already received or from liability for payments that
thereafter become due under the provisions of any contract between the user
and the control authority. Termination of service is appealable under section
18-310(1)(i).
(6) Termination of service by customer. Users who have fulfilled their
contract terms and wish to discontinue service must give at least five (5) days
written notice to that effect, unless their contract specifies otherwise. Notice to
discontinue service prior to expiration of contract term will not relieve user from
any minimum or guaranteed payment under contract or applicable rate
schedule.
(7) Notice of trouble. User shall notify the control authority
immediately of any known defects, trouble or accident affecting the POTW.
(8) Sewer connections. Users requiring connections to existing mains
or the extension of mains must arrange for whatever extension of the sewer
main that may be necessary to reach a point in front of or adjacent to his
property where his sewer service line or lines may be connected. Several users
may jointly arrange for the extension of a main to serve their properties and
share the total expense in whatever manner they agree upon. Such mains, upon
acceptance by the control authority, will become part of the community system,
without cost to the control authority and will then be maintained by the control
authority.
(9) Scope. These rules, regulations and rate schedules as established
by the city are a part of all contracts for receiving sewer service from the control
authority and apply to all service received from the control authority whether
the service is based upon contract, signed application or otherwise. The city
may approve upon application the installation of a deductive meter where major
portions of the water does not enter the POTW. (Ord. 1000, )
18-312. User charge. (1) User charge shall be the charge levied on all
users including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental
entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
(2) The user charge shall reflect the costs of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
(3) Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) costs based on volume of flow.
18-32
(4) The control authority shall review not less often than every two
years the sewage contributions of users, the total costs of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the sewer facilities, and the user charge
system. The control authority shall revise the user charge if necessary to
accomplish the following:
(a) Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users as provided herein; and,
(b) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of POTW facilities.
(5) All flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users (i.e.
infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon
the volume of flow of the users.
(6) Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with
a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charge which is
attributable to operation and maintenance of the POTW.
(7) The Harriman Utility Board shall establish user charges and rates
for service from time to time. The rates will be available from the Harriman
Utility Board upon request. (Ord. 1000, )
18-313. Industrial waste surcharge. (1) In the event the user discharges
industrial wastes to the POTW having an average Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) content in excess of 250 mg/l, and/or an average Suspended Solids (SS)
content in excess of 250 mg/l, and/or an average Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN)
content in excess of 40 mg/l, the user shall pay a surcharge based upon the
excess strength of their wastes.
(2) The costs of treatment for each pound of BOD, SS, and TKN
removed by the POTW shall be reviewed at the end of each fiscal year and
appropriate surcharge rates applied to the sewer billing. These rates shall be
in effect until the next annual rate review. (Ord. 1000, )
18-33
1The regulations in this chapter are recommended by the Tennessee
Department of Health and Environment for adoption by cities.
Municipal code reference
Plumbing code: title 12.
CHAPTER 4
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.1
SECTION
18-401. Definitions.
18-402. Standards.
18-403. Construction, operation, and supervision.
18-404. Statement required.
18-405. Inspections required.
18-406. Right of entry for inspections.
18-407. Correction of existing violations.
18-408. Use of protective devices.
18-409. Unpotable water to be labeled.
18-410. Violations.
18-401. Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Public water supply." The waterworks system furnishing water
to the City of Harriman for general use and which supply is recognized as the
public water supply by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment.
(2) "Cross-connection." Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public
or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner
that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the
manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves,
or because of any other arrangement.
(3) "Auxiliary intake." Any piping connection or other device whereby
the water may be secured from a source other than normally used.
(4) "By-pass." Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
water may be diverted around any part of portion of a water purification plant.
(5) "Inter-connection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
18-34
(6) "Person." Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
18-402. Standards. The Harriman Public Water Supply is to comply with
sections 68-13-701 and 68-13-719 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, as well as
the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Supplies, legally adopted in
accordance with this code, which pertain to cross-connections, auxiliary intakes,
by-passes, and inter-connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program
to control these undesirable water uses. (Ord. 821)
18-403. Construction, operation, and supervision. It shall be unlawful
for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, bypass, or
interconnection to be made; or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever
unless the construction and operation of same have been approved by the
Tennessee Department of Health and Environment, and the operation of such
cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-connection is at all times
under the direct supervision of the superintendent of the Harriman Water
Department. (Ord. 821)
18-404. Statement required. Any person whose premises are supplied
with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same
premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or
unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated
through a piping system, shall file with the Superintendent of the Harriman
Water Department a statement of the non-existence of unapproved or
unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections.
Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no crossconnection,
auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection will be permitted upon
the premises. (Ord. 821)
18-405. Inspections required. It shall be the duty of the Harriman Public
Water Supply to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are
deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Superintendent
of the Harriman Water Department and as approved by the Tennessee
Department of Health and Environment. (Ord. 821)
18-406. Right of entry for inspections. The Superintendent of the
Harriman Water Department or his authorized representative shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the
Harriman Public Water Supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system
or systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter18-
35
connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such
information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of
the presence of cross-connections. (Ord. 821)
18-407. Correction of existing violations. Any person who now has crossconnections,
auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. After a thorough investigation of
existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work,
the amount of time shall be designated by the Superintendent of the Harriman
Water Department. (Ord. 821)
18-408. Use of protective devices. Where the nature of use of the water
supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed:
(1) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation.
(2) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not
willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated
representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are
such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply.
(3) That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such
that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing.
(4) There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted,
altered, or disconnected, the Superintendent of the Harriman Water
Department, or his designated representative, shall require the use of an
approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to assure
that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premise is
contained therein. The protective device shall be a reduced pressure zone type
backflow preventer approved by the Tennessee Department of Health and
Environment as to manufacture, model, and size. The method of installation of
backflow protective devices shall be approved by the Superintendent of the
Harriman Water Department prior to installation and shall comply with the
criteria set forth by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment. The
installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
The department shall have the right to inspect and test the device or
devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the
Superintendent of the Harriman Water Department or his designated
representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without
the knowledge of the occupant of the premises.
Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations
or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to
avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective
device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of
18-36
service is critical, the Superintendent of the Harriman Water Department shall
notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water
service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the
device. The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to make all
repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by
the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified
personnel, acceptable to the Superintendent of the Harriman Water
Department. (Ord. 821)
18-409. Unpotable water to be labeled. The potable water supply made
available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected
from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could
be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the
potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
W A T E R U N S A F E
F O R D R I N K I N G
Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one-inch high located on a red
background. (Ord. 821)
18-410. Violations. Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and fined according to the general penalty clause in this municipal code of
ordinances. In addition to or in lieu of any fines and/or penalties which may be
imposed by a court, the Superintendent of the Harriman Water Department
shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which
there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or
inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection,
auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. (Ord. 821,
modified)
19-1
1Municipal code reference
Electricity and gas are provided under the authority and rules and
regulations of the Harriman Utility Board, the organization, etc. of
which is covered in title 18, chapter 1.
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS1
[RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. CABLE TELEVISION--MID-TENNESSEE CABLE LIMITED
PARTNERSHIP.
2. EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONDERS.
3. CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 COMPLIANCE MANUAL.
4. PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
CHAPTER 1
CABLE TELEVISION--MID-TENNESSEE CABLE
LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
SECTION
20-101. Definitions.
20-102. Franchise agreement.
20-103. Authority not exclusive.
20-104. Franchise territory.
20-105. Extension of unincorporated county limit.
20-106. Operational standards.
20-107. Construction standards.
20-108. Conditions of street occupancy.
20-109. Supervision by the city.
20-110. Franchise fees.
20-111. Service maintenance standards.
20-112. Complaint procedures.
20-113. Performance bond.
20-114. Liability insurance.
20-115. General indemnification.
20-116. Assignment of franchise.
20-117. Review and renewal.
20-118. Revocation of franchise.
20-119. Franchisee's obligation to remove or to sell its facilities in the event
of revocation of non-renewal.
20-120. Liquidated damages.
20-121. Rights reserved to the city.
20-122. Compliance with municipal, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
20-123. Franchisee to have no recourse.
20-124. Notices to franchisee.
20-125. Franchisee's application incorporated.
20-126. Continuity of service mandatory.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-2
20-127. Time essence of this franchise.
20-128. Acceptance.
20-101. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein,
unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. The word
"shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory:
(1) "City" shall mean the incorporated City of Harriman and all
subsequent additions thereto.
(2) "State" shall mean the State of Tennessee.
(3) "Mayor" shall mean the existing or succeeding chief executive
officer of the city, or his designee.
(4) "City council" or "council" shall mean the present governing body
of the city or any successor to the legislative powers of the present city council.
(5) "City manager" shall mean the existing or succeeding City Manager
of the City of Harriman, Tennessee.
(6) "City attorney" shall mean the existing or succeeding retained legal
counsel of the city or his/her assistants.
(7) "Franchise" shall mean the permission, license or authorization
given hereunder to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in
the city including this chapter.
(8) "Franchisee" shall mean Mid-Tennessee Cable Limited
Partnership, its successors, transferees or assigns, the recipient of the franchise
granted herein.
(9) "Cable Act" shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984.
(10) "Federal Communications Commission" or "FCC" shall mean that
administrative agency of the federal government responsible for cable television
regulation on a national level, or its lawful successor.
(11) "Community Antenna Television System" or "CATV" or "Cable
Television System" shall mean any facility which, in whole or in part, receives
directly or indirectly over the air, by microwave, by satellite or otherwise, and
amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by
one or more television and AM and FM radio stations or cable programmers and
distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public
who pay for such services.
(12) "Application" shall include all written communications, in whatever
form, made by the franchisee to the city concerning the construction, rendition
of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the cable television
system contemplated herein.
(13) "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
(14) "Subscriber" shall mean a purchaser of any service delivered over
the system to an individual dwelling unit or of service to be utilized in
connection with a business, trade or profession.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-3
(15) "Chapter" as used herein shall include this chapter and as the same
from time to time may be amended.
(16) "Channel" shall mean a band or frequencies in the electromagnetic
spectrum which is capable of carrying either one (1) audio-video television signal
and/or a number of non-video signals.
(17) "Access channels" shall mean those channels set aside for specific
access purposes, as described in Sections 611 and 612 of the Cable Act.
(18) "Basic cable service" or "basic service" shall mean any service tier
which includes the transmission of local television broadcast signals as
described in Section 602(2) of the Cable Act.
(19) "Normal service interval" shall mean the period between the time
that franchisee is notified by a subscriber of a service deficiency and two
business days following the receipt of such notice, provided that the subscriber
or his representative is available during this period at the premises to be
serviced.
(20) "Annual gross revenue" shall mean any and all compensation
received from subscribers for cable television signals delivered to subscribers,
as well as rentals of equipment.
(21) "Street" shall mean the surface of and the space above and between
any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley,
court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or other casement now or hereafter
held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include such other
easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city
which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its
franchise to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting cable
television system transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable television
system.
(22) "Public school" shall mean any school, college or university which
is a part of an educational program operated by the city or the state.
(23) "Private school" shall mean any school, college or university which
is part of a parochial or religious school system and is operated not for profit.
(24) "Local educational authorities" shall mean those individuals,
groups, organizations, or governmental entities which provide for primary or
secondary education, whether public or private, within the city.
(25) "Good cause" shall represent that set of facts and circumstances
which, in an individual case, a reasonable man would adjudge to be beyond
franchisee's reasonable control and which would, therefore, represent a
justifiable excuse of nonperformance. Depending on the facts and
circumstances, good cause may include, but shall not be limited to, delays or
interruptions arising from necessary utility changes, rearrangements, power
outages, damage to the equipment of franchisee by the city or a third party, the
fulfillment of any federal, state and/or local governmental or regulatory
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-4
restrictions or requirements, national emergency, uncontrollable material
shortages, fire, earthquakes or the elements and acts of God. (Ord. 1010)
20-102. Franchise agreement. There is hereby granted by the City of
Harriman to Mid-Tennessee Cable Limited Partnership, its successors and
assigns, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate, and maintain
a cable television system within the franchise area as herein defined, for a
period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of this chapter, (Jan. 5, 1993),
subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided. Said franchise
may be renewed by the city for an additional ten (10) year period if such renewal
is made in writing and in compliance with the Cable Act. The city shall provide
appropriate public notice and opportunity to comment on such renewal requests.
(Ord. 1010)
20-103. Authority not exclusive. The right to use and occupy said
franchise area as defined in section 20-102 herein for the purposes herein set
forth shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use
of said franchise area to any person or entity at any time during the period of
the franchise in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 59, Part 201, of the Tennessee
Code Annotated, provided, however, no other franchises for a cable service will
be granted on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than in
any existing franchise. (Ord. 1010)
20-104. Franchise territory. This franchise is for the present territorial
limits of the City of Harriman, Tennessee, and for any area henceforth added
thereto during the term of this franchise. (Ord. 1010)
20-105. Extension of unincorporated county limit. Upon annexation of
any territory by the city (other than through a governmental consolidation
process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the rights of franchise hereby
granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent which the city has
authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by franchisee, located
within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be
subject to all terms hereof. (Ord. 1010)
20-106. Operational standards. (1) The cable television system as
contemplated herein shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
highest accepted industry standards to the end that the subscriber may receive
the most desirable form of service. The cable television system shall be built
and extended such that cable television service is available to all current
residents of the city. In those areas annexed into the city hereafter, the cable
television system will be built in such annexed areas of the city having a density
of 30 occupied dwelling units per cable mile. The number of miles will be
calculated at the closest point of active contiguous, serviceable distribution
system and will continue until reaching 250 feet of the dwelling unit.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-5
(2) The cable television system shall be installed and remain capable
of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum
and it shall have the further capability or converting UHF for the distribution
to subscribers on the VHF band.
(3) The cable television system shall be installed and remain capable
of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the
introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence.
(4) The cable television system shall be installed and remain capable
of twenty-four (24) hours per day continuous operation.
(5) The cable television system shall be capable of and will produce a
picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color
(provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture)
that is materially undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by
proper sound, assuming the technical, standard production television set is in
good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is receivable
satisfactorily at the franchisee's antenna site. In any event, the picture
produced shall be as good as is generally accepted in the cable television
industry.
(6) The cable television system shall transmit or distribute signals of
adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television
receivers operating within the manufacturer's specifications of all subscribers
without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other
electrical or electronic systems.
(7) Franchisee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with the television reception of persons not served by franchisee, nor shall the
system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the
various utilities serving the residents of the city. Should franchisee discover or
otherwise become aware of such interference, franchisee shall respond with
reasonable diligence to eliminate the interference.
(8) Franchisee shall continue, throughout the term of this franchise,
to maintain the technical standards and quality or service set forth in this
chapter.
(9) The Franchisee shall make one channel available on the cable
television system for use by local educational authorities in accordance with
Section 611 of the Cable Act.
(10) The requirements of (1) through (8) above may be waived by the
city upon showing by the franchisee of good cause. (Ord. 1010)
20-107. Construction standards. (1) Franchisee shall, at all times,
employ reasonable care and shall install and maintain devices or systems for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or
nuisances to the public.
(2) Franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment so is not to interfere with the equipment of any utility serving
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-6
the residents of the city or any other entity lawfully and rightfully using the
conduit, pole or other part of the right of way.
(3) The cable television system shall at all times conform to the
construction and maintenance standards set forth below:
(a) Methods of construction, installation and maintenance of the
cable television system shall comply with the National Electrical Safety
Code 1975 (ANSI CI-1975), and any future amendments, modifications
or replacements thereof, to the extent that such code is consistent with
the local law affecting the construction, installation and maintenance of
electrical supply and communications lines. To the extent that such code
is inconsistent with the other provisions of this franchise or with local
law, the latter shall govern.
(b) Any tower constructed or maintained in the city for use in
the cable television system shall comply with the standards contained in
Structured Standards for Stell Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, EIE Standards RS-222-A, as published by the Engineering
Department of the Electronic Industries Association, 20001 I Street,
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006 and as the same may be, from time to
time, modified, amended or replaced.
(c) Installations and physical dimensions of any tower
constructed in the city for use in the cable television system shall comply
with all appropriate Federal Aviation Agency Regulations including, but
not limited to, Objectives Affecting Navigable Airspace, 14 C.F.R. Section
77.1 et seq., February, 1965, and as the same may be, from time to time,
modified, amended or replaced.
(d) Any antenna structure in the cable television system shall
comply with Construction, Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structure,
47 C.F.R. Section 77.1 et seq., February, 1965, and as the same may be,
from time to time, modified, amended or replaced.
(e) All working facilities and conditions used during
construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television system
shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
(f) Franchisee shall at all times use reasonable care and shall
install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injuries or nuisances to the public.
(g) Franchisee shall construct and operate the system and
related facilities in accordance with generally accepted related industry
codes, standards and recommendations that are applicable now or that
may hereafter become applicable.
(4) As stated above, franchisee shall be required to reasonably comply
with standards as set forth in the publications recited above, this to include any
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-7
modifications, replacements and/or amendments thereto. However, in the event
any publications mentioned herein should become obsolete or should expire,
then franchisee shall be required to comply with the latest set of published
standards available at such time of obsolescence or expiration.
(5) All conductors, cables, towers, poles and other components of the
system shall be located and constructed by the franchisee in back of the street
curbs, except insofar as such components cross streets and public rights of way,
so as to provide minimum interference with access by adjoining property owners
to the streets and public ways, and no pole or other fixture or the franchisee
shall be placed in the public way so as to interfere with the usual travel on such
public way.
(6) The requirements of (1) through (5) above may be waived by the
city upon showing of good cause. (Ord. 1010)
20-108. Conditions of street occupancy. (1) All transmissions and
distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by franchisee within the
franchise area shall be located so as to not cause unreasonable interference with
the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
The cable television system shall be constructed and operated in compliance in
all material respects with all adopted local, state and national construction and
electrical codes which are in effect as of the date of this construction.
(2) Prior to commencing construction, franchisee shall submit to the
city detailed maps showing proposed construction locations. These plans shall
show the proposed placement of franchisee's cables on the city right of way, and
poles that are to be erected by franchisee as required for construction, and
locations where franchisee proposed to attach to existing utility poles.
Franchisee shall cooperate with the city and any of its agents during any initial
construction period and throughout the full term of the franchise in regards to
construction procedures, practices and locations.
(3) Whenever the city or State of Tennessee shall require the
relocation or reinstallation of any property of franchisee in any of the streets of
the franchise area, it shall be the obligation of the franchisee, upon notice of
such requirements, to cooperate in the timely removal and relocation or
reinstallation of said property so as not to cause unreasonable delay. Such
relocations, removal or reinstallations by franchisee shall be at the sole cost of
franchisee.
(4) Whenever in any place within the franchise area, all or any part of
the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the
obligation of the franchisee to locate or to cause its property to be located
underground within such places. If the electric and telephone utilities shall be
relocated underground in any place within the franchise area after franchisee
shall have previously installed its property, franchisee shall, nevertheless, at the
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-8
same time or in a timely manner thereafter, remove and relocate its property
also underground in such places. Any facilities of franchisee placed
underground at the property owner's request, in an area where electric or
telephone facilities are aerial, shall be installed with the additional expense
being paid by the property owner.
(5) Franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets of the franchise area so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming into contact with franchisee's wires and cables. Franchisee
shall obtain from the city if required, a permit to conduct any such trimming
and the same shall be conducted in strict obeyance of all local laws and
ordinances and at the sole expense of franchisee.
(6) In the case of any disturbance of any street or sidewalk caused by
franchisee, franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the city, replace and restore such street or sidewalk in as good a
condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.
(7) Franchisee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for
a period of one (1) year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or
street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repair shall
be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by
franchisee.
(8) Franchisee shall, upon the request of any person holding a building
permit issued by the city, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit
the moving of such building(s). The expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.
Franchisee shall be given not less than seventy-two (72) hours' advance notice
to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(9) If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the franchise area, it
shall become necessary in the judgment of the city manager or the chief of police
or fire department, to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances
or other fixtures of franchisee, this may be done and the repairs thereby
rendered necessary shall be made by franchisee, at franchisee's sole cost and
expense and without charge against the city.
(10) Franchisee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at
all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are
reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use
the portion of the street involved or adjacent property. (Ord. 1010)
20-109. Supervision by the city. (1) Franchisee shall construct, operate
and maintain the cable television system in strict compliance with all laws,
ordinances and departmental rules and regulations affecting the cable television
system.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-9
(2) Within sixty (60) days of the end of each calendar year, the
franchisee shall provide the city, in writing, with an annual update of system
activities and developments since the close of the previous calendar year.
(3) The cable television system and all parts thereof shall be subject,
upon reasonable notice, to the right of periodic inspection by the city.
(4) If at any time, the powers of the city council or any agency or
official of the city council are transferred by law to any other board, authority,
agency or official, then such other board, authority, agency or official shall have
the powers and rights previously vested under this chapter in the city council
or any agency or official of the city.
(5) The city and the franchisee, by its acceptance hereof, agree that the
purposes of the provisions hereof are to create the relationship of franchiser and
franchisee, to provide for the terms and conditions of that relationship, including
compensation for the use of municipal property and municipal supervision, and
the conditions upon which such property may be utilized. (Ord. 1010)
20-110. Franchise fees. (1) Franchisee herein shall pay to the city for
the use of the streets and other facilities of the city in the operation of the cable
television system and for the municipal supervision thereof a sum equal to three
percent (3%) of the Annual Gross Revenues, as defined herein, from receipts
from subscribers within the city. Said fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis
within forty-five (45) days after the end of a calendar quarter, with an
adjustment fee being the final quarterly payment of the year. Quarterly
payments shall be a reasonable estimate of anticipated and realized receipts.
The final payment will be adjusted upward or downward by franchisee based on
gross revenues received from subscribers for the year in order to arrive at the
three percent (3%) per year fee. The franchisee shall file with the city within
forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each of the franchisee's fiscal years a
statement clearly showing in detail the Annual Gross Revenues received from
subscribers by the franchisee during the preceding fiscal year.
(2) In the event this franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior
to the end of the franchise term, as defined herein, franchisee shall immediately
submit to the city a financial statement prepared by a certified public
accountant or chief financial officer of franchisee acceptable to the city showing
the Annual Gross Revenues of franchisee for the time elapsed since the last
fiscal year report. Franchisee shall pay to the city not later than forty-five (45)
days following the termination of this franchise a like percentage of such Annual
Gross Revenues and any other sums legally due and owing the city.
(3) In the event that any payment is not made on or before the
applicable date fixed herein, franchisee shall be subject to the penalty provided
for hereinafter.
(4) The city shall have the right to inspect the franchisee's records
showing the Annual Gross Revenues from which its franchise payments are
computed. The right of audit and computation of any and all amounts paid
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-10
under this franchise shall always be accorded to the city. Should the city notify
franchisee in writing of its desire to inspect and/or audit franchisee's records,
franchisee shall be obligated to produce such records and make them available
to the city within twenty (20) working days of such notification. (Ord. 1010)
20-111. Service maintenance standards. (1) Franchisee shall maintain
sufficient repair and maintenance crews capable of responding to subscriber
complaints or requests for service within the normal service interval as defined
herein.
(2) Service to subscribers. (a) Any verbal, telephonic or written
complaint relating to the quality or continuity or service shall be attended
to within the normal service interval as defined herein.
(b) The provisions contained in this subsection shall not apply
if the discontinuation of service is occasioned because of an act of God,
strike, national emergency, or any other circumstance beyond the control
of franchisee. Similarly, this provision shall not apply to service requests
or complaints pertaining to television set malfunctions or other
breakdowns not related to the operation of the cable television system.
(c) Franchisee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable
service rules, regulations and rates for the conduct of its business;
provided, however, that such service rules and regulations, as well as
subsequent amendments or modifications thereof, shall be made available
upon request for inspection by the city. The franchisee may increase or
adjust its rates following thirty (30) days' written notice to all subscribers
and to the city. If such notice is given, there shall be no regulation of
rates by the city. (Ord. 1010)
20-112. Complaint procedures. (1) Franchisee shall establish procedures
for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints. Franchisee shall
furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of the initial
subscription to the system. In addition, franchisee shall maintain a written
record, or "log", listing the date and time of each customer's complaints,
identifying the subscriber, describing the nature of the complaints, and when
and what action was taken by franchisee in response thereto. Such records shall
be kept for a period of one (1) year reflecting the operations to date and shall be
available for inspection during normal business hours.
(2) The city manager or his/her authorized designee is hereby
designated as the city complaint officer and shall have the primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the complaint procedures
hereunder. Any subscriber, user, programmer or other interested person who
has a complaint regarding the quality of cable television service, equipment
malfunctions, billings, or any other matters, which remain unsolved for thirty
(30) days after same have been brought to franchisee's attention, may file a
complaint in writing with the city complaint officer. Upon the filing of such a
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-11
complaint, such city complaint officer shall notify franchisee and make an
investigation to determine whether or not there is probable cause to credit the
allegations. If he/she determines after such investigation that there is probably
cause to credit the allegations of the complaint, he shall so notify franchisee and
complainant in writing and promptly endeavor to resolve the matter by
conciliation and persuasion. In the event that the city complaint officer is
unable to obtain conciliation within a reasonable time, he shall promptly set the
matter for a hearing where all parties may give evidence and the merits of the
dispute will be decided. The city complaint officer shall make public his/her
decision, along with a statement reciting the basis therefor. Within thirty (30)
days thereafter, either franchisee or the complainant may appeal in writing the
decision rendered by the city complaint officer to a committee of three city
council persons appointed to hear said appeals. At the appeal hearing, the
aggrieved party may contest the findings of fact or interpretation of controlling
law, at which time the city council persons may affirm, reject, or modify the
decision of the city complaint officer. The affirmance, rejection or modification
of said decision by the city council persons shall be final, subject to judicial
review upon request of the franchisee. (Ord. 1010)
20-113. Performance bond. (1) Thirty (30) days prior to beginning
construction, franchisee shall deposit with the city clerk a performance bond
from surety authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, in the
minimum amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The form and
content of such performance bond shall be acceptable to the city. The
performance bond shall be used to ensure the faithful performance by franchisee
of all provision of this chapter; compliance with all orders, permits and direction
of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the city
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this franchise; and the
payment of franchisee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by
reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
(2) The performance bond shall be maintained at the minimum
amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) during the entire term of
this franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to subsections
(1), (3) or (4) of this section.
(3) If franchisee fails to pay the city any compensation within the time
fixed herein, and fails after thirty (30) days' written notice to pay to the city any
fees due and unpaid, or fails to repay the city within such thirty (30) days any
damages, costs or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of the
acts of default of franchisee in connection with this franchise, and fails after
receipt of thirty (30) days' written notice of such failure by the city to comply
with any provision of this franchise which the city reasonably determines can
be remedied by demand on the performance bond, the city may, subject to
subsection (4) herein, demand payment of the amount thereof, with interest and
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-12
any penalties, from the performance bond. Upon such demand for payment, the
city shall notify franchisee of the amount and date thereof.
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (3) hereinabove, in the case of a bona
fide dispute regarding compliance, franchisee may request a hearing before the
city manager within thirty (30) days after written notification of non-compliance
and penalty by the city. At such hearing, all parties may file evidence and the
merits of the dispute will be decided. The city manager shall make public his
decision, along with a statement reciting the basis therefor. Within thirty (30)
days, franchisee may appeal to the city council, in writing, the decision rendered
by the city manager. At the appeal hearing, franchisee may contest the findings
of fact or interpretation of controlling law, at which time the city council may
affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager. The affirmance,
rejection or modification of said decision by the city council shall be final, subject
to judicial review upon request of franchisee.
(5) The rights reserved to the city with respect to the performance
bond are in addition to all other rights by the city, whether reserved by
negotiation with franchisee or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of a right with respect to such performance bond shall affect any other
rights the city may have. (Ord. 1010)
20-114. Liability insurance. (1) Franchisee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of this franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout
the term of this franchise, liability insurance insuring the franchisee and city
(and naming the city, its officials, boards, council, agents, and employees as
additional insureds) with regard to any and all damages for the following:
(a) A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy
indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person
or entity whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or
persons derivative from any injury to or death of a person or persons (i.e.,
including but not limited to claims for loss of services, medical and other
expenses) occasioned by the operations of franchisee under this franchise
or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per personal injury or death
of any one (1) person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per personal
injury or death of any two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence.
(b) Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and
saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and
employees from and against all claims by any person or entity whatsoever
for property damage, including loss of use and all consequential damages,
occasioned by the operation of franchisee under this franchise or alleged
to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage to any
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-13
one (1) person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for
property damage to any two (2) persons in any one occurrence.
(c) One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
All insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by franchisee
throughout the term of this franchise and until after the removal of all
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the
cable television system as defined in this franchise.
(2) An insurance certificate obtained by franchisee in compliance with
this section shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk during the term of
this franchise.
(3) Neither the provision of this section nor any damages recovered by
the city hereunder shall be construed as limiting the terms, obligations or
liabilities imposed under any other section of this franchise. (Ord. 1010)
20-115. General indemnification. (1) Franchisee agrees by the
acceptance of this franchise to indemnity, hold and save the city free and
harmless from all liability on account of injuries, deaths or damages to persons
or property arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair and operation
of its cable television system. In the event that suit shall be brought against the
city, either independently or jointly with franchisee on account thereof,
franchisee shall upon written notice by the city, defend the city in any such suit
at the cost of franchisee, and, in the event of a settlement approved by
franchisee or final judgment being obtained against the city, which franchisee
had notice and opportunity to defend, franchisee shall indemnify the city and
pay such settlement of judgment, together with all costs, and hold the city
harmless therefrom.
(2) Franchisee shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise
specifically agrees that it will pay, all expenses incurred by the city in defending
itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (1)
hereinabove, provided franchisee had written notice and declined to defend the
city. These expenses shall include but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket
expenses, such as attorney's fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of
any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any employees of
the city or its agents. (Ord. 1010)
20-116. Assignment of franchise. (1) No assignment of this franchise
shall take place, whether by forced or voluntary sale, lease, or assignment,
without prior written notice to and approval by the city council which shall not
be unreasonably withheld. The notice shall include full identifying particulars
of the proposed transaction, and the city council shall act by resolution. The city
council shall have forty-five (45) days within which to approve or disapprove an
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-14
assignment. If no action is taken within such forty-five (45) day period,
approval shall be deemed to have been given.
(2) Franchisee shall have the right to mortgage, pledge or otherwise
hypothecate the assets of its cable television system including the rights granted
under this franchise. (Ord. 1010)
20-117. Review and renewal. (1) The city council shall not make a
decision involving the renewal, cancellation or expiration of franchisee's
franchise unless the city manager has advised franchisee in writing, at least
thirty (30) days prior to such meeting, as to its time, place and purpose. Such
renewal procedures will be conducted pursuant to Section 626 of the Cable Act.
(2) It shall be the policy of the city to amend this franchise upon
application of the franchisee when necessary to enable franchisee to take
advantage of advancements in the state of the art which will afford it an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its subscribers,
provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to require the city to
make any amendment. No such amendment shall create any rights in
franchisee other than those specifically set out in such amendments. (Ord.
1010)
20-118. Revocation of franchise. (1) In addition to all other rights and
powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves, as an additional and
as a separate and distinct remedy, the right to revoke this franchise and all
rights and privileges of franchisee hereunder in any of the following enumerated
events or for any of the following reasons:
(a) Franchisee shall, by act or omission, violate any material or
substantial term or condition or this chapter and shall within thirty (30)
days following written notice by the city fail to effect such compliance; or
(b) Franchisee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt, or all or part of franchisee's facilities
should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not
redeemed by franchisee within thirty (30) days from said sale; or
(c) Franchisee fails to restore service following ninety-six (96)
consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when an act or God,
disaster, or other action beyond the control of the franchisee caused such
service interruption; or
(d) Franchisee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit
or pattern of material misrepresentation in its conduct or relations with
the city under this franchise.
(2) No such revocation shall be effective unless or until the city council
shall have adopted an ordinance setting forth the cause and reason for the
revocation and the effective date thereof, which ordinance shall not be adopted
without thirty (30) days' prior written notice thereof to franchisee and an
opportunity for the franchisee to be heard upon the proposed adoption of said
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-15
ordinance. Franchisee shall furnish to the city a written statement at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which city council convenes to consider such
proposed ordinance setting out its position relative to the cause(s) of such
revocation. In the event the revocation as proposed in said ordinance depends
upon finding a fact, such finding of fact is made by the city council shall be, in
writing, after the hearing provided for, if requested by franchisee.
(3) Notwithstanding the grounds for termination herein, no
termination procedure shall be held except in compliance with FCC regulations
and the Cable Act.
(4) Franchisee shall not be declared in default nor be subject to any
sanction under any provision of this section in any case in which the
performance of such provision is prevented for reasons of good cause. Any final
determination shall be subject to judicial review upon request of the franchisee.
(Ord. 1010)
20-119. Franchisee's obligation to remove or to sell its facilities in the
event of revocation of non-renewal. (1) In the event of revocation of this
franchise as provided for in section 20-118 herein or in the event this franchise
is not renewed as provided for in section 20-117 herein, the city shall have the
option of either requiring franchisee to remove from the public streets where its
properties are located all or any part of its equipment and facilities so located
within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such revocation or non-renewal,
or of requiring franchisee to leave all of its equipment and facilities in place
within the franchise area.
(2) The city manager is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of
this section as hereinafter provided.
The city manager shall immediately notify franchisee in writing of such
revocation or non-renewal. Within ninety (90) days following receipt of such
notice, franchisee shall, if required, remove from the streets of the city upon,
over and under which its properties are located all of said properties. Such
removal, if required, shall be performed by franchisee in such a manner so as to
not permanently destroy, mar or damage the franchise areas in which such
removal is being conducted. The city representative shall make an inspection
of the areas in which the removal is being or has been conducted, and should it
be found that franchisee has unreasonably destroyed, marred or damaged such
areas, franchisee shall be held responsible for the expenses of repairing such
areas to the satisfaction of the city.
(3) In the event franchisee has not removed its facilities within ninety
(90) days as described herein, or in the event the city elects not to require
franchisee to remove its facilities, franchisee shall be obligated to sell its
facilities in place within the franchise area to either the city or to any new
franchise operator. Any sale of facilities as required by this subsection shall be
pursuant to the valuation requirements of Section 626 of the Cable Act. (Ord.
1010)
20-16
20-120. Liquidated damages. Should it be found, after conducting the
hearing and appeal procedure provided for herein, and after written receipt by
franchisee of a finding of violation by the city manager or his designee, that
franchisee is in violation or the terms of this chapter, the liquidated damages
chargeable to the performance bond, provided for under section 20-113 herein,
shall be as follows:
(1) For failure to provide or maintain data and reports as requested by
the city or as required herein, franchisee shall forfeit one hundred dollars
($100.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues, if, after twenty
(20) days written notice, such data or reports are not supplied.
(2) For failure to comply with the operation standards as specified in
section 20-105 thereof, following the city council's resolution directing franchisee
to make improvements within a reasonable time period, franchisee shall forfeit
fifty dollars ($50.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues unless
cause can be shown for said delay.
(3) For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
system following the reasonable request of the city, franchisee shall forfeit fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues unless cause
can be shown for said delay.
(4) For failure to pay the franchise fee when due pursuant to section
20-110 herein, franchisee shall pay a one time flat charge of five percent (5%) of
the amount due.
(5) The rights in this section are separate, distinct and in addition to
those enumerated elsewhere in this chapter.
(6) Any liquidated damages imposed by the City of Harriman in
accordance with this license may be reduced by the city if it finds that the
failure of the franchisee resulted from conditions beyond the franchisee's control
and/or acts of God.
(7) Any damages assessed under this section 20-120, shall be subject
to judicial review at the request of the franchisee. (Ord. 1010)
20-121. Rights reserved to the city. Without limitation upon the rights
which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the
following rights, powers and authorities:
(1) To exercise its governmental police powers now or hereafter to the
full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city.
(2) To grant additional franchises within the city to other persons for
the construction of a cable television system.
(3) To exercise any other rights, powers or duties required or
authorized under the laws of the United States; Constitution of the State of
Tennessee; the laws of Tennessee; or the city charter. (Ord. 1010)
20-122. Compliance with municipal, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this franchise to the
20-17
contrary, franchisee shall at all times reasonably comply with all laws, rules and
regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agencies
thereof; provided, however, that if any such state or federal law, rule or
regulation shall require franchisee to perform any service or shall prohibit
franchisee from performing any service or shall permit franchisee to perform
any service in conflict with the terms of this franchise or of any law, rule or
regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof,
franchisee shall notify the city manager of the point of conflict believed to exist
between such law, rule or regulation and the laws, rules or regulations of the
city or this franchise, provided, however, that nothing herein shall compel
franchisee to act in any way which violates or contravenes any local, state or
federal law, rule or regulation.
(2) Franchisee shall be subject to all city ordinances, rules and
regulations and franchisee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and
regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission for cable television systems. (Ord. 1010)
20-123. Franchisee to have no recourse. (1) Except as expressly provided
for in this franchise, franchisee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever
against the city for any loss, cost or expense of damage arising out of any of the
provisions or requirements of this franchise or because of the enforcement
thereof by the city.
(2) Franchisee expressly acknowledges that upon acceptance of this
franchise it did so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the
power and authority of the city to grant this franchise.
(3) Franchisee further acknowledges by the acceptance of this
franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is
willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and
conditions.
(4) Franchisee further acknowledges by the acceptance of this
franchise that this franchise is non-exclusive. (Ord. 1010)
20-124. Notices to franchisee. At any time the city manager, mayor, city
council, members of the city council, or resident of the city brings an issue
regarding this chapter, agreements or applications thereunder, or the activities
of any franchisee to a meeting or work session of the city council, the city
manager will notify franchisee. Such notification shall take place at least
twenty (20) days prior to the meeting. (Ord. 1010)
20-125. Franchisee's application incorporated. (1) Franchisee shall
provide all services specifically set forth in its application, if any, to provide
cable television service within the city, and by its acceptance of this franchise,
franchisee specifically grants and agrees that its application is hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
20-18
(2) In the event of a conflict between such proposals and the provisions
of this chapter, and the franchise and/or application, the provisions of the
application shall prevail. (Ord. 1010)
20-126. Continuity of service mandatory. It shall be the right of all
subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other
obligations to franchisee are honored. In the event that franchisee elects to
overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the cable television system, or the city council
terminates or fails to renew the franchise, franchisee shall do everything in its
power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted services
regardless of the circumstances. In the event of a change of franchisee, the
current franchisee shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a
temporary period in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. (Ord.
1010)
20-127. Time essence of this franchise. Whenever this franchise shall set
forth any time for any action to be performed by or on behalf of franchisee, such
time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of franchisee to perform
within the time allocated may be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke this
franchise; provided franchisee receives notice of intent to revoke and has thirty
(30) days to cure any and all alleged violations as specified in the chapter. (Ord.
1010)
20-128. Acceptance. This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be
accepted by franchisee by a written acceptance executed and acknowledged by
franchisee and filed with the city clerk. Said acceptance shall incorporate
franchisee's written application, if any, to the city for the cable television
franchise and shall bind and obligate franchisee to perform and carry out all
provisions of said application. The city council may require franchisee to clarify
any portion of its written application, if any, prior to final acceptance. (Ord.
1010)
Change 3, April 10, 2007 20-19
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONDERS
SECTION
20-201. Emergency services responders must comply with requirements of
OSHA.
20-201. Emergency services responders must comply with requirements
of OSHA. (1) Selected emergency responders must be trained to the standard
set forth in OSHA Law 29 CFR 1910.120, Section Q, within eighteen (18)
months from the passage of the ordinance comprising this chapter and that if
within the period of 18 months the Roane County Emergency Management
Agency (EMA) is unable to provide the training to meet the intent of this
chapter, the Roane County EMA will recommend an appropriate extension for
the deficient organization.
(2) It is hereto mandated that all emergency services be trained in the
ICS system in order to be compliant within eighteen (18) months from the
passage of the ordinance comprising this chapter.
(3) After the period of eighteen (18) months has passed from the
passage of the ordinance comprising this chapter, additional hazardous material
response funding will be withheld from any department(s) that is deemed
deficient until such time as it is shown that the deficient department(s) is in
compliance with these requirements. (as added by Ord. #04-11, Aug. 2004)
Change 4, March 11, 2014 20-20
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964
COMPLIANCE MANUAL
SECTION
20-301. Compliance manual adopted.
20-301. Compliance manual adopted. (1) The Title VI Compliance
Manual for the City of Harriman shall be adopted in its entirety by reference.1
(2) The following statement shall be deemed as the City of Harriman's
Title VI policy statement:
"It is the policy of the City of Harriman to ensure that no citizen
shall, on the grounds of race, color or national origin, be excluded
from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal
financial assistance." (as added by Ord. #07-08-02, Aug. 2007)
1A copy of the Compliance Manual regarding Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 is available for review in the office of the city recorder.
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-21
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION
20-401. Committee appointments; terms and compensation.
20-402. Vacancies and removal of committee members.
20-403. Eligibility of committee members.
20-404. Authority; duties and responsibilities.
20-405. Solicitation of funds, grants, and gifts.
20-401. Committee appointments; terms and compensation. The
committee shall consist of seven (7) appointees and two (2) ex-officio members.
Appointments shall be made by the mayor subject to approval of the city council.
The initial appointments shall include two (2) members to serve a term of one
(1) year, two (2) members to serve a term of two (2) years, and three (3)
members to serve a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, all appointments shall
be for terms of three (3) years. The parks and recreation director and one (1)
member of the city council shall serve as ex-officio members. All members shall
serve without compensation and shall be required to pass a background check.
(as added by Ord. #0815-02, Sept. 2015)
20-402. Vacancies and removal of committee members. Members of the
committee may be removed for cause upon majority of four (4) votes by the
council. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of
the mayor subject to approval of the city council. Removal for cause includes, but
is not limited to, regularly being absent from committee meetings. (as added by
Ord. #0815-02, Sept. 2015)
20-403. Eligibility of committee members. Appointees to the committee
shall be citizens of the City of Harriman or its urban growth boundary.
Appointees shall be generally considered persons of good moral character and
shall be subjected to a background check prior to appointment. Appointees
should be generally interested in and/or involved in the recreational programs
of the City of Harriman. While not requirement, it is anticipated that a
successful committee member will periodically volunteer in support of
recreational activities within the City of Harriman. (as added by Ord. #0815-02,
Sept. 2015)
20-404. Authority; duties and responsibilities. The committee shall make
recommendations to council so that they properly oversee, regulate, operate, and
fund the municipal parks and recreation facilities and activities. Members of the
committee shall organize and elect officers as deemed necessary by the
committee; however ex-officio members shall not be eligible to serve as
Change 5, July 5, 2016 20-22
permanent chairperson, but shall preside during election of the chair. The
committee may adopt by-laws, rules, and regulations governing its action. The
committee shall have the duty to develop and recommend governing policies
governing the operations of the municipal parks and recreation facilities and
programs. Duties the committee will include:
(1) Periodically identify the present recreation resources, programs,
and facilities available to citizens within the City of Harriman;
(2) Conduct a "needs assessment" of recreation programs to citizens
within the City of Harriman;
(3) Stimulate citizens interest in recreation and to create motivation
for citizens participation;
(4) Establish recreation plan with goals and priorities to provide the
recreation programs and facilities necessary to meet the recreation needs for the
citizens of the City of Harriman;
(5) Coordinate various recreation programs and encourage growth; and
(6) Develop policies guiding use and operations of city recreational
facilities for council review and approval. (as added by Ord. #0815-02, Sept.
2015)
20-405. Solicitation of funds, grants, and gifts. The committee may be
given by the city council the right to seek funds from public and private sources
in the name of the City of Harriman for the municipal parks and recreation
facilities, but all funds shall be deposited in accordance with State of Tennessee
requirements with the city treasury primarily for the improvement of the
municipal parks and recreation facilities and their operations. (as added by
Ord. #0815-02, Sept. 2015)