THE
JOHNSON CITY
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE
INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
in cooperation with the
TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
August 2004
Change 11
April 4, 2019
CITY OF JOHNSON CITY, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Jenny Brock
VICE MAYOR
Joe Wise
COMMISSIONERS
Larry Calhoun
Todd Fowler
John Hunter
CITY MANAGER
Pete Peterson
CITY RECORDER/FINANCE DIRECTOR
Janet Jennings
ii
PREFACE
The Johnson City Municipal Code contains the codification and revision
of the ordinances of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. By referring to the
historical citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine
the origin of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means
that the section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical
citation indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations included
as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code relating to any
question that might arise. However, the user should note that most of the
administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map Amendments, Tax
Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise, ordinances that have
been passed since the last update of the code do not appear here. Therefore, the
user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city recorder for a
comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 7 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
(3) That the city agrees to pay the annual update fee as provided in the
MTAS codification service charges policy in effect at the time of the update.
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
iii
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of Linda Dean, the MTAS Administrative Specialist
and Rachel Coykendall, Program Resource Specialist, is gratefully
acknowledged.
MTAS appreciates the cooperation and assistance provided by the
following City of Johnson City staff members in the production of this municipal
code of ordinances:
Mike West
James H. Epps, IV
Patricia McKee
Lester Lattany
Janet Jennings
Janice Bennett
Cathy Feathers
Lora Groce
James D. Moody
Jim Donnelly
Steve Neilson
Wendy Bailey
Jeremy Bryant
Julie Ayers
Monie Honeycutt
Dwight Harrell
Steve Lobertini
Codification Consultant
iv
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER
That all ordinances shall begin “Be it ordained by the City of Johnson
City as follows:”.
Reading; effective date; emergency ordinances; amendments.
That every ordinance shall be considered on three (3) different days in
open session before its adoption, and not less than one (1) week shall elapse
between the first and third considerations, and any ordinance not so considered
shall be null and void.
The City of Johnson City may establish by ordinance a procedure for the
consideration of ordinances, the minimum requirement of which shall be that
the caption of an ordinance be read on each of the three (3) occasions at which
the ordinance is considered as provided in the preceding paragraph. Unless
otherwise provided by ordinance, applicable law, or by majority vote of the
commission at the time of its consideration, it shall not be required that any
ordinance be read in its entirety at any meeting at which it is under
consideration. No ordinance shall be read in its entirety more than once unless
required by applicable law, and in that instance only immediately prior to
consideration at public hearing.
Copies of ordinances under consideration shall be available after
introduction, during regular business hours at the office of the city recorder and
during sessions of the board of commissioners in which the ordinance is
considered.
An ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage thereof,
unless otherwise specified by the board of commissioners or prohibited by law.
No ordinance shall be amended except by a new ordinance.
That in all cases under the preceding section, the vote shall be determined
by yeas and nays; the names of the members voting for or against an ordinance
shall be entered upon the journal.
That every ordinance shall be immediately taken charge of by the
recorder and by him numbered, copied in an ordinance book, filed and preserved
in his office.
That all ordinances of a penal nature passed shall be published at least
once in a newspaper of the city, and no such ordinance shall be in force until it
v
is so published; provided, however, that as to any ordinance embodying a
building, plumbing, or electric code or any ordinance regulating as to sanitation
in the interest of public health, a single type of occupation, business or industry,
if it appears to the board of city commissioners that, in view of the length of the
ordinance, the newspaper publication is unnecessarily expensive, such fact shall
be stated in the ordinance and such ordinance may be published by posting a
certified copy thereof on a bulletin board which shall be maintained by the city
for that purpose at the city hall, for a period to be prescribed in such ordinance,
which shall not be less than ten (10) days, and after such publication, such
ordinance shall be in full force and effect.
It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep on hand for distribution,
without charge, to persons affected by such building, plumbing or sanitary
ordinances a supply of printed, type-written or mimeographed copies of such
ordinances; provided, however, that as to any ordinance compiling and/or
codifying the laws and ordinances of the city, the board of city commissioners,
if they believe it advisable, may have such ordinance printed in book form rather
than published in a newspaper, and such ordinance shall be in full force and
effect immediately after such printing.
It shall be [the] duty of the city manager to keep on hand a supply of such
ordinances for distribution to persons affected thereby; provided, that the city
manager may charge for each volume an amount to be fixed by the board of city
commissioners, which amount shall not exceed the cost of the city preparing and
publishing same. [Priv. Acts 1939, Art. VI, §§ 30-34]
vi
1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER
1. CODE OF ORDINANCES - GENERAL PROVISIONS.
2. ADMINISTRATION.
3. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
4. RECORDER.
5. CITY MANAGER.
6. CITY ENGINEER.
7. ELECTIONS.
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GENERAL PROVISIONS1
SECTION
1-101. How code designated and cited.
1-102. Definitions and rules of construction.
1-103. Catchlines of sections.
1-104. General penalty.
1-105. Severability of parts of codes.
1-106. Authority of boards, etc., to issue licenses or permits.
1-107. City seal; emblem.
1-108. Provisions not affected by code.
1-109. Amendments to code.
1-110. Supplementation of code.
1-101. How code designated and cited. The ordinances embraced in
the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The
Code of The City of Johnson City, Tennessee," and may be so cited.2 (1985 Code,
§ 1-1)
1Charter references
Boundaries: art. II.
Ordinances: art. VI.
2Charter reference
Codification of ordinances: § 34.
State law reference
Adoption of municipal code: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-508,
et seq.
1-2
1-102. Definitions and rules of construction. In the construction of
this code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of
construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise:
(1) "Board of commissioners" or "city commission." The words "board
of commissioners" or "city commission" shall mean the Board of Commissioners
of the City of Johnson City.
(2) "Bond." When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall
be sufficient.
(3) "Building official." The term "building official" shall mean the chief
building official of the city or his designee.
(4) "City." The words "the city" shall mean the City of Johnson City,
in the counties of Washington, Sullivan, and Carter, and the State of Tennessee,
except as otherwise provided.
(5) "Computation of time." The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if
the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
(6) "County." The words "county" or "the county" shall mean the
County of Washington, the County of Carter, or the County of Sullivan, as the
case may be, in the State of Tennessee.
(7) "Gender." Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.
(8) "Health department." The words "city health department" or
"health department" shall mean that department designated by the city to
perform the functions of a health department under this code and other laws or
ordinances.
(9) "Health officer." The words "city health officer" or "health officer"
shall mean the person designated by the city to perform the functions of a health
officer under this code and other laws or ordinances.
(10) "Joint authority." All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
(11) "May." The word "may" is permissive.
(12) "Month." The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
(13) "Number." Words used in the singular include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular number.
(14) "Oath." The word "oath" shall be construed to include an
affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to
the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
(15) "Officials, employees, etc." Whenever reference is made to officials,
employees, boards, commissions, departments or other agencies by title only,
i.e., "mayor," "police department," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the
1-3
officials, employees, boards, commissions, departments or other agencies of this
city.
(16) "Owner." The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
(17) "Person." The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as
well as an individual.
(18) "Personal property." The term "personal property" shall include
money, goods, chattels, things in action, evidences of debt and every other
species of property except real property, as herein defined.
(19) "Preceding," "following." The words "preceding" and "following"
shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
(20) "Property." The word "property" shall include real and personal
property.
(21) "Real property." The term "real property" shall include lands,
tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein,
equitable as well as legal.
(22) "Shall." The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
(23) "Sidewalk." The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a
street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
(24) "Signature" or "subscription." The term "signature" or
"subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, the name
being written near the mark and witnessed.
(25) "State." The word "state" shall be construed as if the words "of
Tennessee" followed it.
(26) "Street." The word "street" shall mean any public way, road,
highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and the
approaches thereto within the city.
(27) "T.C.A." The designation, "T.C.A." shall mean the Official
Annotated Tennessee Code, as amended.
(28) "Tenant." The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or
land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building
or land, whether or alone or with others.
(29) "Tense." Words used in the past or present tense include the future
as well as the past and present, and the future includes the present.
(30) "Time standard." Whenever certain hours are named, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this
city.
(31) "Writing." The words "writing" and "written" shall include
printing, typewriting, engraving, lithographing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
1-4
(32) "Year." The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (1985 Code,
§ 1-2)
1-103. Catchlines of sections. The catchlines of the several sections
of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall
they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or re-enacted. (1985 Code, § 1-3)
1-104. General penalty. Whenever in this code or any other ordinance
of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such code or other ordinance the doing
of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate violation. Each day any
violation of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense for
the purposes of this section. (Ord. #3259, Dec. 1994, modified)
1-105. Severability of parts of code. It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the mayor and the board of commissioners that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this code are severable, and if any
word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections
of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and the
board of commissioners without the incorporation in this code of any such
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid word, clause, sentence, paragraph or
section.1 (1985 Code, § 1-5)
1-106. Authority of boards, etc., to issue licenses or permits.
Words prohibiting anything from being done, except in accordance with a license
or permit, or authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such
a board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such a thing to be done.
(1985 Code, § 1-6)
1-107. City seal; emblem. (1) A new common seal for the city is
adopted, effective on and after July 4, 1976, according to the following
1Charter reference
Severability of parts of charter: § 188.
1-5
description: A circle enclosing a concentric ring with the words "SEAL OF
JOHNSON CITY, TENNESSEE" along the bottom perimeter, immediately
above which is the wording "Incorporated 1869." Along the top perimeter of the
circle is the word "Adopted," below which is the wording "July 4, 1976" and in
the center of the circle is a strong abstract symbol.
(2) A bicentennial emblem is adopted, effective on and after July 4,
1976, in celebration of the bicentennial year according to the following
description: A circle enclosed in a concentric ring with the wording "Johnson
City, Tennessee" along the lower half with the national bicentennial emblem
separating the words "City" and "Tennessee" immediately above which is the
likeness of the liberty bell and along the top perimeter is a likeness of the
American eagle.1 (1985 Code, § 1-7)
1-108. Provisions not affected by code. Nothing in this code or the
ordinance adopting this code shall affect any of the following:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date
of this code;
(2) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence
of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(3) Any right or franchise granted by the city to any person;
(4) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in
the city;
(5) Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
(6) Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any
street in the city;
(7) Any ordinance providing for local improvements or levying or
imposing taxes therefor;
(8) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in
the city;
(9) Any ordinance relating to fees of ambulances, fees for reclaiming
or adopting impounded animals, license fees consistent with this code or
building and other permit fees;
(10) Any zoning ordinance of the city; or
(11) Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations,
prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way
traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with
this code; and all such provisions are hereby recognized as continuing in full
1Charter references
Municipal seal: §§ 2, 58.
1-6
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (1985
Code, § 1-8)
1-109. Amendments to code. (1) Amendments to any of the provisions
of this code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to
the section number of this code. Such amendments may be in the following
language: "That section of the Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee,
is hereby amended to read as follows: . . ." The new provisions may then be set
out in full as desired.
(2) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this code is to
be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City
Johnson City, Tennessee, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered
, which section reads as follows: . . ." The new section may then be set out
in full as desired.
(3) All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to
be repealed shall be specifically repealed by title, chapter, or section number,
as the case may be. (1985 Code, § 1-9)
1-110. Supplementation of code. (1) By contract or by city personnel,
supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the code shall include
all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board
of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes
made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that
they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(2) In the operation of a supplement to this code, all portions hereof
which have been repealed shall be excluded from reprinted pages.
(3) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning
the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them
into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(a) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;
(b) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(c) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision
numbers;
1-7
(d) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case
may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated in the code);
(e) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in
the code. (1985 Code, § 1-10)
1-8
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION1
SECTION
1-201. Ordinances--designation.
1-202. Ordinances--reading prior to adoption.
1-203. Ordinances--recordation.
1-204. Removal of public records.
1-205. Execution of deeds.
1-201. Ordinances--designation. All the bylaws of the city shall be
designated "ordinances," and shall be designated by number, in consecutive
order, according to the date of passage. (1985 Code, § 2-1)
1-202. Ordinances--reading prior to adoption.2 (1) Before its
adoption, every ordinance shall be presented on three (3) different days in open
public session. The caption shall be read prior to the passage of an ordinance
on each of the three occasions at which the ordinance is presented. Unless
otherwise provided by ordinance, applicable law, or by majority vote of the
commission at the time of its consideration, it shall not required that any
ordinance be read in its entirety at any meeting at which it is under
consideration. No ordinance shall be read in its entirety more than once unless
required by applicable law, and in that instance only immediately prior to
consideration at public hearing.
(2) Copies of such ordinances shall be available after introduction,
during regular business hours, at the office of the city recorder. Copies shall
also be available during sessions of the board of commissioners. (1985 Code,
§ 2-2, as amended by Ord. #2783, Feb. 1989)
1Charter references
Board of commissioners: art. V.
City attorney: art. X.
City manager: art. IX.
Corporate powers: art. III
Departments: art. XVIII.
Incorporation: art. I
Mayor: art. VII.
Officers and employees: art. VIII.
2Charter reference
Reading of ordinances: § 31.
1-9
1-203. Ordinances--recordation. All ordinances shall be recorded at
length by the recorder, in the order in which they are passed, in a book kept for
that purpose.1 (1985 Code, § 2-3)
1-204. Removal of public records. All records of the city are hereby
declared to be public records, open to the inspection of any citizen of the city, but
no official shall permit any book, paper or other document or record to be taken
from his office unless on a summons properly served and issued by some court.
(1985 Code, § 2-4)
1-205. Execution of deeds. All deeds and leases of land, sold or leased
by the city, and all deeds, leases, agreements, indentures, assurances and
contracts made and entered into by order of the board of commissioners, shall
be signed, and executed by the mayor and countersigned and the seal of the city
affixed thereto and delivered by the recorder.2 (1985 Code, § 2-5)
1Charter reference
Recordation of ordinances: § 33.
2Charter reference
Duties of recorder generally: § 58.
Execution of deeds, etc., by mayor: § 35.
1-10
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
SECTION
1-301. Legislative powers.
1-302. Rules of procedure.
1-303. Compelling members to attend meetings.
1-304. Regular meetings.
1-305. Meeting place for special meetings.
1-306. Special committees.
1-307. Vacancies.
1-308. Appointment of board and committee members.
1-301. Legislative powers. The legislative powers of the city shall be
vested in and exercised by the board of commissioners, in the manner and under
the provisions of the charter of the city, as amended.1 (1985 Code, § 2-22)
1-302. Rules of procedure. The board of commissioners may, by
resolution, regulate the conduct of its members during its meetings and
prescribe its own rules of procedure. Except as provided in the charter, in all
cases where there is no rule, that compilation of rules of procedure known as
"Robert's Rules of Order" shall be the guide.2 (1985 Code, § 2-23)
1-303. Compelling members to attend meetings. Absent members
may be compelled to attend any meeting of the board of commissioners by
subpoena issued by the recorder, under the direction of two (2) commissioners,
and served by a policeman; and on refusal of such member to answer such
summons by his immediate attendance, he shall be fined the sum of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) by the recorder, for each offense.3 (1985 Code, § 2-24)
1-304. Regular meetings. The regular meetings of the board of
commissioners shall be held at 6:00 P.M. on the first and third Thursdays of
each month in the commission chamber in the Municipal and Safety building at
1Charter reference
Powers of board of commissioners: § 18, et seq.
2Charter reference
Rules of procedure: § 27.
3Charter reference
Compelling attendance: § 26.
1-11
601 East Main Street, Johnson City, Tennessee.1 (1985 Code, § 2-25, as
amended by Ord. #3035, Nov. 1991, and Ord. #3864, March 2002)
1-305. Meeting place for special meetings. All special meetings of
the board of commissioners are to be held at such suitable place or places as the
board shall from time to time designate by resolution.2 (1985 Code, § 2-26)
1-306. Special committees. Special committees may be appointed,
when deemed necessary by the board of commissioners, in the manner
prescribed by the resolution constituting such committees. (1985 Code, § 2-27)
1-307. Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring in the board of commissioners
shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of the charter.3 (1985 Code,
§ 2-28)
1-308. Appoinment of board and committee members. Members of
all boards and committees of the City of Johnson City whose membership has
heretofore been appointed by the city manager shall be appointed by a majority
vote of the Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City. (Ord. #2754,
Nov. 1988)
1Charter references
Regular meetings: § 20.
Participation in meetings by city manager: § 45.5.
2Charter references
Special meetings: § 21.
3Charter references
Filling vacancies: § 23.
1-12
CHAPTER 4
RECORDER1
SECTION
1-401. Duties of recorder.
1-401. Duties of recorder. (1) The recorder shall be the fiscal officer
of the city and, as such, shall perform the duties specified in the city charter and
such other reasonable duties as may be required of him by this code or other
ordinance or resolution.
(2) The recorder shall certify, under his hand and the seal of the city,
all copies of such original documents, records and papers as may be required by
any officer or person and charge therefor to individuals such fees for the use of
the city as are charged by the clerks of the court for like services. (1985 Code,
§ 2-47)
1Charter references
Appointment and salary of city recorder: § 39.
Recorder as finance officer: art. XII.
Recorder and taxation: art. XI.
1-13
CHAPTER 5
CITY MANAGER1
SECTION
1-501. Powers.
1-502. Duties.
1-501. Powers. (1) The city manager shall be the chief executive officer
of the city and may, in such manner as he deems proper, inform himself as to
conditions prevailing in any city offices, and shall have the right to inspect
books, papers and records in such offices, and may call upon any officer, clerk
or deputy for such information as he desires. He shall report to the board of
commissioners all violations or neglect of duty by any city official that comes to
his knowledge.
(2) The city manager shall have charge of the executive work of the
city in its various departments and, except as otherwise provided in the city
charter, he shall have sole charge of all employees of the city; but the city
manager shall be subject to the control of the board of commissioners; except,
that it shall not direct the city manager to make any expenditure, when there
is no available cash on hand to meet the expenditure, unless at the same time
the board provides means to obtain the necessary funds to meet such
expenditure. (1985 Code, § 2-60)
1-502. Duties. (1) The city manager shall see that this code and all
other ordinances are properly enforced; he shall have control of the police force,
and is hereby empowered to call to his aid the entire force and as many other
persons as he may require, to preserve the peace, to prevent or quell any
unlawful assembly or riot and to preserve order and decorum in all meetings of
the board of commissioners, and all persons, so called by him, shall be subject
to his order while on the duty for which they are called.
(2) The city manager shall perform such other duties and exercise such
other powers as are imposed upon him by law, by charter or by this code or other
ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners not in conflict with any
provisions of such laws or charter. (1985 Code, § 2-61)
1Charter reference
City manager: art. IX.
Supervision of departments: § 89.
Municipal code reference
Supervision of police department: § 6-101.
1-14
CHAPTER 6
CITY ENGINEER
SECTION
1-601. City engineer generally.
1-601. City engineer generally.1 The city engineer shall be a graduate
of some approved technical school in the civil engineering course, or land
surveyor, who has graduated in the municipal engineering course, in some
approved correspondence school, and shall have had at least three (3) years'
practical experience. He shall make all the surveys, maps, profiles,
specifications and estimates of cost for all public improvements; set all grade
and line stakes for such work; supervise repairs and cleaning of streets and
sewers; and generally do all work of an engineering nature required of him by
the board of commissioners or city manager. He shall preserve monuments and
benchmarks and establish new ones when necessary. He shall make and keep
suitable records, in books and on plats, so plain and complete that any
competent engineer can from them retrace and check all work. He shall have
charge of all surveying instruments, plans, profiles, measurements and books,
properly belonging to his office, and shall turn same, together with all other city
property in his possession, over to his successor in the office or to the recorder,
as the board may direct. He shall obtain the full and correct names of every
person owning or having any interest in the lands abutting any street or way
proposed to be laid out, altered, widened, graded or otherwise improved, and
shall present to every person waivers of notice and damage, for his signature.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with or abridge the right
of the board to employ a consulting and designing engineer or architect for
special work or to advise with the city engineer and supervise the work for
which he is responsible. (1985 Code, § 2-48)
1Charter references
Appointment and salary of city engineer: § 39.
Supervision of engineer: § 45.3.
1-15
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS1
SECTION
1-701. Conduct of persons near ballot boxes.
1-702. Ward boundaries.
1-701. Conduct of persons near ballot boxes. It shall be unlawful for
any person or groups of persons to hand out or distribute cards, pamphlets,
pictures or literature, or in any way loaf, loiter or remain within three hundred
(300) feet of any ballot box during the hours between 9:00 A.M., and 7:00 P.M.,
on the day of any election or primary held and conducted within the city, or to
do any act whatsoever for the purpose of attempting to or influencing the vote
of any eligible voter within three hundred (300) feet of any ballot box. (1985
Code, § 9-1)
1-702. Ward boundaries. The city is divided into wards, or voting
precincts, as shown on the maps as prepared by the respective election
commissions of Washington, Sullivan, and Carter Counties for official purposes.2
(1985 Code, § 9-2)
1Charter references.
Elections: art. IV.
State law reference
Municipal elections: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-53-101, et seq.
Wards: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-101, et seq.
2Charter reference
Wards: § 6.
State law reference
Wards: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-101, et seq.
2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. CENTRAL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
2. BOARD OF EDUCATION.
CHAPTER 1
CENTRAL BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT1
SECTION
2-101. Created.
2-102. Purpose; costs.
2-103. Board of assessment commissioners.
2-101. Created. Pursuant to the powers granted by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 7, chapter 84, article 7, there is hereby created the Johnson City
Downtown Centre Central Business Improvement District to contain and
include all of the properties within the area herein described:
Beginning at a point in the northerly right-of-way of East Market Street
as it intersects with the common property line of the City of Johnson City and
the John Sevier Center; thence north 30 degrees 29 minutes west along the
common line of the City of Johnson City and the John Sevier Center a distance
of 227.50 feet to a point; thence south 63 degrees 05 minutes west a distance of
53.10 feet to a point; thence south 78 degrees 37 minutes west a distance of 36.8
feet to a point; thence north 29 degrees 48 minutes west a distance of 21.6 feet
to a point in the easterly right-of-way line of the downtown loop; thence along
the easterly right-of-way line of the downtown loop the following three (3) calls
and distances: South 18 degrees 54 minutes west a distance of 132.45 feet to a
point; south 15 degrees 26 minutes west a distance of 74.23 feet to a point; and
south 12 degrees 50 minutes west a distance of 82.25 feet to a point; thence
along a curve to the left, having a radius of 40.0 feet and an arc distance of 92.73
feet to a point, said point being in the northerly right-of-way line of East Market
Street; thence along the northerly right-of-way line of East Market Street,
north 60 degrees 00 minutes east a distance of 266.43 feet to the point of
beginning. (1985 Code, § 2-170)
1State law reference
Central business improvement districts: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 7-84-101, et seq.
2-2
2-102. Purpose; costs. The purpose of the Johnson City Downtown
Centre Central Business Improvement District shall be to foster and encourage
development of the downtown centre as a complete and viable commercial
enterprise through development of the first floor area, or through vertical
expansion of the centre for commercial purposes, or both. Since construction
and other costs for the development are not to be financed from an assessment
upon the property included within the improvement district, no employment of
architects or engineers or levying of any special assessment is authorized by this
chapter. Therefore, there shall be no allocation of costs to municipal revenues,
nor shall there be any collection process enumerated within this chapter. (1985
Code, § 2-171)
2-103. Board of assessment commissioners. A board of assessment
commissioners shall be appointed as required, unless it is otherwise determined
that the absence of any assessment precludes this requirement.1 (1985 Code,
§ 2-172)
1State law reference
Board of assessment commissioners: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 7-84-303.
2-3
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF EDUCATION1
SECTION
2-201. Violations.
2-202. City judge to determine cases.
2-203. Oath of office.
2-204. Powers and duties generally.
2-205. School attendance--generally.
2-206. School attendance--when parents, etc., excused.
2-207. Certain needy children to be reported to charity.
2-208. False statements as to age of children, etc., by parents, etc.
2-201. Violations. Any penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter
may be suspended and finally remitted by the court trying the case, if the child
in question is immediately placed in regular attendance in some school and if
such fact or regular attendance is subsequently proved to the satisfaction of
such court by a certificate from the principal of such school. (1985 Code,
§ 2-189)
2-202. City judge to determine cases. The city judge shall be vested
with power to determine all cases coming within the provisions of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 2-190)
2-203. Oath of office. Each member of the board of education, upon his
induction into office, shall take the following oath before the recorder:
"I do solemnly swear that I will use my best endeavors to
carry out the laws and regulations governing the public schools of
the City of Johnson City, and will perform my duties as a member
of the board of education to the best of my ability, so help me God."
(1985 Code, § 2-191)
2-204. Powers and duties generally. The board of education and
officers thereof shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are now,
or may be hereafter, imposed and conferred upon them by the laws of the state,
1Charter references
City bonds: art. XV.
Departments: art. XVIII.
Department of education: art. XXIII.
Recorder as custodian of public school funds: § 58.
2-4
this code and the resolutions and other ordinances of the board of
commissioners.1 (1985 Code, § 2-192)
2-205. School attendance--generally. Every parent, guardian or other
person in the city having charge or control of any child between the ages of
seven (7) and sixteen (16) years shall cause such child to be enrolled and attend
some school, public, private or parochial, for the entire school term in each year
in the city; provided, that the phrase "school term" in this section shall be a
period not exceeding nine (9) school months or one hundred eighty (180) school
days; provided, further, that any child during that period may be excused
temporarily from complying with the provisions of this section in whole or in
part if it is shown to the local board of education:
(1) That such parent, guardian or other person having charge or
control of such child is not able, through extreme destitution, to provide clothing
for such child;
(2) That such child is mentally or physically incapacitated to attend
school for the whole period or any part thereof; or
(3) That such child has completed the eighth grade of the elementary
school and holds a certificate of promotion to the high school.2 (1985 Code,
§ 2-193)
2-206. School attendance--when parents, etc., excused. If any
parent, guardian or other person having charge or control of any child embraced
within the provisions of this chapter proves in defense that he is unable to
compel the child under his control to attend school, he may thereupon be
discharged from liability; and such child shall be proceeded against as a
delinquent child under the statutes governing such cases.3 (1985 Code, § 2-194)
2-207. Certain needy children to be reported to charity. If it is
ascertained by the local board of education that any child who is required under
1Charter reference
Powers of board of education generally: § 116.
2State law references
Children excused from compulsory attendance: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 49-6-3005.
School attendance and truancy reports: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 49-6-3007.
School term: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 49-6-3004.
3State law reference
Report of truant child to judge having juvenile jurisdiction: Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 49-6-3007.
2-5
the provisions of this chapter to attend school is unable to do so on account of
lack of clothing or food, such cases shall be reported to the appropriate agency
for investigation and relief. (1985 Code, § 2-195)
2-208. False statements as to age of children, etc., by parents, etc.
No parent, guardian or other person having charge or control of any child
embraced within the provisions of this chapter shall make a false statement
concerning the age of such child or the time that such child has attended school.
(1985 Code, § 2-196)
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. CITY COURT.
3. PRISONERS.
4. JUVENILE JUDGE AND JUVENILE ADVISORY BOARD.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
3-101. Violations.
3-101. Violations. (1) Any person violating the terms of this title shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 1-104. Any police officer or other
city employee convicted of a violation of the terms of this title shall, in addition
to the fine provided for in § 1-104, shall be immediately dismissed from the
services of the city in accordance with section 166 of the city charter.
(2) It shall be the duty of the city judge to make a written report of any
violation of the terms of this title to the board of commissioners, a copy of which
report shall be furnished by the city judge, to each member of the board of
commissioners. (1985 Code, § 8-1)
1Charter references
City bonds: art. XV.
City court and judge: art. XXII.
Juvenile court and judge: art. XXV.
State law references
Collection of fines and costs: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-303,
et seq.
Punishment for contempt: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 29-9-103.
3-2
CHAPTER 2
CITY COURT
SECTION
3-201. Established; presiding officer; jurisdiction; sessions.
3-202. Docket--generally.
3-203. Report of arrests, committals, etc.; police attendance.
3-204. Confinement of defendants prior to hearing; bail bond.
3-205. Commitment of intoxicated persons.
3-206. Execution of judgment on forfeited bonds.
3-207. Remission of fines.
3-208. Discharge of acquitted persons.
3-209. Appeals.
3-210. Release of prisoners.
3-211. Court costs.
3-212. Local litigation tax.
3-201. Established; presiding officer; jurisdiction; sessions. There
shall be a municipal court, which shall be known as the "city court" of the city,
of which the city judge shall be the judge or presiding officer, which under the
charter, shall have jurisdiction of and be vested with full power to try all
offenses for violation of this code or other ordinances of the city, and is also
vested with concurrent jurisdiction with justices of the peace in cases of the
violation of the criminal laws of the state, and to be entitled to the same fees
now allowed justices of the peace for like services, the same to be paid into the
city treasury. Such court shall be opened at such time or times on each day,
except Sunday, as shall be set by order of the city judge with the approval of the
board of commissioners, and shall continue in session until the cases before it
shall have been disposed of; but, upon good cause shown, the judge of such court
may in his discretion, continue as provided by law, the hearing of any case
pending in such court.1 (1985 Code, § 8-18)
2-202. Docket--generally. The city judge shall keep a docket upon
which shall be entered all the cases tried in the city court, and the docket shall
show, by appropriate entries thereon, the name and style of the cause; the
nature of the offense, the date of the hearing; the names of the accused, the
arresting officer and the presiding judge; the judgment of the court; the amount
of fines and costs, or by committal to the workhouse or work gang. The docket
1Charter references
City court established, jurisdiction generally: § 100.
Disposition of costs: § 106.
3-3
shall show the names of witnesses examined in each case and the fees allowed
them, and the date of appeal, if the case is appealed. Columns shall also be
provided for recording payments and remissions of fines. Credits to the docket
shall be by posting the amount of receipts issued by the city judge and reported
by him in his daily report.1 (1985 Code, § 8-19)
3-203. Report of arrests, committals, etc.; police attendance. It
shall be the duty of the chief of police, or in his absence, of any of the policemen
requested by the city judge, to report to the city court at 7:00 A.M. each
morning, except Sunday, all arrests and committals and the names of witnesses,
and wait upon the court during all its sittings. (1985 Code, § 8-20)
3-204. Confinement of defendants prior to hearing; bail bond. All
persons arrested for the violation of this code or other ordinance or bylaw of the
city, or for the commission of any municipal misdemeanor committed in the city,
may be confined in jail until they can have a hearing in the city court, unless
such persons give proper bond and security for their appearance before such
court, in which event they may be released, and any member of the police force
shall have authority to take from persons arrested bonds and securities for their
appearance as set out in this section. (1985 Code, § 8-21)
3-205. Commitment of intoxicated persons. If, in the opinion of the
city judge, any person brought before him in answer to any charge is too
intoxicated to understand his situation, or properly attend to the trial, he may
commit such person to jail until he is clothed in his right mind. (1985 Code,
§ 8-22)
3-206. Execution of judgment on forfeited bonds. The city court
shall, in cases where the parties accused have been upon bond, if they shall not
appear, proceed to enter judgment upon such bonds against the principal and
sureties for the full amount of the penalty thereof, and the city judge shall, after
the expiration of two (2) whole days from the rendition of the judgment, issue
a fieri facias to the chief of police or any assistant policeman, who shall execute
the same. (1985 Code, § 8-23)
3-207. Remission of fines. No person except the city judge shall be
permitted to remit a fine, fines or part of a fine, imposed upon any person by the
city court. (1985 Code, § 8-24)
1Charter reference
Court dockets: § 107.
3-4
3-208. Discharge of acquitted persons. All persons tried in the city
court, who shall be acquitted of the offense against them, shall at once be
discharged. (1985 Code, § 8-25)
3-209. Appeals. All persons convicted in the city court, and the city,
shall have the right to appeal from the judgment of such court to the law court
at Johnson City, where the cause shall be tried de novo; but no appeal shall be
granted unless the same is prayed and obtained within two (2) days of the
rendition of the judgment and a proper appeal bond is given, with solvent
security, to be approved by the city judge, in no case less than the amount of
judgment and costs, or upon otherwise complying with the law of the state in
cases wherein the personal liberty of the defendant is involved. But in cases
wherein a defendant has been convicted of an offense against this code or other
ordinance of the city and fined therefor, and appeals from such conviction and
fails to give bond for his appearance at the court to which he appeals, he may be
confined in the city lockup, or prison, until his appeal is disposed of.1 (1985
Code, § 8-26)
3-210. Release of prisoners. No person, except the city judge, shall be
permitted to release any prisoner from the city jail, regardless of whether the
prisoner has been tried by the city court or is in jail awaiting trial; but this
section shall not be construed to mean that a prisoner may not be released when
thought necessary by a designated physician, when such prisoner is in need of
medical attention or hospitalization.2 (1985 Code, § 8-27)
3-211. Court costs. Court costs in the total amount of fifty-four dollars
($54.00) shall be levied and collected on every individual charge (except parking
violations) adjudicated or otherwise disposed of in the Johnson City Municipal
Court. One dollar ($1.00) of the court costs collected on each charge shall be
forwarded by the municipal court clerk to the state treasurer to be used by the
administrative office of the courts for training and continuing education for
municipal court judges and municipal court clerks, as required by the Municipal
Court Reform Act. Three dollars ($3.00) of the court costs collected on each
charge shall be accounted for separately in the city's accounting records under
the term Municipal Court Technology Fee.
1Charter reference
Appeals from city court, bond: § 103.
State law references
Appellate jurisdiction of circuit court: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 16-10-112.
2Charter reference
Authority to release prisoners, etc.: § 102
3-5
For parking violations, court costs of one dollar ($1.00) shall be assessed
as required by the Municipal Court Reform Act and shall be forwarded by the
municipal court clerk to the state treasurer to be used by the administrative
office of the courts for training and continuing education courses for municipal
court judges and municipal court clerks. (as added by Ord. #4466-12, Oct. 2012)
3-112. Local litigation tax. In all cases in which a state litigation tax
is imposed, a city litigation tax shall also be levied and collected, in the amount
of thirteen dollars seventy-five cents ($13.75). (as added by Ord. #4466-12, Oct.
2012)
3-6
CHAPTER 3
PRISONERS
SECTION
3-301. Workhouse authorized.
3-302. Confinement--generally.
3-303. Confinement--in lieu of paying fines and costs.
3-304. Hard labor--generally.
3-305. Hard labor--per diem.
3-306. Treatment generally.
3-301. Workhouse authorized. Whenever, in the opinion of the board
of commissioners, it may be necessary, the board my purchase lands and erect
or purchase buildings and provide everything necessary for a workhouse;
appoint suitable persons to manage same, and make all necessary and proper
regulations for the government thereof. (1985 Code, § 8-44)
3-302. Confinement--generally. Until a work house as provided in
§ 3-301 shall be built or established by the city, persons committed by the city
judge shall be confined, when not at work, in the city jail, or in the county jail
or workhouse and shall, while so confined, be under the guard and safekeeping
of the keeper of the city jail or county jail or workhouse, their food and other
necessities to be furnished as provided by the board of commissioners. (1985
Code, § 8-45)
3-303. Confinement--in lieu of paying fines and costs. If any person
convicted of a violation of this code or other ordinance of the city, and given a
fine or jail sentence, or both, shall fail to pay the fine and costs adjudged against
him, he may be committed by the city judge to the county jail or workhouse, or
to the custody of the officer having charge of the county prisoners, there to
remain at labor until such fine and costs are paid, and such jail or workhouse
sentence is served; provided, that such convict may, at any time, pay any
balance of such fine and costs that may be unpaid, but in no case to be released
until the expiration of such jail or workhouse sentence. (1985 Code, § 8-46)
3-304. Hard labor--generally. Persons committed as provided in this
chapter shall be put to work at such labor as their health and strength will
permit. Females shall be confined or kept at work separate and apart from male
prisoners. The person in charge of prisoners shall be permitted to use the ball
and chain, or hobbles, to prevent their escape, when he thinks it necessary.
(1985 Code, § 8-47)
3-7
3-305. Hard labor--per diem. City convicts shall be worked upon the
streets and other public works of the county, and shall be allowed such amount
as may be established by state law for each day's work until such fine and costs
are paid. (1985 Code, § 8-48)
3-306. Treatment generally. (1) The officer in charge of the city
convicts shall treat them humanely, and shall provide them with good food,
clean quarters, warmed as the season demands, and with water, towels and
soap.
(2) When any prisoner is sick or physically disabled, the jailor, or
anyone else in charge of such prisoner, shall report the same to the city
physician or the county jail physician, who shall examine such prisoner, and if
he believes the disability will continue for some time, or that the condition of
such prisoner is such as to endanger the health of other prisoners, he shall make
a written report of same to the city judge, who shall have power to discharge
such prisoner.1 (1985 Code, § 8-49)
1State law references
Medical care of prisoners: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 41-4-115.
3-8
CHAPTER 4
JUVENILE JUDGE AND JUVENILE ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
3-401. Juvenile judge.
3-402. Juvenile advisory board.
3-403. Clerk of the juvenile court.
3-401. Juvenile judge. (1) Jurisdiction generally. The juvenile judge
shall preside over the juvenile court. He shall have jurisdiction as provided by
state law, this code and other ordinances of the city.1
(2) Quarterly reports of cases. The juvenile judge shall meet with the
juvenile advisory board created by § 3-402(1) once each month and shall submit,
in writing, once each quarter, a detailed report, furnishing one (1) copy to the
secretary of the advisory board and one (1) copy to the city manager, showing a
list of all cases for the previous quarter, which list shall show the names or
numbers, of all children committed to any home or institution.2
(3) Work with juvenile advisory board as to juvenile home. It shall be
the duty of the juvenile judge to work in conjunction with the juvenile advisory
board created by § 3-402(1) and to originate and direct the policy of the juvenile
home in accordance with the latest scientific methods of dealing with children,
not inconsistent with the amount of funds in the treasury. The juvenile judge
shall suggest and discuss with the advisory board any changes in the policies of
the home, and such changes shall be made from time to time as are thought
beneficial for the better conduct and maintenance of the juvenile home. (1985
Code, §§ 8-82, 8-83, and 8-84)
3-402. Juvenile advisory board. (1) Established; composition; terms
of members; compensation. (a) A juvenile advisory board consisting of
nine (9) members is created to work in connection with the juvenile judge
and the juvenile home.
1State law reference
Jurisdiction of juvenile court: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 37-1-103,
et seq.
2Charter reference
Juvenile court and judge: art. XXV.
State law reference
Juvenile courts and proceedings: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 37-1-101, et seq.
3-9
(b) The board of commissioners shall annually elect three (3)
members of such board to serve for a period of three (3) years. The
members of the advisory board shall serve without remuneration.
(2) Organization. The juvenile advisory board created in this section
shall elect from its own membership a chairman, a secretary and a treasurer.
(3) Duties generally. (a) The juvenile advisory board shall have no
connection with the juvenile court, but shall be limited to the supervision
of the juvenile home.
(b) All officers and members of the juvenile advisory board shall
keep permanent records and shall surrender and deliver them to their
successors.
(4) Chairman. The chairman of the juvenile advisory board created in
this section shall preside at all meetings, appoint committees and be an ex
officio member of all committees. Any major problem arising in connection with
the juvenile court or the juvenile home shall be discussed with the board of
commissioners by the chairman.
(5) Secretary. The secretary of the juvenile advisory board created in
this section shall keep a record of each meeting and shall notify the members of
the juvenile advisory board of the time and place of the meeting. The secretary
shall, upon request, furnish the board of commissioners a detailed report of the
proceedings of the juvenile advisory board.
(6) Treasurer. The treasurer of the juvenile advisory board created in
this section shall have charge of all funds for the maintenance and upkeep of the
juvenile home, including all donations from any source. The treasurer, with the
juvenile judge, shall also be responsible for the collection of any money due to
the home by parents or friends for the care of children detained therein. The
treasurer shall be the purchasing agent and, as such, he shall be responsible for
the buying of necessary supplies and groceries. When directed by the advisory
board to do so, he shall pay for other items, such as repairs to the building and
necessary furnishings, including forms, postage, and similar supplies, and he
shall keep an itemized account of receipts and expenditures and shall make a
quarterly report to the board of commissioners, or shall report more often if
requested by the city manager to do so. The juvenile advisory board, by a
majority vote of all its members, shall employ all necessary help to be used at
the juvenile home, not inconsistent with the amount of funds in the treasury.
(7) Matron of juvenile home generally. The matron of the juvenile
home shall make requisitions of the juvenile advisory board for such supplies as
are necessary for the well being of the children. (1985 Code, §§ 8-96--8-102)
3-403. Clerk of the juvenile court. (1) The clerk of the Juvenile Court
of Johnson City, Tennessee shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City
of Johnson City, Tennessee, for a term of four (4) years, beginning with the
general election in August, 2016.
3-10
(2) The juvenile court clerk shall be a resident of Johnson City,
Tennessee.
(3) The duties of the juvenile court clerk are to perform all the clerical
functions of the juvenile court, to maintain the records of the juvenile court, and
to possess all authority of other juvenile court clerks as provided in Tennessee
Code Annotated, title 37, or any other general law.
(4) The board of commissioners shall appoint an interim juvenile court
clerk until the first election of the juvenile court clerk in August, 2016, and in
the event of any future vacancy in the position.
(5) The board of commissioners hereby appoints the municipal court
clerk as the interim juvenile court clerk, pending the first election in August
2016. Pending the first election, the position of the interim juvenile court clerk
shall be a part-time position.
(6) Beginning September 1, 2016, the position of the juvenile court
clerk shall be a full-time position. The compensation of the juvenile court clerk
shall be set by resolution of the board of commissioners.
(7) Before entering upon the duties of office, the juvenile court clerk
shall enter into an official bond conditioned upon the safekeeping of the records
and for the faithful discharge of the duties of the juvenile court clerk's office.
(8) Before entering upon the duties of office, the juvenile court clerk
shall take an oath or affirmation to support the constitutions of the United
States and the State of Tennessee, and to execute the duties of the office without
prejudice, partiality or favor, to the best of the clerk's skill and ability.
(9) The Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee
hereby calls for an election for the position of Juvenile Court Clerk on the
August, 2016, ballot.
(10) If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions, or application of the section which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to that end, the provisions of this section
are declared to be severable. (as added by Ord. #4556-14, Nov. 2014)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
3. CODE OF ETHICS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
4-101. Standards of conduct generally.
4-102. Preferring charges against officers.
4-101. Standards of conduct generally. (1) No officer or agent of the
city shall have a direct interest in any contract to which the city is a party or
speculate in city bonds or warrants or other evidences of indebtedness; nor shall
the mayor, any commissioner or other officer or agent of the city order or
contract or do anything whereby a financial liability is incurred, unless
authorized by existing laws or by order of the board of commissioners; nor shall
any salaried official engage in, or carry on, any business or occupation which
interferes with a prompt and proper discharge of his duties to the city. As used
in this subsection, "direct interest" means any contract with any business in
which the officer or agent is the sole proprietor, a partner or the person having
the controlling interest. "Controlling interest" shall include the individual with
the ownership or control of the largest number of outstanding shares owned by
any single individual or corporation.
(2) No officer or agent of the city shall be indirectly interested in any
contract to which the city is a party unless the officer or agent publicly
acknowledges his interest and excuses himself from any of his duties which
include the consideration of, voting on or overseeing the particular contract. As
used in this subsection, "indirectly interested" means any contract in which the
officer or agent is interested but not directly so, but includes contracts where the
officer or agent is directly interested but is the sole supplier of goods or services
in the city.1 (1985 Code, § 2-45)
1State law reference
Conflict of interest law: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 12-4-101, et seq.
Interest of officer in municipal contracts: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-107.
4-2
4-102. Preferring charges against officer.1 (1) Charges against the
mayor, any commissioner or any other city official shall be in writing, addressed
to the board of commissioners, signed by the person making the same and filed
with the recorder, or with the mayor, when such charges are against the
recorder. Charges must be made as brief as possible, shall be made only on
paper filed as a pleading in the case and shall be tried before such board, sitting
as a court, over which the mayor shall preside. In the event of any charges
against the mayor or any commissioner, such mayor or commissioner shall not
sit as a member of the court. The recorder shall be the clerk of such court,
unless he is on trial, in which case the board shall elect one (1) of its members
to act in his stead.
(2) The recorder, at the request of the board or of any person
interested in the proceedings, shall issue subpoenas or other compulsory process
to compel the attendance of persons and the production of books and papers
before such court or any committee of same. Any person failing or refusing to
obey such summons or process shall be guilty of contempt and shall be subject
to the same penalties as prescribed in like cases before the city court. The board
may refer the case to a committee of its members to take evidence and prepare
the case, but the final decision shall rest with the board itself and a two-thirds
vote of all members of the board, qualified to vote in such court, shall be
necessary for a conviction. (1985 Code, § 2-46)
1Charter references
Punishment for contemptuous behavior: § 27.
Removal of city officers generally: § 29.
4-3
CHAPTER 2
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM1
SECTION
4-201. Title.
4-202. Purpose.
4-203. Coverage.
4-204. Standards authorized.
4-205. Variances from standards authorized.
4-206. Administration.
4-207. Funding the program.
4-201. Title. This chapter shall be known as "The Occupational Safety
and Health Program Plan" for the employees of the City of Johnson City,
Tennessee. (Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-202. Purpose. The City of Johnson City, Tennessee in electing to
update the established program plan will maintain an effective and
comprehensive Occupational Safety and Health Program Plan for its employees
and shall:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment
that includes:
(a) Top management commitment and employee involvement;
(b) Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and
potential hazards;
(c) Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling
the existing or potential hazards; and
(d) Train managers, supervisors, and employees to understand
and deal with worksite hazards.
(2) Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment,
personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect
employees.
(3) Record, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner
of Labor and Workforce Development, or persons within the Department of
Labor and Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.
1The complete "Plan of Operation for the Occupational Safety and Health
Program Plan for the Employees of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee" is
available in the office of the city recorder.
4-4
(4) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records.
(5) Consult with the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved
under a standard promulgated by the state.
(6) Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees
in the effectuation of the objectives of this program plan, including the
opportunity to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices
injurious to employee safety and health.
(7) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this
program plan. (Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April
2013)
4-203. Coverage. The provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health
Program Plan for the employees of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee shall
apply to all employees of each administrative department, commission, board,
division, or other agency whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent.
(Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-204. Standards authorized. The Occupational Safety and Health
standards adopted by the City of Johnson City, Tennessee are the same as, but
not limited to, the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health
Standards promulgated, or which may be promulgated, in accordance with
section 6 of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972.1
(Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-205. Variances from standards authorized. Upon written
application to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the
State of Tennessee, we may request an order granting a temporary variance
from any approved standards. Applications for variances shall be in accordance
with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development
Occupational Safety and Health, Variances from Occupational Safety and
Health Standards, chapter 0800-01-02, as authorized by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 50. Prior to requesting such temporary variance, we will notify
or serve notice to our employees, their designated representatives, or interested
parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50, chapter 3.
4-5
notice on the main bulletin board shall be deemed sufficient notice to employees.
(Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-206. Administration. For the purposes of this chapter, the city
manager or his designee is designated as the director of occupational safety and
health to perform duties and to exercise powers assigned to plan, develop, and
administer this program plan. The director shall develop a plan of operation for
the program plan in accordance with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor
and Workforce Development Occupational Safety and Health, Safety and Health
Provisions for the Public Sector, chapter 0800-01-05, as authorized by Tennessee
Code Annotated, title 50. (Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by
Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-207. Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program plan pursuant to this chapter shall be made available as
authorized by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City,
Tennessee. (Ord. #3975-03, Nov. 2003, as replaced by Ord. #4482-13, April 2013)
4-6
CHAPTER 3
CODE OF ETHICS1
SECTION
4-301. Applicability.
4-302. Definition of "personal interest."
4-303. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote.
4-304. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
4-305. Acceptance of gratuities, etc.
4-306. Use of information.
4-307. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc.
4-308. Use of position or authority.
4-309. Outside employment.
4-310. Ethics complaints.
4-311. Violations.
1State statutes dictate many of the ethics provisions that apply to
municipal officials and employees. For provisions relative to the following, see
the Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.) sections indicated:
Campaign finance: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 2, ch. 10.
Conflict of interests: Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-107, 108;
12-4-101, 102.
Conflict of interests disclosure statements: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 8-50-501 and the following sections.
Consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal officials: Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 2-10-122, 124.
Crimes involving public officials (bribery, soliciting unlawful
compensation, buying and selling in regard to office): Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 39-16-101 and the following sections.
Crimes of official misconduct, official oppression, misuse of official
information: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 39-16-401 and the following
sections.
Ouster law: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 8-47-101 and the following
sections.
4-7
4-301. Applicability. This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel of
the municipality. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed
officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of the
Johnson City Housing Authority, those of the Johnson City Power Board, those
of the Department of Education of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, and
those of any separate board, commission, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words
"municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. (as added by
Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-302. Definition of "personal interest." (1) "City" means the City of
Johnson City, Tennessee.
(2) "City commission" means the Board of Commissioners of the City
of Johnson City.
(3) "Municipal board" means the Board of Commissioners of the City
of Johnson City, the Johnson City Housing Authority, the Board of Education
of the City of Johnson City, the Johnson City Power Board, and any board,
commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality
appointed or created by the city.
(4) "Officials and employees" means and includes any official, whether
elected or appointed, officer, employee or servant, or any member of any board,
agency, commission, authority or corporation, whether compensated or not, or
any officer, employee or servant thereof, of a county or municipality.
(5) For purposes of sections (3) and (4), "personal interest" means:
(a) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the
subject of a vote by the municipal board not otherwise regulated by state
statutes on conflicts of interests; or
(b) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised; or
(c) Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official's or employee's spouse, parent(s); step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or step child(ren).
(6) The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised.
(7) In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-303. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. An
official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the
meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the
minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable
4-8
person to infer that it affects the official’s vote on the measure. In addition, the
official may recuse himself1 from voting on the measure. (as added by
Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-304. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters. An
official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other
than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects
or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of
discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the
interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the
official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or
policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. (as added
by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-305. Acceptance of gratuities, etc. An official or employee may not
accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration or
favor of any kind from anyone other than the municipality:
(1) For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of
an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the
regular course of his duties; or
(2) That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence
his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary as contained in the
Johnson City Municipal Code, unreported gifts, gratuities, or other
consideration that have a cumulative value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less shall
automatically be exempt from the provisions of this ethics ordinance. Reported
gifts, gratuities, or other consideration that have a cumulative value over fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall, likewise, automatically be exempt from the provisions of
this ethics ordinance. Campaign contributions of any amount shall
automatically be exempt from the provisions of this ethics ordinance. An official
or employee who receives a gift, gratuity, or other consideration with a
cumulative value of more than fifty dollars ($50.00) shall within seventy two
(72) hours of receipt of that gift, gratuity, or other consideration, file with the
city manager's office a statement containing the following information: (a) a
description of the gift, gratuity, or other consideration; (b) the name of the
donor; (c) the date of receipt of the gift, gratuity, or other consideration; (d) and
the cumulative value of the gift, gratuity, or other consideration. Except for
campaign contributions, no official or employee shall accept any monetary
consideration, gift, or gratuity in any event. Personal gifts to an official or
employee (for birthdays, anniversaries, holidays, retirements, etc.) shall
1Masculine pronouns include the feminine. Only masculine pronouns
have been used for convenience and readability.
4-9
automatically be exempt from the provisions of this ethics ordinance. (as added
by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-306. Use of information. (1) An official or employee may not disclose
any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that
is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law.
(2) An official or employee may not use or disclose information
obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to
result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. (as added by
Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-307. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. (1) An official or
employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities,
equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself.
(2) An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of
municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage
to any private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or
lease that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the
municipality.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Johnson City Municipal
Code to the contrary, all officials and employees shall be allowed to use, lease,
or rent municipal facilities on the same basis and under the same terms that
apply to all citizens. (as added by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-308. Use of position or authority. (1) An official or employee may
not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the
name of the municipality.
(2) An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position
to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized
by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the municipality. (as added
by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-309. Outside employment. An official or employee may not accept
or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the
performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with
any provision of the municipality's charter or any ordinance or policy. (as added
by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-310. Ethics complaints. (1) The city attorney is designated as the
ethics officer of the city. Upon the written request of any official or employee
potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the city attorney may render
an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter and other
applicable law. The city commission may designate one or more other attorneys
4-10
to act under this section in the event the city attorney has or will have a conflict
of interest in a particular matter.
(2) If a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the city commission, the mayor (or the vice-mayor
if the complaint is against the mayor), city manager, and city attorney shall
examine the same to determine whether the complaint appears to have
sufficient merit to warrant further consideration. If at least two (2) of those
persons determine that the complaint warrants further consideration, the city
commission shall consider the complaint and determine whether (a) the
complaint has merit, (b) the complaint does not have merit, or (c) the complaint
has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the city commission
determines that a complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize
an investigation by the city attorney or another individual or entity chosen by
the city commission.
(3) If a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the board of education, the chairperson (or the
vice-chairperson if the complaint is lodged against the chairperson), director of
schools, and board of education attorney shall examine the same to determine
whether the complaint appears to have sufficient merit to warrant further
consideration. If at least two (2) of those persons determine that the complaint
warrants further consideration, the board of education shall consider the
complaint and determine whether (a) the complaint has merit, (b) the complaint
does not have merit, or (c) the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further
investigation. If the board of education determines that a complaint warrants
further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the board of
education attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the board of
education.
(4) If a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the board of directors of the Johnson City Power
Board, the chairperson (or the vice-chairperson if the complaint is lodged
against the chairperson), the general manager of the Johnson City Power Board,
and the Johnson City Power Board's attorney shall examine the same to
determine whether the complaint appears to have sufficient merit to warrant
further consideration. If at least two (2) of those persons determine that the
complaint warrants further consideration, the board of directors of the Johnson
City Power Board shall consider the complaint and determine whether (a) the
complaint has merit, (b) the complaint does not have merit, or (c) the complaint
has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the board of directors of
the Johnson City Power Board determines that a complaint warrants further
investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by its attorney or another
individual or entity chosen by the board.
(5) If a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the board of directors of the Johnson City Housing
Authority, the chairperson (or the vice-chairperson if the complaint is lodged
4-11
against the chairperson), executive director of the Johnson City Housing
Authority, and the Johnson City Housing Authority's attorney shall examine the
same to determine whether the complaint appears to have sufficient merit to
warrant further consideration. If at least two (2) of those persons determine
that the complaint warrants further consideration, the board of directors of the
Johnson City Housing Authority shall consider the complaint and determine
whether (a) the complaint has merit, (b) the complaint does not have merit, or
(c) the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the
board of directors of the Johnson City Housing Authority determines that a
complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by
its attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the board.
(6) If a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against an official appointed by the city commission (including members
of municipal boards not specified above, but excluding the city manager), or
against an employee appointed, hired by or working under the authority of the
city manager, the city attorney shall examine the same to determine whether
the complaint appears to have sufficient merit to warrant further investigation.
If the city attorney determines that a complaint warrants further investigation,
or if the city attorney otherwise acquires credible information indicating a
violation, he or she may investigate the complaint and make recommendations
for action to end or seek redress for any activity that, in the attorney's judgment,
constitutes a violation of this code of ethics.
(7) If a complaint of violation of any provision of this chapter is lodged
against the city manager, the mayor (or a member of the city commission
designated by the mayor) and an outside attorney shall examine the same to
determine whether the complaint appears to have sufficient merit to warrant
further investigation and shall report their recommendations to the city
commission.
(8) If a complaint of violation of any provision of this chapter is lodged
against an employee appointed, hired by or working in connection with or under
the authority of officials of the Johnson City Housing Authority, the Johnson
City Power Board, the Department of Education of the City of Johnson City, or
an employee of any other municipal board, the attorney for that board shall
examine the same to determine whether the complaint appears to have
sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If such attorney determines
that a complaint warrants further investigation, or if the attorney otherwise
acquires credible information indicating a violation, he or she may investigate
the complaint and make recommendations for action to end or seek redress for
any activity that, in the attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this code
of ethics. If the complaint is lodged against the chief executive or chief
administrative officer hired by such board, the attorney for the board shall
advise the city attorney of any investigation which he or she undertakes and the
results of that investigation.
4-12
(9) The city attorney, or the attorney representing a municipal board,
may request the hiring of another attorney, individual, or entity to act under
this section when it appears he or she has or will have a conflict of interest in
a particular matter.
(10) Complaints lodged under this section should be in writing and
signed by the person or persons making the same.
(11) The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances
would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
(12) When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation, the violations shall be dealt with as a
violation of the personnel provisions rather than as a violation of this code of
ethics.
(13) Any attempt by an official or employee to improperly influence the
consideration, investigation, or resolution of a complaint lodged under this
section shall constitute a violation of this code of ethics. (as added by
Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
4-311. Violations. An elected official or appointed member of a separate
municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
punishment as provided by the municipality's charter or other applicable law,
and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. An appointed
official or an employee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
disciplinary action. (as added by Ord. #4242-07, June 2007)
5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. TAXATION.
3. HOTEL/MOTEL TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY PRIVILEGE TAX.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
5-101. Purchasing policy.
5-102. Authority to make purchases and negotiate contracts.
5-103. Financial reports.
5-104. Recorder to approve accounting methods.
5-105. Duties of city treasurer generally.
5-106. Treasurer to collect accounts and receive payments.
5-107. Cash receipts.
5-108. City officers to turn money over to treasurer.
5-109. Daily reports of collections.
5-110. Delinquent accounts.
5-111. Depositories designated.
5-112. Bank deposits.
5-113. Annual audit.
5-114. Disbursements--generally.
5-115. Appropriations for payment of officers and employees.
1Charter references
Budget and appropriations: art. XVII.
City manager: art. IX.
Departments: art. XVIII.
Recorder as finance officer: art. XII.
Sinking fund: art. XVI.
State law references
Fiscal affairs: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-101, et seq.
Municipal Budget Law of 1982, Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-201,
et seq.
5-2
5-116. Labor payrolls.
5-117. Purchasing--informal bidding.
5-118. Purchasing--when public advertising, etc., required.
5-119. Notes payable.
5-120. City bonds--in treasury.
5-121. City bonds--hypothecation.
5-122. Procedure for paying contractors on estimates of city engineer.
5-123. Preparation of annual departmental budgets.
5-101. Purchasing policy. There is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference and made a part of this chapter, as fully and completely as those
set forth verbatim herein, a purchasing policy and purchasing manual for the
City of Johnson City, Tennessee, which are appended to Ordinance #3165,1 as
Exhibits "A" and "B," respectively, and which documents, as supplemented, shall
constitute the purchasing policy of the City of Johnson City. (Ord. #3165, Nov.
1993)
5-102. Authority to make purchases and negotiate contracts.
(1) The city manager shall have the power to procure all supplies and
to negotiate all contracts for departments under his control, including the fire
and police departments. No contract negotiated by the city manager shall be
binding upon the city until the same has been approved and signed by the mayor
and countersigned by the recorder, and no contract covering a greater sum than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) shall be binding upon the city until approved
and confirmed by the board; provided further, that the city manager shall issue
written orders, in duplicate, for all materials and supplies purchased by him, the
original to be delivered to the person from whom the purchase is made.
(2) In accordance with section 45.8 of the Charter of the City of
Johnson City, the city manager be and is hereby authorized to expend funds in
his discretion without specific authorization of the board of commissioners, not
to exceed the maximum sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
(3) The threshold over which public advertisement and sealed
competitive bids or proposals are required shall be twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for nonemergency, nonproprietary purchases. At least three (3)
written quotations shall be required whenever possible for purchases costing
between ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00). Purchases of like items shall be aggregated for purposes of the bid
threshold. The city manager, as purchasing agent, or his designated purchasing
director, are authorized to make purchases as specified herein pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 12-3-1212 and the charter of the City of Johnson
1Ord. #3165, Nov. 1993, Exhibits "A" and "B" are available in the office of
the city recorder.
5-3
City. (1985 Code, § 2-62, as amended by Ord. #3724, Nov. 1999, Ord. #4437-12,
Feb. 2012, and Ord. #4593-15, Nov. 2015)
5-103. Financial reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to
render to the board of commissioners reports on the current fiscal condition of
each city department, in such form and at such times as may be required by the
board. (1985 Code, § 2-63)
5-104. Recorder to approve accounting methods. All departments
or officers of the city charged with the collection or disbursement of money shall
keep their books and accounts in such manner as shall be approved by the
recorder. (1985 Code, § 2-80)
5-105. Duties of city treasurer generally. (1) It shall be the duty of
the city treasurer to collect and receive all rents which may be due the city. He
shall proceed forthwith to collect all accounts and bills which may be delivered
to him for collection, and in any case in which he may be unable to obtain an
immediate settlement of a bill or account, he shall report the same to the city
attorney for collection.
(2) The city treasurer shall open a public property book, in which he
shall enter each piece of property belonging to the city, properly indexed, and
when a revaluation is made, shall credit or debit each piece of property with all
changes in value.
(3) The city treasurer shall make up his account to the thirtieth day
of June, inclusive, and the fiscal year shall begin on the first day of July of each
year.1 (1985 Code, § 2-81)
5-106. Treasurer to collect accounts and receive payments. It
shall be the duty of the city manager and all officers of the city to deliver to the
city treasurer, for collection, all bills and accounts against persons indebted to
the city, and no head of department or officer of the city shall receive payment
of any such bill or account. The receipt of the city treasurer shall be deemed the
only sufficient and valid discharge of debts due the city; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this section shall affect the collection of bills of the water
and sewer department, or of the other bills or charges of officers of the city, in
pursuance of the provisions of law. (1985 Code, § 2-82)
5-107. Cash receipts. Each employee authorized to receive cash for the
city shall, at the time of receiving it, issue to the person paying, a receipt written
in indelible pencil upon a printed receipt form furnished by the city recorder.
1Charter reference
Fiscal year: § 83.
5-4
By the use of a carbon sheet an exact copy of such receipt shall be retained upon
the sheet provided for that purpose, such receipts to remain in the bound book
of receipt forms until the book is exhausted or until the duplicates are desired
for checking the accounts, when all shall be turned over to the recorder, taking
his receipt therefor. The following shall govern the preparation of receipt forms.
The original, duplicate and, where a third is used, the triplicate forms shall be
numbered consecutively by the printer. All receipt forms shall be made into
bound books bound economically, with perforations on the originals except the
forms provided for property tax, paving assessments, water consumers' bills and
for any other class of revenue for which a subsidiary ledger or register, operated
under a controlling account in the general ledger, is provided. In the case of
receipt forms for collections of the latter classes, instead of the book forms, the
receipts may be looseleaf, but numbered by the printer as provided above. All
such looseleaf receipts shall be made in three (3) sections, separated by
perforations, and shall be made up as follows: First section, office record of
collection; second section, receipt for payer, printed in red; third section, notice
to be mailed to payer when account is about to become payable. The first and
third sections shall be printed in black. After detaching the "notice" portion, the
two (2) remaining portions shall be filed, without separation, in a drawer under
alphabetical indices until payment is made. In completing the receipt at the
time of payment, the amount received, the date and the name of the collector
shall be shown on the red portion, retaining an exact copy by the use of carbon.
A serial number indicating the order of the payment of such items shall be
endorsed upon both copies of all such receipts. The office record portions shall
be retained until the accounts are audited, when they shall be turned over to the
recorder for filing. Both the original and duplicate of all receipts, in either
looseleaf or book form, which may be spoiled shall be marked "spoiled" and
turned in to the recorder with the next report, noting same upon the report.
(1985 Code, § 2-83)
5-108. City officers to turn money over to treasurer. All city
officers who, in their official capacity, receive any money on behalf of the city,
shall forthwith pay the same to the treasurer, accompanied by a statement of
the purposes for which the same was received. (1985 Code, § 2-84)
5-109. Daily reports of collections. (1) Each department or employee
authorized to collect cash for the city shall render a daily report of collections to
the recorder. Such report forms shall be furnished in duplicate sheets,
numbered by the printer, the original to be separated by perforations and filed
with the recorder, the duplicate to be retained by the maker, upon which
duplicate the recorder shall acknowledge receipt of the amount remitted, and
shall show such receipt by the number thereon, in making up his own daily
report.
5-5
(2) Such report blanks shall be furnished by the recorder, in book
form. Collectors shall show thereon each item collected, giving the class of
revenue, the receipt number, the name of the payer and the amount collected.
(3) The recorder shall prepare and file a daily report along the same
lines.
(4) At the discretion of the recorder-treasurer, any department whose
monthly collections average one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more may be
required by the officer to whom such department reports collections, to make
daily deposits directly in one (1) of the designated depositories, turning in with
his daily report to the recorder-treasurer, a duplicate deposit ticket, initialed by
the receiving teller of such depository, evidencing the receipt of the deposit.
(1985 Code, § 2-85)
5-110. Delinquent accounts. (1) The city attorney shall take such
steps as he deems necessary to collect delinquent accounts certified as such by
the city manager.
(2) All delinquent tax accounts on real estate and public utilities shall
be certified in accordance with the city charter.1 (1985 Code, § 2-86)
5-111. Depositories designated. The board of commissioners does
hereby designate the Hamilton Bank, the Commerce Union Bank, the First
Tennessee Bank, the First American National Bank--Eastern and Tri City Bank
and Trust Company, with a branch office in the city, as official depositories for
any and all funds which are now or which hereafter come into the hands of the
recorder-treasurer by virtue of his office. (1985 Code, § 2-87)
5-112. Bank deposits. (1) The following rules shall govern the making
of bank deposits to the credit of the city; deposit tickets shall be made in
triplicate, one (1) copy each for the bank, the city treasurer and the department
making the deposit. Deposits shall be made daily covering collections for the
previous day. On deposit tickets, each check shall be listed separately, showing
the name of the drawer. All checks received shall be deposited, never cashed.
Endorsements of checks shall be substantially in the form shown below,
preferably by rubber stamp:
1Charter references
Collection of delinquent taxes and assessments: § 55, et seq.
5-6
"For deposit in Bank
To the credit of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee,
Treasurer, ."
All deposits shall be made in the name of the "City of Johnson City, Tennessee."
(2) Employees are forbidden to pay out cash on checks presented,
except vouchers or payroll checks of the city's own issue. Any check returned by
a bank, and charged to the city's account, shall be handled by the treasurer with
the department accepting the check. The receipt given in exchange for a check
dishonored by the bank shall be canceled automatically, and the collection of the
account shall be proceeded with as though no check had been tendered. (1985
Code, § 2-88)
5-113. Annual audit. At the close of each fiscal year the board of
commissioners shall within a reasonable time cause an adequate audit to be
made for the preceding year, and for this purpose it may employ a certified
public accountant, or firm of certified public accountants; or the board of
commissioners may employ a certified public accountant or firm of certified
public accountants to make a continuing audit, and a final report at the end of
the fiscal year. Such audits shall cover the accounts of each officer and
employee whose duties embrace the receipt or disbursement of cash for all
departments of the city, and the scope of such audits shall be set forth in audit
specifications prescribed by the board.1 (1985 Code, § 2-89)
5-114. Disbursements--generally. (1) Cash disbursements shall be
made by voucher drawn by the city recorder upon the city treasury, after the
account has been ordered paid by the board of commissioners. This shall not,
however, diminish the authority vested in the city recorder; providing, that the
city manager's weekly labor payrolls, the salaries of the city officials elected by
the voters and by the board of commissioners, the interest coupons matured and
presented for redemption, freight settlements, postage and similar items may,
at the discretion of the city manager and recorder, be covered by vouchers issued
as required, and such action reported in detail to the board at the first regular
meeting after the end of that month, and asking for the adoption of a resolution
ratifying such action.
(2) At the close of the month, the city manager shall prepare a
summary of account of each person furnishing material or services upon his
order or upon a contract authorized by the board of commissioners, for the
month. Such summary shall show the invoice date, the city manager's order
1State law reference
Fiscal affairs: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-101 et seq.
5-7
number and the amount of invoice with the month's total, and shall have
attached thereto the original invoices rendered by the creditor. Freight
allowances and discounts shall be deducted first. At the first regular meeting
of the board in the month following that covered by the summaries, all such bills
shall be presented to the board for approval. Any accounts incurred by the
recorder, under the authority given him by the charter, this code and other
ordinances, shall be similarly handled, after approval of the recorder is endorsed
thereon.
(3) In case of any account not being covered by an invoice from the
creditor, the city manager or the recorder shall show upon his summary a full
description of the account.
(4) The vouchers used for disbursements shall consist of three (3)
portions: Check portion, or cash voucher, original; audit portion for recorder,
duplicate; advice sheet for treasurer, triplicate (while the recorder and treasurer
are one and the same person the use of the triplicate is unnecessary). Each
portion shall be numbered by the printer. The check portion shall be made upon
safety ruled paper. (1985 Code, § 2-101)
5-115. Appropriations for payment of officers and employees. All
officers and persons in the service of the city shall be paid from the
appropriation for the department in which they are employed. (1985 Code,
§ 2-102)
5-116. Labor payrolls. Weekly labor payrolls shall be prepared under
the supervision of the city manager upon such forms and in such manner as may
be approved by the board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 2-103)
5-117. Purchasing--informal bidding. The purchasing agent of the
city in making purchases in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and under
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), shall buy merchandise in a competitive
manner, that is, by calling for prices or bids either by phone or on the regular
bid forms now being used by the city, from merchants and business houses
within the city and outside the city, and awarding the business to the low bidder
after both quality and price have been considered. The purchasing agent shall
record such competitive prices on the requisition of such material as a matter
of record. (1985 Code, § 2-104)
5-118. Purchasing--when public advertising, etc., required. No
purchase exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) shall be made by the
purchasing agent unless bids shall have been requested through public
advertisement and award made to the lowest responsible bidder, with price and
quality of merchandise considered. (1985 Code, § 2-105)
5-8
5-119. Notes payable. (1) Loans which the board of commissioners
authorizes its officers to procure, and renewals of these already existing, shall
be evidenced by notes executed in the name of the city by the mayor, attested by
the recorder. All notes shall be numbered consecutively, and a renewal shall
show upon its faces "City Note No. ." Those notes authorized to be further
secured by a pledge of bonds or other collateral shall show in the body thereof
a full description of such pledges. The recorder shall retain a carbon copy of
each note given in the city's name, which shall be attached, after registration in
the city's bill book, to the deposit ticket evidencing the banking of the proceeds,
in the case of new loans, and to the journal voucher carrying the entry recording
the renewal in the case of renewal of loans. Deposit tickets shall show the full
amount of notes cashed, and the discount being covered by a voucher.
(2) A note in the hands of an innocent purchaser being good for the
face value thereof, it shall be the duty of the recorder carefully to endorse upon
the back of a note any partial payments made thereon. For the same reason, the
practice of renewing notes by placing renewal endorsements, upon the one
matured, is forbidden, as a failure to endorse the payment of interest upon a
note renewed by endorsement might, in the case of loans procured from
individuals not maintaining an accounting system, subject the city to loss by
having to pay such interest twice. (1985 Code, § 2-106)
5-120. City bonds--in treasury. (1) Upon the passage of an ordinance
authorizing the issuance of bonds, the recorder shall place an order for their
preparation in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance. Immediately
upon their receipt the mayor and recorder shall sign and seal them in the
presence of an officer of one of the local national banks, and shall execute a
certificate showing that they, in their official capacities, on a given date,
executed certain bonds, describing them by name of issue and numbers of bonds,
acknowledging execution of such certificate either before the bank officer
witnessing the execution of the bonds or before a notary public, as preferred by
the purchasers of the bonds. The bonds, with such certificate, shall then be
turned over to the city treasurer whose receipt shall be taken unless he is the
same person as the recorder, and shall be placed by him in a safe deposit vault
pending further directions of the board of commissioners.
(2) The recorder shall attach such receipt to a journal voucher carrying
an entry: "Bonds in Treasury to Bonds Payable." When bonds are delivered, the
treasurer shall record the individual numbers of the bonds delivered and the
value of each and of the interest accrued thereon at the date of delivery.
(3) If bonds are sold for cash, the general cash book shall show a credit
to the account of "Bonds in Treasury," and to the proper interest account if there
is interest accrued at the date of delivery.
(4) If bonds are delivered on account of work done under constract,
such transactions shall be recorded by a journal entry debiting the contractor
and crediting bonds in the treasury and the appropriate interest account.
5-9
(5) A register, showing the details of each issue of bonds, deliveries
thereof and of redemptions, shall be kept by the recorder.1 (1985 Code, § 2-107)
5-121. Purchasing--hypothecation. (1) Upon the adoption of a
resolution by the board of commissioners authorizing the mayor and recorder to
pledge certain of the city's bonds then in the treasury, as collateral security to
notes authorized, the mayor and recorder shall take duplicate receipts of the
pledgee, fully describing the bonds pledged, one copy of which shall be attached
to the journal voucher carrying the entry, "Bonds Hypothecated to Bonds in
Treasury."
(2) At the time of delivery of such bonds, and thereafter as coupons
reach maturity, all matured interest coupons shall be detached and endorsed,
"Canceled, Not Purchased." (1985 Code, § 2-108)
5-122. Procedure for paying contractors on estimates of city
engineer. (1) The monthly estimate sheets of the city engineer, showing
amounts due contractors by the city, shall be attached to the audit voucher
covering payment, when payment is made in cash. When payment is made in
bonds, or deferred until the completion of the work, the estimate sheet shall be
attached to the journal voucher carrying an entry: "Asset Account or Expense
Account to Contractor." When settlement with such contractor is made, the
contractor's account shall be debited, crediting cash or bonds in treasury (and
the proper interest fund if there is interest accrued on the bonds delivered).
(2) The practice of passing out bonds to contractors in payment for
work covered by the engineer's estimates without a record of such transactions
appearing upon the books of account is positively forbidden. (1985 Code,
§ 2-109)
5-123. Preparation of annual departmental budgets. Every board
or officer of the city in charge of a department shall, annually, on or before April
tenth, send to the city manager an estimate, in detail, of the appropriation
which will be needed to meet the expenditures to be incurred by such board or
officer during the succeeding fiscal year, and also an estimate of all income to
be received from any source by such board or officer during such year. 2 (1985
Code, § 2-110)
1Charter reference
City bonds: art. XV.
2Charter reference
Budget and appropriations: art. XVII.
5-10
CHAPTER 2
TAXATION1
SECTION
5-201. Basis; exemptions generally.
5-202. Due date.
5-203. [Repealed.]
5-204. Penalty for late payment.
5-205. Back assessments or reassessments.
5-206. Telephone or telegraph pole tax.
5-207. Central business improvement district.
5-208. Purpose.
5-209. Tax levy authorized.
5-210. Board of assessment created; members.
5-201. Basis; exemptions generally. All property, real, personal and
mixed, subject to the state and county taxes, when the same shall have been
duly assessed for taxation as now or as may be provided by law, shall be the
basis upon which property shall be taxed and taxes collected by the city for
municipal purposes, as provided in this chapter, but all property or persons
exempted from taxation by the general laws of the state, and all property
belonging to the city, shall be exempt from taxation by the city.2 (1985 Code,
§ 22-1)
1Charter references
Recorder and taxation: art. XI.
Taxation and revenue: art. XIII.
State law references
County boards of equalization: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-5-1401, et seq.
Property taxes: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-5-101, et seq.
Real property tax deferral: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-64-101,
et seq.
Taxing powers generally: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-55-101,
et seq.
2State law reference
Tax exemptions: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-5-201, et seq.
5-11
5-202. Due date. September first of each year shall be the due and
payable date of the current year's taxes.1 (1985 Code, § 22-2)
5-203. [Repealed.] (1985 Code, § 22-3, as repealed by Ord. #4501-13,
Aug. 2013)
5-204. Penalty for late payment. A penalty of one and one-half (1 ½)
percent upon all taxes remaining unpaid after December thirty-first shall be
imposed and collected by the city as authorized in the city charter for the month
of January; and an additional penalty of one and one-half (1 ½) percent shall be
added for each month thereafter until paid; and interest at one (1) percent per
annum above the prime rate in the city, as described in the city charter, shall
be imposed and collected by the city from January first year on all delinquent
taxes.2 (1985 Code, § 22-4)
5-205. Back assessments or reassessments. Back assessment or
reassessment of property shall be made when authorized and in the same
manner prescribed by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-1-1001 et seq. The city
recorder is given the duties which said law imposes upon county court clerks,
county trustees, the county executives or chairmen of county courts, and
collectors of taxes. The city attorney is given the duties which said law imposes
upon county attorneys. (1985 Code, § 22-5)
5-206. Telephone or telegraph pole tax. (1) Each person owning or
maintaining a telephone or telegraph pole located on or along the public streets
of the city shall pay a tax of twenty-five cents ($.25) on each telephone or
telegraph pole so located.
(2) Each person owning or maintaining telephone or telegraph poles
located on or along the public streets of the city shall notify, in writing, the
recorder of the city when an additional pole is erected and when a pole is
dispensed with.
(3) The proceeds derived from the enforcement of this section shall be
for the use and benefit of the city and shall go into the general fund of the city.
(4) The tax levied by this section shall be payable in advance on the
first day of August of each year; and if not paid within thirty (30) days from
August first, of the year in which such tax became due and payable, a distress
warrant shall be issued by the city recorder to enforce the collection of such
taxes.
1Charter reference
Due date of taxes: §§ 51, 54.
2Charter reference
Penalty for delinquency: § 53.
5-12
(5) The tax levied in this section shall not apply to mutual home
telephone companies not operated for profit. (1985 Code, § 22-6)
5-207. Central business improvement district. (1) Created;
boundaries. Pursuant to the powers granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, title
7, chapter 84, there is hereby created for a period of five (5) years the Johnson
City Central Business Improvement District, to contain and include all of the
properties within the area herein described: Beginning at a point in the
centerline of East Market Street as it intersects with the centerline of Colonial
Way; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Colonial Way a
distance of 580.0 feet to a point in the centerline of State of Franklin Road;
thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of State of Franklin
Road a distance of 1312.5 feet to a point in the centerline of Wilson Avenue
extended; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Wilson Avenue
a distance of 922.0 feet to a point in the centerline of Boone Street; thence in a
northerly direction along the centerline of Boone Street a distance of 718.0 feet
to a point in the centerline of an alley extended from the Little and Horner
Subdivision; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of said alley a
distance of 348.5 feet to a point in the centerline of McClure Street; thence in an
easterly direction a distance of 12.5 feet to the northwesterly corner of N.
Taubman; said point being in the easterly right-of-way line of McClure Street
and a distance of 108.0 feet from its intersection with the northerly right-of-way
line of West Market Street; thence in an easterly direction along the northerly
lines of N. Taubman, and L. Farmer, a distance of 186.1 feet to a point in the
westerly right-of-way line of Commerce Street; thence in an easterly direction
across the right-of-way line of Commerce Street a distance of 41.0 feet to a point
in the easterly right-of-way line of Commerce Street, said point also being the
northwesterly corner of the R. Carter et al. property; thence in an easterly
direction along the northerly line of the R. Carter et al. property a distance of
125.0 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of the R. Carter
et al. property; thence in an easterly direction along the northerly line of R.
Carter et al. property extended as distance of 168.5 feet to a point in the
centerline of East Market Street; thence in a northeasterly direction along the
centerline of East Market Street a distance of 912.0 feet to the point of
beginning. (1985 Code, § 22-7)
5-208. Purpose. The purpose of the Johnson City Central Business
Improvement District shall be the financing of a central business district
management organization, either "in-house" or a professional consultant, to
manage, coordinate and improve the commercial operations in the central
business district, to recruit new business interests, to fill vacant buildings, to
improve the commercial mix within the central business district, to encourage
building improvements and new construction and to support such other public
or private improvements as would better the commercial viability and vitality
5-13
of the Johnson City Central Business District. The estimated cost of such
operation is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year. (1985 Code, § 22-8)
5-209. Tax levy authorized. It is hereby authorized that all properties,
except those exempt from taxation, contained within the Johnson City Central
Business Improvement District shall be levied an additional assessment
sufficient in amount to raise fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year for five
(5) years or for a shorter period of time should the district be properly dissolved
before five (5) years. In no case shall the assessment on any property for the life
of the district exceed fifteen (15) percent of the assessed value of the property
and the improvements thereon. Said assessment shall be collected at least
annually but may be collected as often as quarterly. (1985 Code, § 22-9)
5-210. Board of assessment created; members. There is hereby
created the Johnson City Central Business Improvement District board of
assessment commissioners to consist of five (5) citizens of the city, none of whom
shall be interested in any property contained within the described district.
Members of the board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners, shall
be at least thirty (30) years of age and shall serve without compensation. It
shall be the duty of this board to determine the amount of assessment on each
property and to ascertain and award damages and compensation to property
owners. (1985 Code, § 22-10)
5-14
CHAPTER 3
HOTEL/MOTEL TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY PRIVILEGE TAX1
SECTION
5-301. Definitions.
5-302. Levied.
5-303. Collected by operator; refund.
5-304. Tax advertised as being absorbed, etc.
5-305. Remittance of tax to city.
5-306. Delinquency.
5-307. Collection; disposition of funds.
5-308. Operator's and treasurer's responsibilities.
5-309. Powers of treasurer; taxpayer's remedies.
5-310. Records preserved.
5-301. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires:
(1) "Consideration" means the consideration charged, whether or not
received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property
and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that consideration is
charged when the space provided to the person is complimentary from the
operator and no consideration is charged to or received from any person.
(2) "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which
is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any inn, tourist camp, tourist court,
tourist cabin, motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations
are furnished to transients for a consideration.
(3) "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use
or possession, of any room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel.
(4) "Operator" means the person operating the hotel whether as owner,
lessee or otherwise.
(5) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint-stock company, corporation,
estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
1State law reference
Hotel occupancy tax: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-4-1401, et seq.
5-15
(6) "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is
entitled to occupancy for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for
a period of fewer than ninety (90) continuous days. (1985 Code, § 22-27)
5-302. Levied. There is hereby levied, assessed, and imposed and shall
be paid and collected a privilege tax upon the privilege of occupancy in any hotel
of each transient in an amount equal to seven percent (7%) of the consideration
charged by the operator. Of this seven percent (7%) privilege tax, two percent
(2%) received by the City of Johnson City shall be used solely for tourism. Such
tax is a privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room and is to be
collected as provided by this chapter. (Ord. #2823, June 1989, as replaced by
Ord. #4580-15, June 2015)
5-303. Collected by operator; refund. (1) The tax levied in this
chapter shall be added by each operator to each invoice prepared by the operator
for the occupancy in his hotel and shall be given directly or transmitted to the
transient and shall be collected by such operator from the transient and
remitted to the city.
(2) When a person has maintained occupancy for ninety (90)
continuous days, he shall receive from the operator a refund or credit for the tax
previously collected from or charged to him, and the operator shall receive credit
for the amount of such tax if previously paid or reported to this city. (1985 Code,
§ 22-29)
5-304. Tax advertised as being absorbed, etc. No operator of a hotel
shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the
tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it
will not be added to the rent, or that if added, any part will be refunded.(1985
Code, § 22-30)
5-305. Remittance of tax to city. The tax levied in this chapter shall
be remitted by all operators who lease, rent or charge for occupancy within a
hotel in the city to the city treasurer, such tax to be remitted to such officer no
later than the twentieth day of each month for the preceding month. The
operator is required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the
presentation of the invoice for such occupancy, whether prior to occupancy or
after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator, and if credit is granted by
the operator to the transient, then the obligation to the city for such tax shall be
that of the operator. (1985 Code, § 22-31)
5-306. Delinquency. Taxes under this chapter, collected by an operator,
which are not remitted to the city treasurer on or before the due dates are
delinquent. An operator shall be liable for interest on such delinquent taxes
from the due date at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum, and in addition,
5-16
a penalty of one (1) percent for each month or fraction thereof such taxes are
delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax. Each
occurrence of willful refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax or willful
refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax or willful refusal of a transient
to pay the tax imposed is declared to be unlawful and shall be punishable upon
conviction by a fine not in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00). (1985 Code, § 22-32)
5-307. Collection; disposition of funds. The city treasurer is hereby
charged with the duty of collection of the tax levied in this chapter and shall
place the proceeds of such tax in the municipal general fund. (1985 Code,
§ 22-33)
5-308. Operator's and treasurer's responsibilities. A monthly tax
return under oath shall be filed with the city treasurer by the operator with
such number of copies thereof as the city treasurer may reasonably require for
the collection of such tax. The report of the operator shall include such facts and
information as may be deemed reasonable for the verification of the tax due.
The form of such report shall be developed by the city treasurer and approved
by the board of commissioners prior to use. The city treasurer shall audit each
operator in the city at least once per year and shall report on the audits made
on a quarterly basis to the board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 22-34)
5-309. Powers of treasurer; taxpayer's remedies. (1) The city
treasurer, in administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, shall
have those powers and duties with respect to collecting taxes as are provided in
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 67, or otherwise provided by law for county
clerks.
(2) Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the taxpayer
shall have the remedy provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-1-901 et
seq., it being the intent of this chapter that the provisions of law which apply to
the recovery of state taxes illegally assessed and collected shall also apply to the
tax levied under the authority of this chapter. The city treasurer shall also
possess those powers and duties provided in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-1-707(b), for county clerks with respect to the adjustment and settlement
with taxpayers of all errors of taxes collected by him under authority of this
chapter and to direct the refunding of same. Notice of any tax paid under
protest shall be given to the city treasurer and any suit may be brought for
recovery of such tax paid under protest by filing the same against the city
recorder-treasurer. (1985 Code, § 22-35)
5-310. Records preserved. It shall be the duty of every operator liable
for the collection and payment to the city of the tax levied by this chapter to
keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all records as may be necessary
to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the
5-17
collection of and payment to this city, which records the city treasurer shall have
right to inspect at all reasonable times. (1985 Code, § 22-36)
6-1
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
2. ARREST.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
6-101. Supervision; discharge of members.
6-102. Composition.
6-103. Chief--powers generally.
6-104. Chief--duties generally.
6-105. Chief--attend meetings of board.
6-106. Calling for attendance.
6-107. Duties.
6-108. Uniform, etc.
6-109. Conduct of members generally.
6-110. Stolen, lost, etc., property.
6-111. Resisting or obstructing officer.
1Charter references
Chief of police:§ 39.
Civil service commission: art. XXVI.
Departments: art. XVIII.
Police force: art. XIX.
Supervision of chief of police: § 45.3.
State law references
Employment and training of police officers: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 38-8-101, et seq.
Municipal police authority: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-301, et
seq.
Municipal code reference
Municipal offenses: title 11.
Traffic citations, etc.: title 15, chapter 7.
6-2
6-101. Supervision. The police department shall be under the control
of the city manager.1 (Ord. #3068, June 1992)
6-102. Composition. The police department shall consist of one (1) chief
of police and as many assistant policemen as the board of commissioners may
deem necessary to preserve the peace and good order, and to enforce this code
or other ordinances of the city. (1985 Code, § 17-2)
6-103. Chief--powers generally. The chief of police shall have general
control over the entire police force, under the general supervision of the city
manager, with authority to assign the several members thereof special or
general duties within the scope of their employment and to enforce his orders
and directions to the extent of suspending any member of the force disregarding
same or for any conduct unbecoming an officer, and such suspension shall
remain in force and effect until the next regular meeting of the board of
commissioners. All such suspensions under this section and the reasons
therefor shall be reported in writing, by the chief of police, to the city manager.
(1985 Code, § 17-3)
6-104. Chief--duties generally. The chief of police shall devote his
entire time to the maintenance and preservation of the peace, order and
cleanliness of the city. He shall aid, to the fullest extent of his ability, in the
enforcement of special laws relating to the city, this code or other ordinances
thereof, and he shall enforce all orders of the city manager relating to the
business and duties of his department. He shall take notice of unlawful
obstructions and nuisances and defects in the streets and public places of the
city, and remove the same, or take proper action in relation thereto. He shall
see that proper guards and lights are placed at obstructions in the streets,
throughout the day and night. He shall have general charge of the lockup and
the prisoners therein. He may establish rules for the government of the police
department, subject to the approval of the city manager. He shall keep an
account of the duties performed by each member and shall note all absentees
from duty and the cause of same; he shall report all violations of the rules and
regulations to the city manager, together with the names of witnesses to the
facts, that the charges may be investigated. He shall render a monthly report
to the board of commissioners showing in detail the workings of his department.
(1985 Code, § 17-4)
1Municipal code reference
City manager; powers: § 1-501.
6-3
6-105. Chief--attend meetings of board. The chief or police, or in his
absence one (1) of the assistant policemen, shall be present at all meetings of the
board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 17-5)
6-106. Calling for assistance. Any member of the police force is hereby
empowered to call to his assistance as many of the inhabitants of the city as may
be necessary to aid him in making arrests and in preventing or quelling any riot,
unlawful assembly or breach of peace; and all persons so called shall be subject
to the orders of the policeman, while on the duty for which they were called. It
shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey the orders of such
policeman, when so called by him. (1985 Code, § 17-6)
6-107. Duties. It shall be the duty of the police to prevent crime; detect
and arrest offenders; suppress riots; protect the rights of persons and property;
guard the public health; see that nuisances are removed; restrain disorderly,
bawdy and gambling houses; assist, advise and protect strangers and travelers
on the streets or at railroad stations; enforce all the laws relating to the
suppression of crime and the public health or to disorderly persons; to evaluate
all and every manner of process, in behalf of the city, upon persons or property;
to arrest, upon view, any person who shall be guilty of a breach of this code or
other ordinances of the city, or a crime against the laws of the state; to serve any
process issued out of the city court, or any process in criminal matters, issued
by any justice of the peace, within the city or any and all processes issued by any
court in the county, in any proceedings instituted for the enforcement of this
code or other ordinance, or punishment for violations thereof, or for the
collection of any fines and forfeitures which may be incurred under this code or
other ordinances of the city; and do all within their power to enforce the laws
and whatever else may be required of them by the board of commissioners and
by law. All fees for services rendered by any policeman shall be remitted to the
city treasury. (1985 Code, § 17-7)
6-108. Uniform, etc. The police, when on duty, shall wear such
uniform, hat and badge as the board of commissioners shall determine. (1985
Code, § 17-8)
6-109. Conduct of members generally. Each member of the police
force shall be protected in his right to entertain his own political opinions, but
all are required to refrain from taking part in any convention or promoting the
election of any public officer, or electioneering for, or against, any candidate for
public office, while on duty or in the pay of the city. They shall carefully avoid
at all times and in all places participation in any political discussion of any
character that may lead to recrimination and the use of harsh or intemperate
language. (1985 Code, § 17-9)
6-4
6-110. Charges against members. Charges against any member of the
police force must be made to the city manager, in writing, verified by the oath
of the complainant, except that charges made by any member of the board of
commissioners, the city manager or the chief of police need not be verified.
When charges are made, as provided in this section, it shall be the duty of the
city manager to investigate such charges, referring those charges which have
merit to the recorder, who shall issue summons to the charged party to appear
before the board of commissioners. The charges shall be tried and determined
by the board, a majority of same being necessary for a conviction. If convicted,
the policeman may be suspended or discharged as the board may determine.
The recorder shall issue subpoenas for, and the chief of police or some member
of the police force shall summon, such witnesses as may be asked for by either
party. The accused may be represented by counsel. The city manager, if in his
opinion the public welfare demands it, or if he believes there is reasonable
ground to sustain the charges made, may suspend the officer until the matter
has been heard and determined by the board.1 (1985 Code, § 17-10)
6-111. Grounds for suspension or discharge. Any member of the
police force against whom any of the following charges are sustained shall be
suspended or discharged:
(1) An act of insubordination or disrespect toward a superior officer;
(2) An act or acts of suppression or tyranny over those under his
control;
(3) Neglect of duty;
(4) Violation of the rules governing the police force;
(5) Absence without leave;
(6) Immoral conduct, drunkenness, gambling or conduct unbecoming
an officer;
(7) Any legal offense;
(8) Any conduct injurious to the peace or welfare of the public;
(9) Incapacity, mental or physical. (1985 Code, § 17-11)
1Charter references
Hearings upon termination: § 159.
Termination, suspension, etc., of officers: § 157
6-5
6-112. Stolen, lost, etc., property.1 Property coming into the
possession of a policeman which he supposes to be stolen or lost, and all
property taken from persons under arrest, shall be deposited in such place as
the chief of police shall designate. (1985 Code, § 17-12)
6-113. Resisting or obstructing officer. No person shall resist or
obstruct an officer of the city, by force or threats, in the discharge of his duty.2
(1985 Code, § 17-13)
1Ordinance #3673, April 1999, designates funds received from the
disposition of forfeited property pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 39-11-101, et seq., for the use of law enforcement.
2State law reference
Resistance to officer: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 40-7-108.
6-6
CHAPTER 2
ARREST1
SECTION
6-201. Generally.
6-202. Breaking in.
6-203. Summoning bystanders as witnesses.
6-204. Procedure for bringing arrested person to trial.
6-201. Generally. (1) Police officers shall make arrests without using
boisterous language, shall treat all persons humanely, shall avoid all violence
in making arrests, unless absolutely necessary and shall not use their office to
oppress or annoy any person.
(2) Any member of the police corps of the city may arrest a person:
(a) Whenever he shall have in his possession a warrant duly
issued by the city judge;
(b) For a public offense committed or a breach of the peace
threatened in his presence;
(c) When the person has committed a felony, though not in his
presence;
(d) When a felony has in fact been committed, and he has
reasonable cause for believing the person arrested to have committed it;
(e) On a charge made, upon reasonable cause, of the commission
of a felony by the person arrested;
(f) Who is attempting to commit suicide; or
(g) At the scene of a traffic accident who is the driver of a
vehicle involved in such accident when based on personal investigation
the officer has probable cause to believe that such person has committed
an offense under the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, chapters
8 and 10 of title 55. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
traffic accidents in which no personal injury occurs or property damage
1State law reference
Arrest: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 40-7-101, et seq.
6-7
is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) unless the officer has
probable cause to believe that the driver of such vehicle has committed
an offense under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-401.1
(3) In making arrests the policeman shall be clothed with the powers
and governed by the restrictions of the state officers in like cases. (1985 Code,
§ 17-30)
6-202. Breaking in. To make arrests either with or without a warrant,
the officer may break open any inner or outer door or a window of a dwelling
house or other building, if after notice of his official authority and purpose, he
is refused admittance. (1985 Code, § 17-31)
6-203. Summoning bystanders as witnesses. Whenever an arrest
has been made by any city officer, it shall be lawful for him to summon any of
the bystanders as witnesses, and such summons shall be binding as though
made by virtue of a subpoena issued by competent authority. (1985 Code,
§ 17-32)
6-204. Procedure for bringing arrested person to trial. When
arrests have been made the prisoner shall be taken before the city court for trial
at its next session, except in cases where the prisoner is not in condition to be
tried. When for the safekeeping of the party arrested, or for any sufficient
reason imprisonment until trial is necessary, the prisoner shall be committed
to the city lockup, unless he gives proper bond for his appearance at court. Upon
his appearance, and upon any proper and legal showing, the city judge may
continue his cause at the request of the plaintiff or defendant, but not for more
than three (3) days without his consent, and may require bond to be given for his
appearance, and in default of same, may commit him to the city lockup. (1985
Code, § 17-33)
1State law references
Accidents, arrests, crimes and penalties: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-101, et seq.
Driving under the influence, etc.: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-401.
Operation of vehicles, rules of the road: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-8-101, et seq.
7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION1
CHAPTER
1. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION.
2. FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
3. OPEN BURNING.
CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
SECTION
7-101. Composition of fire department.
7-102. Bureau of fire prevention--created.
7-103. Bureau of fire prevention--powers and duties of chief generally.
7-104. Duties of police in event of fire.
7-105. Right-of-way of fire engines, etc.
7-106. Assistance at fire.
7-107. Interfering with fire department.
7-108. Interfering with fireplugs.
7-109. False alarm.
7-101. Composition of fire department. The fire department shall
consist of such fire, hose and hook-and-ladder companies as the board of
commissioners may from time to time determine and of such drivers and other
employees as the need of the department requires. (1985 Code, § 10-1)
1Charter references
Appointment of fire chief: § 39.
Civil service commission: art. XXVI.
Departments: art. XVIII.
Fire bureau: art. XX.
Supervision of fire chief: § 45.3.
State law references
Fire fighting training and standards: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 4-24-101, et seq.
Fire prevention and investigation: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-102-101, et seq.
Muncipal code reference
Release of hazardous materials: title 11, chapter 7.
7-2
7-102. Bureau of fire prevention--created. A bureau of fire
prevention is hereby created which shall operate under the chief of the fire
department, subject to the control and direction of the board of commissioners.
(1985 Code, § 10-2)
7-103. Bureau of fire prevention--powers and duties of chief
generally. The chief of the fire department is hereby declared to be chief of the
bureau of fire prevention and he shall do, or cause to be done by any designated
deputy, all things required under the rules and regulations of the fire prevention
code, adopted by § 7-201; to enforce the rules and orders of the state department
of labor, relating to prevention of fires; to inspect or cause to be inspected, for
life and fire hazards, all properties within the city and to issue and enforce the
necessary orders for the abatement, removal or safeguarding of same; to issue
all permits and collect, or cause to be collected, all fees that are required by such
code. For the performance of his duties he is hereby vested with police powers
and with the right of entry to any building or premises, at all reasonable hours,
in the performance of his duties. (1985 Code, § 10-3)
7-104. Duties of police in event of fire. When an alarm of fire is
sounded, it shall be the duty of at least one (1) policeman to repair as speedily
as possible to the scene of the fire, to preserve the order, to prevent persons from
interfering with the firemen and to protect property. (1985 Code, § 10-4)
7-105. Right-of-way of fire engines, etc. It shall be the duty of all
persons upon the streets when a fire engine, hook-and-ladder truck or hose cart
comes in sight, after a fire alarm has sounded, to give immediate right-of-way
to such fire apparatus.1 (1985 Code, § 10-5)
7-106. Assistance at fire. It shall be the duty of any person, when so
summoned for that purpose by the acting chief of the fire department, to render
all the assistance in his power to extinguish or to stay the progress of a fire, and
to observe all orders given by the officers of the fire department while on such
duty. (1985 Code, § 10-6)
7-107. Interfering with fire department. No person shall interfere
in any manner with the operation of the fire department at a fire. (1985 Code,
§ 10-7)
7-108. Interfering with fireplugs. No person shall interfere or tamper
with the fireplugs in any way whatsoever, except a member of the fire
department, or persons authorized to repair them. (1985 Code, § 10-8)
1State law reference
Operation of vehicles and streetcars upon approach of authorized
emergency vehicles: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-132.
7-3
7-109. False alarm. No person shall knowingly make, or cause to be
made, any false alarm of fire. (1985 Code, § 10-9)
7-4
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PROTECTION CODE1
SECTION
7-201. Adopted.
7-202. Where filed.
7-201. Adopted. There are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference and made a part of this chapter, as fully and completely as though
copied at length herein, all volumes of the 1998 edition of the National Fire
Prevention Fire Codes, as well as the standard fire prevention code, 1997
edition, as published by the Southern Building Codes Congress International,
and all supplements to either of said codes as are now or may hereafter be
published; and which codes collectively, as supplemented, shall constitute the
Fire Protection Code of this city. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of the aforementioned codes, the stricter provision shall apply.
Any person who violates said code shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-104.2 (Ord. #3663, Feb. 1999)
7-202. Where filed. At least three (3) copies of the code adopted in this
chapter shall be maintained on file in the office of the city recorder and shall be
available for inspection by any interested person. (1985 Code, § 10-27)
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
2State law reference
Codes incorporated by reference: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-501, et seq.
7-5
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING
SECTION
7-301. Purpose.
7-302. Prohibited.
7-303. Exceptions.
7-304. Permits.
7-301. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish controls on
open burning so as to prevent undesirable levels of air contaminants in the
atmosphere. (1985 Code, § 10-44)
7-302. Prohibited. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open
burning or shall conduct a salvage operation by open burning except as
specifically permitted in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 10-45)
7-303. Exceptions. Open burning as listed in this section may be
conducted subject to the specified limitations herein; provided, that no public
nuisance is or will be created by such open burning. This grant of exemption
shall in no wise relieve the person responsible for such burning from the
consequences of or the damages, injuries or claims resulting from such burning:
(1) Domestic burning, exclusive of garbage, at a property used
exclusively as a private residence or dwelling for not more than four (4) families
where collection service for such material is not available;
(2) Fires used for cooking of food or for ceremonial or recreational
purposes including barbecues and outdoor fireplaces;
(3) Fires set for the training and instruction of public or private firefighting
personnel including those in civil defense;
(4) Fires set by or at the direction of a responsible fire control agency
for the prevention, elimination or reduction of a fire hazard;
(5) Open burning of tree limbs, brush, excelsior, dunnage and other
items of comparable combustion characteristics, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The site of such burning is not nearer than one (1) mile to a
designated primary highway or military, commercial, municipal or
private airport; and
(2) The site of such burning is not nearer than one-half mile to
a designated secondary highway, national reservation, state park,
wildlife area, state forest or residence.
(6) Such other open burning as may be approved by the fire chief or
other official as from time to time may be designated by the city manager or
7-6
acting city manager, where there is no other practical, safe or lawful method of
disposal. (1985 Code, § 10-46)
7-304. Permits. (1) Open burning as listed in § 7-303 (1)-(4), may be
conducted in accordance with the limitations of such section without permit.
However, this shall not relieve any person of the responsibility of obtaining such
permit as may be required by any other agency relative to open burning, i.e.,
under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-3-226. All other open burning shall be
contingent upon possession of a valid written permit from the city fire chief or
other official as from time to time may be designated by the city manager or
acting city manager; except, that owners or operators of open burning operations
in existence on or before the effective date of this chapter may continue such
operations provided proper application for a permit is made as hereinafter
described and until such time as final action has been taken on the application.
Application for a permit for open burning shall be made on forms supplied by
the city. Failure to submit completed forms or to supply requested
supplementary information concerning an existing or proposed open burning
operation shall constitute just cause for refusing issuance of a permit.
(2) Any person proposing to conduct open burning, not exempted in
subsection (1) of this section, shall make application for and have in his
possession a valid open burning permit before such open burning is commenced.
(3) Failure to strictly adhere to the provisions of any open burning
permit shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any permit issued hereunder.
Such revocation shall be made by the official issuing the same. All permits
issued hereunder shall terminate upon completion of the operation conducted
thereunder or the expiration of a period designated in such permit not to exceed
one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the issuance of such permit. (1985
Code, § 10-47)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. BEER OF NOT MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT ALCOHOLIC CONTENT.
3. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OF MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT
ALCOHOLIC CONTENT.
4. PRIVILEGE TAX FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS1
SECTION
8-101. Public display--public drinking.
8-102. Open containers on premises whether or not allowing brown bagging.
8-103. Sale of wine containing unlawful amount of alcohol.
8-104. Face lotion, hair tonic, etc., with unlawful amount of alcohol.
8-105. Prohibited acts on premises selling beer, wine, and other alcoholic
beverages.
8-101. Public display--public drinking. (1) For the purpose of
interpreting this title, the terms "alcoholic beverage," "high alcohol content beer"
and "wine" shall have the same definitions as provided in Tennessee Code
Annotated, §57-3-101, as the same may be amended. For the same purpose of
interpreting this title, the term "beer" shall have the same definition as provided
in Tennessee Code Annotated §57-5-101, as the same may be amended.
(2) Except as permitted by the board of zoning appeals by special
exception in the B-2 Central Business District, it shall be unlawful for any
person publicly to drink any alcoholic beverage, wine, high alcohol content beer,
or beer on any public street or public sidewalk or on any school ground or public
walking trail or in any park, playground, theater, coliseum, stadium, or school.
Except as permitted by the board of zoning appeals by special exception in the
B-2 Central Business District, it shall be unlawful for any person to display,
exhibit or show openly an unsealed, immediate container of any alcoholic
beverage, wine, high alcohol content beer, or beer on any public street or public
sidewalk or on any school ground or public walking trail, or in any park,
playground, theater, coliseum, stadium, or school. The beer license for any
establishment receiving a special exception from the board of zoning appeals
shall automatically be amended to conform to the terms of the special exception,
1State law reference
Intoxicating liquors: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
8-2
but only for the time the special exception is in effect. No person shall publicly
drink, display, sell, exhibit or show openly an unsealed, immediate container of
any alcoholic beverage, wine, high alcohol content beer, or beer within Founders
Park, The Pavilion at Founders Park, the pedestrian areas containing flood
control measures installed by the city bounded by Roan Street, King Street,
Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin Road, or the streets and public
spaces bounding the same, except for beer during downtown special
events/street festivals and/or pursuant to temporary occasion licenses (see
§ 8-217) approved by the city commission or during other events held in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
(3) For private events that are invitation-only and not open to the
public at Founders Park, The Pavilion at Founders Park, and the pedestrian
areas containing flood control measures installed by the city bounded by Roan
Street, King Street, Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin Road,
scheduled through the Johnson City Development Authority (or through some
other entity managing these facilities, including the city itself), if no
consideration is charged or money exchanged for the sale of alcoholic beverages,
wine, high alcohol content beer, or beer or to attend the event, the serving (but
not sale), possession, and consumption of alcoholic beverages, wine, high alcohol
content beer, and beer are permitted during such hours allowed for such
beverages for on-premises consumption.
(4) For public and private events at Founders Park, The Pavilion at
Founders Park, and the pedestrian areas containing flood control measures
installed by the city bounded by Roan Street, King Street, Boone/Commerce
Streets and State of Franklin Road, scheduled through the Johnson City
Development Authority (or through some other entity managing these facilities,
including the city itself), if a consideration is charged or money exchanged either
to attend the event or for the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine, high alcohol
content beer, or beer, the sale, serving, possession, and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, wine, high alcohol content beer, and beer are permitted during such
hours allowed for such beverages for on-premises consumption, provided that
a temporary occasion license is obtained from the Board of Commissioners of the
City of Johnson City (for beer) and a license is obtained from the Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission (for alcoholic beverages, wine, and high alcohol
content beer). Notwithstanding the foregoing, no alcoholic beverages, wine, or
high alcohol content beer shall be allowed to be sold, consumed, or possessed in
these areas at downtown special events/street festivals such as the Blue Plum
or UMOJA festivals, which have specific regulations as shown below. Caterers
holding a valid license pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-101 et seq.
to sell wine, beer, and other alcoholic beverages may cater events authorized by
this paragraph without a temporary occasion license from the city.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) above, retail sales
and the consumption of beer shall be allowed at Cardinal Park on Legion Street
in the City of Johnson City, except for events involving pre-K through 12th
grade institutions.
8-3
(6) No person shall be allowed to bring any alcoholic beverages, wine,
high alcohol content beer, or beer into Cardinal Park for the purposes of "brown
bagging" or otherwise.
(7) No person shall be allowed to carry beer out of Cardinal Park. All
beer allowed at Cardinal Park shall be consumed within the gates of those
premises.
(8) Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate violation in addition to any
other penalties authorized within this title. (1985 Code, § 3-1, as amended by
Ord. #3876, May 2002, and Ord. #4308-08, May 2009, and replaced by Ord.
#4596-15, March 2016)
8-102. Open containers on premises whether or not allowing
brown bagging. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to open, or to have
open, or to consume anywhere inside or outside on the premises of a business,
during the hours of operation of said business, any alcoholic beverages, wine,
high alcohol content beer, or beer, whether those alcoholic beverages, wine, high
alcohol content beer, or beer are contained in a bottle, can, flask, or any other
container of any and every kind and description, after the hour of 3:15 A.M. local
time and before the hour 8:00 A.M. local time on weekdays including Saturdays,
or after the hour of 3:15 A.M. local time and before the hour of 10:00 A.M. local
time on Sundays.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of any
restaurant, club, whether or not such club is restricted, a lounge, a café or any
business of any and every kind and description to permit any person to open,
have open, or consume any alcoholic beverages, wine, high alcohol content beer,
or beer upon such premises, whether those alcoholic beverages, wine, high
alcohol content beer, or beer are contained in a bottle, can, flask, keg, or any
other container of any and every kind and description, during the hours of
operation of said business, after the hour of 3:15 A.M. local time and before the
hour of 8:00 A.M. local time on weekdays including Saturdays, or after the hour
of 3:15 A.M. local time and before the hour of 10:00 A.M. local time on Sundays.
(Ord. #3512, Sept. 1997, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-103. Sale of wine containing unlawful amount of alcohol. It
shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer to sell, or aid or abet in selling
or offering to sell, within the city, any wine containing a greater percentage of
alcohol by volume than that authorized by the laws of the state. (1985 Code,
§ 3-2)
8-104. Face lotion, hair tonic, etc., with unlawful amount of
alcohol. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute for
beverage purposes any face lotion, hair tonic, bitters, extract or other liquid with
an alcoholic content of an excess of five (5) percent by volume.
(2) The possession or display for sale at retail of such face lotions, hair
tonics, bitters or other alcoholic liquids by any person, other than a bona fide
8-4
barbershop, grocery or cosmetic, drug or department store shall be deemed
prima facie evidence that they are kept for sale for beverage purposes.1 (1985
Code, § 3-3)
8-105. Prohibited acts on premises selling beer, wine, and other
alcoholic beverages. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any
place or establishment or upon the premises thereof where wine, beer, or other
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, consumed, possessed, or otherwise
present and to:
(a) Publicly perform acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, or any other sexual acts prohibited by law.
(b) Publicly engage in the actual or simulated touching,
caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
(c) Publicly engage in the actual or simulated displaying of the
pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva, genitals, or any portion thereof, or
breasts below the top of the areola of any person.
(d) Publicly wear or use any device or covering, exposed to
public view, which simulates the human breasts, genitals, anus, buttock,
pubic hair or any portion thereof.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow another to
commit any of the acts specified in subsection (1) hereof on or about the
premises which are owned, managed, possessed, occupied, or operated by said
person or in which said person is employed.
(3) The following acts or conduct on premises licensed by the city are
deemed contrary to public policy, and therefore no license issued by the city
shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted:
(a) To employ, use or allow any person in the sale or service of
wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises
while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as
to expose to view any portion of the male or female breasts below the top
of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttock,
vulva, or genitals;
(b) To employ, use or allow the services of any hostess or other
person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is
unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection
(a) hereinabove;
(c) To encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises
to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttock, anus or genitals of any
other person;
(d) To encourage or permit any act prohibited by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-4-204, or other applicable law or ordinance.
1State law reference
Contraband goods: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-9-101, et seq.
8-5
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or encourage any
of the acts or conduct set forth in subsection (3) hereinabove in any place or
establishment or upon the premises thereof where wine, beer, or other alcoholic
beverages are offered for sale, consumed, possessed, or are otherwise present.
(5) Live entertainment shall be permitted on any licensed premises,
subject to all other applicable laws and ordinances, except that:
(a) No licensee or employee of licensee shall permit any person
to perform acts of or acts which simulate the following:
(I) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law;
(ii) The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals;
(iii) The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or
genitals.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove, any
entertainer who is employed in whole or in part or otherwise suffered or
allowed by the licensee to dance or otherwise perform at such licensee's
premises, shall perform only on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches
above the immediate floor level and removed at least six (6) feet from the
nearest patron.
(6) No licensee or employee of any licensee shall permit any person to
use artificial devices or any animate objects to depict any of the prohibitive
activities described above, nor shall any licensee or employee of any licensee
permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises whose exposing
to public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
(7) The following conduct or acts on licensed premises are deemed
contrary to public policy, and therefore no license for the sale, dispensing or
possession of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages issued or in any way
caused to be issued by the city shall be held at any premises where such conduct
or acts are permitted:
The showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, or other
visual reproductions depicting the following:
(a) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which
are prohibited by law;
(b) Any person being touched, caressed, or fondled on the
breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals;
(c) Scenes wherein the person displays the vulva or the anus or
the genitals;
(d) Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the
prohibited activities described above.
(8) The Police Bureau of the City of Johnson City is hereby empowered
to conduct investigations into alleged violations of the provisions of this section,
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-204, and of any and all other applicable
8-6
laws or ordinances, and that said bureau shall report such violations to the
appropriate authorities for such action as may be proper.
(9) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
engaging by persons of either sex in swimming or related activities while clad
in attire customarily worn for such purposes within the community.
(10) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
broadcast or display of any television program subject to regulation by the
Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
(11) The violation of any provision of this section is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance. (Ord. #3134, March 1993)
8-7
CHAPTER 2
BEER OF NOT MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT
ALCOHOLIC CONTENT
SECTION
8-201. Penalty.
8-202. Applicability of chapter.
8-203. Transport, sale to comply with rules.
8-204. Hours of sale.
8-205. Minors; intoxicated persons; loitering.
8-206. Wholesale beer tax.
8-207. Advertising signs or displays.
8-208. License required.
8-209. License--classes.
8-210. [Repealed].
8-211. License--hotels; motels; clubs, lodges.
8-212. License--application--generally.
8-213. License--application procedure.
8-214. License--limitations upon issuance.
8-215. License--display.
8-216. License--transfer.
8-217. Temporary occasion licenses.
8-218. License suspension, revocation generally, calculations of time and
number of violations, etc.
8-219. License--suspension for noise violations, calculations of time and number
of violations, etc.
8-220. Alcohol awareness training.
8-221. Seller/server permits.
8-222. Application for fee; privilege tax; permits.
8-223. Prohibited conduct.
8-224. Training of licensees, employees, etc.
8-225. [Repealed.]
8-226. Drive-through window sales.
8-227. Grandfathered status.
8-228. Downtown special events/street festivals.
8-201. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall
upon conviction be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense;
each separate occurrence and each day of an offense shall be construed as
constituting a separate offense. (1985 Code, § 3-20)
8-202. Applicability of chapter. Except as otherwise specifically
provided, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to beer and any other
beverage of like alcoholic content. (1985 Code, § 3-21, as replaced by Ord.
#4596-15, March 2016)
8-8
8-203. Transport, sale to comply with rules. It shall be unlawful for
any person to transport, store, sell, distribute, possess, receive or manufacture
beverages mentioned in § 8-202 within the corporate limits of the city, except as
provided by all of the regulations, limitations and restrictions provided by the
laws of the state and this chapter, and subject to the rules and regulations
enacted by authorized public officials or boards.1 (1985 Code, § 3-22)
8-204. Hours of sale. (1) Off-premises sales: The sale of beer is
authorized for off-premises licensees between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 3:00
A.M., Monday through Saturday. The sale of beer shall be prohibited for all
off-premises licensees on Sunday between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M.,
but shall be authorized for all off premises licensees on Sunday at hours outside
of that time period.
(2) On-premises sales: The sale of alcoholic beverages, wine, high
alcohol content beer, and beer is prohibited between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and
8:00 A.M. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and
10:00 A.M. on Sunday for all on-premises licensees.
(3) It is shall be unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages, wine,
high alcohol content beer, and beer upon any premises licensed by the City of
Johnson City for the sale of such beverages for on-premises consumption or to
open such beverages or to display or possess such beverages in an open bottle,
glass, or other open container fifteen (15) minutes beyond the time that beer
sales for on-premises establishments end.
(4) Any person operating or otherwise having charge and control of any
on-premises licensed location shall cause any and all containers as described in
the previous paragraph, whether the same are open or not, to be removed from
any tables, bars, or other areas occupied by patrons not later than fifteen (15)
minutes beyond the time that beer sales for on-premises establishments end.
(Ord. #3320, Sept. 1995, as amended by Ord. #3499, July 1997, and replaced by
Ord. #4408-11, Sept. 2011 and Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-205. Minors; intoxicated persons; loitering. (1) It shall be unlawful
for anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase or attempt to
purchase beer, wine, high alcohol content beer, or alcoholic beverages and it
shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess
any such beverage upon the premises of a licensee.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, wine, high alcohol
content beer, or alcoholic beverages to any person who is less than twenty-one
(21) years of age, or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to buy
beer, wine, high alcohol content beer, or alcoholic beverages, and which offense
shall be punishable by fine or otherwise as provided by law.
1State law reference
Rules and regulations of Tennessee alcoholic beverage commission:
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-1-209.
8-9
(3) It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to submit a false identification for the purpose of misrepresenting the age
or identity of the person attempting to make a purchase of beer, wine, high
alcohol content beer, or alcoholic beverages, and which offense shall be
punishable by fine or otherwise as provided by law.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his agent or employee to
allow or permit any intoxicated person or person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years to loiter upon or about the licensed premises.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, wine, high alcohol
content beer, or alcoholic beverages to any person who reasonably appears to be
intoxicated.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, wine, high alcohol
content beer, or alcoholic beverages to any person without first verifying as to
that person's date of birth.
(7) Anyone who acts in violation of any one (1) or more of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, if of suitable age,
shall be taken before juvenile court for appropriate disposition.1 (1985 Code,
§ 3-24, as amended by Ord. #3015, Sept. 1991, Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998,
and Ord. #3674, May 1999, and replaced by Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-206. Wholesale beer tax. Pursuant to the authority contained in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-6-103, as the same may be amended, there is
hereby imposed a tax on the sale of beer at wholesale within the city.2 (1985
Code, § 3-25, as replaced by Ord. #4596, March 2016)
8-207. Advertising signs or displays. Notwithstanding any provision
of any other ordinance of the City of Johnson City to the contrary, and
particularly those pertaining to signs, no retail licensee may erect, maintain or
suffer any on-premises signs, advertising or displays for the purpose of
advertising beer except as provided in this section, as follows:
(1) One advertising or display sign which makes reference to the fact
that the establishment sells beer may be erected on the outside of the building
or on the premises. Said sign display may only show the single word "beer" with
the size of the letters not to exceed a total of eight (8") inches in height and a
total of thirty-six (36") inches in length and which shall not use brand names,
pictures, numbers, prices, diagrams, or other forms of communication relating
to beer. Furthermore, no accompanying words, phrases or other forms of
1State law references
"Minor" defined: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 1-3-105.
Sale of beer to minors: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-301, et seq.
2State law reference
Local enforcement of wholesale beer tax law: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-6-113.
8-10
communication which relate to, describe or in any sense modify or explain the
word "beer" shall be permitted.
(2) (a) One (1) sign, containing the single word "beer" with the size
of the letters not to exceed a total of eight (8") inches in height and a total
of twenty-four (24") inches in length, is permitted within a window or on
the building, subject to the same prohibitions as described hereinabove
in subsection (1) of this section.
(b) Retail licensees may erect or maintain any quantity, size or
style of signs or other advertising displays on the inside of the premises,
subject to the provisions of the Sign Code of the City of Johnson City as
the same may be applicable, so long as such signs or displays are not
window signs or are not readily visible from the outside of the premises.
(Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998)
8-208. License--required. No person shall engage in the storing,
selling, distributing or manufacturing of beer or any other beverage referred to
in § 8-202 within the corporate limits of the city until he receives a license to do
so. (1985 Code, § 2-38)
8-209. License--classes. (1) Licenses for the sale of beer shall be
according to the following classes:
Class 1: On-premises, where alcoholic beverages, beer, high alcohol
content beer, or wine is sold for consumption at a restaurant. "Restaurant" shall
mean any place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as
a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly
served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a seating
capacity of at least twenty-five (25) people at tables, having employed therein
a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food for its guests. At least one (1) meal per day shall be served at least five (5)
days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of
redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business
conducted.
Class 2: On-premises, where alcoholic beverages, beer, high alcohol
content beer, or wine is sold for consumption at a hotel, motel, club, or lodge.
Class 3: On-premises, where alcoholic beverages, beer, high alcohol
content beer, or wine is sold for consumption in a bar.
Class 4: Off-premises, where beer is sold for consumption off the
premises.
Class 5: Off-premises, originally licensed by Washington County, Carter
County, or Sullivan County, where beer is sold for consumption off the premises
and on which said premises there exists at the time of annexation a lawful,
valid, and unrestricted license for the sale of off-premises consumption of beer.
The license authorized by this class shall be permitted to exist following
annexation only if the licensee shall be properly qualified for the sale of
beverages under this code, as provided in § 8-212 hereinafter, has filed a duly
8-11
certified copy of the license issued to said licensee by Washington County,
Carter County, or Sullivan County with the city recorder; and, all such licenses,
upon annexation and qualification under this part, shall not be transferred from
the premises occupied at the time of annexation and qualification under this
chapter, any other provision of this code, or other rule, regulation, ordinance or
law to the contrary notwithstanding.
Class 6: Wholesale license, which is for a business engaged in the delivery
of beer (or high alcohol content beer, where applicable) by a wholesaler to a
retailer and which does not allow sales to any persons not holding a retail
beverage sales license.
Class 7: Manufacturer/retailer, which is for a business engaged in the
manufacture of beer and which sells the aforesaid beer for consumption on the
premises or off the premises, providing that the aggregate of such sales shall not
exceed the sum of twenty-five thousand (25,000) barrels of beer annually, in
accordance with all provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 5, title 57,
as the same may be amended, which chapter is hereby incorporated in its
entirety by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim herein.
Class 8: On-premises for a governmental entity, where the governing body
of the governmental entity has authorized the sale of beer.
(2) The determination of the class of license to be granted shall be
solely within the discretion and judgment of the city commission. (Ord. #3623
Version B, Oct. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-210. [Repealed]. (Ord. #3848, Nov. 2001, as repealed by Ord. #4223-
06, Oct. 2006)
8-211. License--hotels; motels; clubs, lodges. (1) Hotels; motels.
Licenses may be issued to hotels and motels for the sale of beverages for
consumption on the premises.
(2) Clubs; lodges. Licenses may be issued to clubs or lodges which are
regularly incorporated, operating under a charter and bylaws, whose members
must pay a substantial initiation fee and which are organized and exist for
purposes other than the sale of beverages under such license. (1985 Code,
§ 3-41, as amended by Ord. #3378, March 1996)
8-212. License--application--generally. (1) Each applicant for a
license under this chapter shall file with the city manager or his or her designee
a sworn petition in writing, establishing the following facts, to the satisfaction
of the city manager, the truth of each and all of which facts at the time of
approval of the application are hereby made conditions of any license issued
hereunder:
(a) The applicant shall be the owner of the business regulated
by this chapter. The name and date of birth or date of creation of the
applicant, whichever is applicable, his or her social security number or its
tax i.d. number, as applicable, the residence addresses of all of the
applicant's managers, supervisors in charge of the daily operation of the
8-12
business, and all personnel completing the sale on behalf of the license
holder, for the ten (10) years next preceding the date of the application,
and the telephone number of the applicant.
(b) The name, address, and zoning designation of the location
for which the license is requested.
(c) The classification of the license requested.
(d) A statement that the applicant is the owner of the business
and shall conduct the business in person for himself or herself, and if he
or she is acting as an agent for the owner in the event the owner is a
corporation, firm, syndicate, stock company, association, or other entity,
the agent shall state the name, address and telephone number of the
corporation, firm, syndicate, stock company, association, or other entity
that is the owner of the business and for which the agent intends to act.
(e) The owner or owners of the premises, including any and all
persons, corporations, or other entities as may have a partial ownership
interest therein, or who may share a portion of any proceeds therefrom,
as well as a legal description thereof, photographs of the finished exterior
and interior of the actual building wherein the business is or shall be
located, copies of the deed to the subject premises and any leases and
other agreements to which the same are subject, and a survey by a
licensed surveyor depicting all boundaries of the subject premises and
showing the location of any and all structures thereon.
(f) In the event that the applicant is a corporation or other
entity, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the manager of
the licensed premises, any immediate supervisor of such manager, and
the chief executive officer of such corporation or other entity and the
name and address of the entity's registered agent for service of process
and the principal office address of the entity.
(g) That the applicant will not engage in the sale of such
beverages except at the place for the which the license has been issued.
(h) That no sale of such beverages will be made except in
accordance with all terms and conditions of the license granted.
(i) That the applicant has/has not had a license for the sale of
alcoholic beverages or controlled substances revoked or suspended by the
City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(j) That the applicant has received a copy of the sections of the
Johnson City Code applicable to the sale of such beverages or conduct of
business in connection therewith, including but not limited to any
applicable zoning, building, and sign codes, and that the applicant has
read all of such ordinances and is familiar with their contents and
applicant's responsibilities thereunder.
(k) That, at the time of making the application, the applicant
does not employ within Johnson City any person or persons as a
manager, supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier or
other person whose duties include serving or completing the sale of beer
on behalf of the license holder, who has been convicted of violating any
8-13
statute, rule or regulation against the prohibition, sale, consumption,
manufacture, handling or transportation of beer within the ten (10) year
period next preceding the date of the application or the possession, sale,
manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquor or any crime of
moral turpitude within the ten (10) year period next preceding the date
of the application.
(l) That, at the time of making application, the applicant does
not employ within Johnson City any person or persons as a
manager, supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier
or other person whose duties include serving or completing the sale
of beer on behalf of the license holder who has been convicted of
violating any statute, rule, or regulation regarding any controlled
substances within the ten (10) year period next preceding the date
of application.
(m) That, at the time of making application, the applicant does
not employ within Johnson City any person or persons as a manager,
supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier or other person
whose duties include serving or completing the sale of beer on behalf of
the license holder, who has been convicted of committing any state or
federal felony, violating any DUI/DWI/implied consent laws, or violating
any criminal law regarding theft, burglary, violence, child abuse, spousal
abuse, prostitution, or pandering within the ten (10) year period next
preceding the date of application.
(n) That the applicant and all managers, supervisors, and
persons in charge of daily operations, consent to be investigated by
municipal, county, state, and federal law enforcement agencies or any
other agency or representative thereof; or such other firms as may be
employed concerning any information presented in the application and
any other information which any of the aforementioned authorities deem
pertinent.
(o) Any additional information as may be required by the board
of commissioners or their designee or the city manager or his or her
designee from time to time in their absolute discretion.
(2) Applications shall be submitted on forms promulgated by the city,
which forms shall be satisfactory to the city manager and legal counsel for the
city. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except under those
circumstances where the commission in its absolute discretion deems that an
extraordinary circumstance exists which makes it desirable to award a license
to a particular applicant, licenses should be issued to qualified applicants on a
first come, first served basis.
(3) The foregoing notwithstanding, the provisions of this chapter shall
not be construed so as to disqualify the holder of any license hereunder as of
January 1, 1998, by virtue of any act committed prior to that date from the
holding of any present or future license.
(4) Any provision of any ordinance or statute not withstanding, an
application shall be considered void and of no effect and shall be returned to the
8-14
applicant without a refund of the application fee, unless at the time of filing the
application, the following requirements are met:
(a) The premises for which the application is filed shall be
wholly within the corporate limits of the City of Johnson City;
(b) The premises for which the application is filed shall be
properly zoned;
(c) Payment in full of all application fees has been made to and
received by the recorder of the City of Johnson City;
(d) The application shall be in all respects accurate and
complete;
(e) The applicant shall have complied with all other
requirements of this section.
(5) The city shall issue no license until the premises for which the
application is filed has received a certificate of occupancy from the city. (Ord.
#3848, Nov. 2001, as replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006, and amended by
Ord. #4596-15, March 2016).
8-213. License--application procedure. Accurate and complete
applications meeting all requirements of title 8 of the Johnson City Municipal
code that are filed under this chapter shall be considered by the board of
commissioners in an open, public meeting. The board of commissioners shall
grant or refuse the license according to its best judgment and absolute discretion
under all of the facts and circumstances then appearing to it. The action of said
board of commissioners in granting or refusing a license shall be final and
subject to judicial review as provided by the laws of the State of Tennessee.
(Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006)
8-214. License--limitations upon issuance. No license under this
chapter shall be authorized for, granted to, or held at any time by any person,
firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity:
(1) In violation of any law.
(2) For a premises in violation of the zoning code, building code, fire
code, and public health requirements of the city.
(3) At any location where, in the opinion of the board of commissioners
acting in its sole and absolute discretion, it appears that there may be an
adverse effect in consideration of the type and the character of the
neighborhood, the population density of the neighborhood, the proximity of
residences, schools, child day care centers, parks and playgrounds, the proximity
of churches, other bona fide religious establishments, other places where youth
may congregate, any problem with law enforcement in the area, and such other
factors which may affect the public health, safety, welfare or morals. The
foregoing notwithstanding, no licenses under this article shall be issued for a
premises located within one hundred feet (100') of any school, child day care
center, playground, park, church, or other bona fide religious establishment. The
said one hundred feet (100') shall be measured from the center of the front door
of the licensed premises to the center of the nearest entrance/exit door of any
8-15
school building, child day care center or church building in a straight line. For
playgrounds and parks the one hundred foot (100') measurement shall be from
the center of the front door of the licensed premises to the nearest point on the
property line bounding the playground or park in a straight line.
(4) At any on-premises location which does not offer separate
restrooms for each sex.
(5) Who is delinquent in tax payments to any governmental agency.
(6) Who has made a false statement in the application, and which such
misstatement shall be deemed to invalidate or void the application and any
license issued pursuant thereto.
(7) Who has omitted any relevant fact required to be stated in the
application or supporting materials.
(8) Who, at the time of making the application or who after receiving
a license required by this chapter, employs within Johnson City as a manager,
supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier, or other person whose
duties include serving or completing the sale of beer on behalf of the license
holder, any person who has been convicted ("convicted" for purposes of this
chapter includes license suspensions, civil penalties, and fines) of violating any
statute, rule, or regulation against the prohibition, sale, consumption,
manufacture, handling or transportation of beer within the ten (10) year period
next preceding the date of the application or the possession, sale, manufacture,
and transportation of intoxicating liquor or any crime of moral turpitude within
the ten (10) year period next preceding the date of the application.
(9) Who, at the time of making the application required by this chapter
or who after receiving a license, employs within Johnson City as a manager,
supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier, or other person whose
duties include serving or completing the sale of beer on behalf of the license
holder, any person who has been convicted of violating any statute, rule, or
regulation regarding any controlled substances within the ten (10) year period
next preceding the date of application.
(10) Who, at the time of making the application required by this chapter
or who after receiving a license, employs within Johnson City as a manager,
supervisor, person in charge of daily operations, cashier, or other person whose
duties include serving or completing the sale of beer on behalf of the license
holder, who has been convicted of committing any state or federal felony, any
DUI/DWI/implied consent laws, or violating any criminal laws regarding theft,
burglary, crime of violence, child abuse, spousal abuse, prostitution, or
pandering within the ten (10) year period next preceding the date of application.
(11) Whose beer license has been suspended or revoked or who has been
fined for a violation of this chapter by the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, at
any time prior to the submission of the application, unless the applicant
presents clear and convincing proof that changes in management and operations
have occurred that warrant the issuance of a new license. Changes in
management, procedures regarding sales, educational programs, improvements
to the premises and appurtenances thereto, personnel policies, and such other
factors shall be considered regarding a new application from an applicant with
8-16
a prior fine, license suspension, or license revocation by the City of Johnson
City.
(12) To any applicant unless the applicant has been a citizen or lawful
resident of the United States for not less than one (1) year immediately
preceding the date upon which the application is made to the city. (Ord. #3623
Version B, Oct. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006, and Ord.
#4596-15, May 2016)
8-215. License--display. The license granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be framed under glass and placed so that it is conspicuous and may be
easily read at all times. (1985 Code, § 3-45)
8-216. License--transfer. (1) Licenses issued hereunder shall not be
transferred. Any license issued hereunder shall expire upon the termination of
the business, change in ownership, relocation of the business or change in the
business' name as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-103(a)(6).
(2) In the event a license expires as a result of a change of ownership
of a business, the license which expired as a result thereof shall be awarded to
the new owner of said business if, and only if:
(a) The new owner files an application for a license; and
(b) The purchase of the business otherwise meets the
requirements set forth in § 8-212(1)--(2) and § 8-214;
(c) The type of business contemplated by the new owner is
operated and maintained in a manner which is substantially similar to
the type of business purchased (e.g., supermarket, convenience store,
etc.); and
(d) The business remains at the same location.
In the event the new owner of the business does not satisfy one or more
of the foregoing four (4) requirements, the license shall be awarded as otherwise
provided herein.
(3) In the event a license expires as a result of relocation of a business,
the license which expired as a result thereof shall be awarded to the owner(s)
of the relocated business if, and only if:
(a) The owner(s) of the relocated business is or are the same as
the owner(s) of the business which was relocated; and
(b) An application for a license for the new location of the
business is filed by the owner(s) of the relocated business; and
(c) The owner(s) of the relocated business, and the new location
of the business, otherwise meet the requirements set forth in
§§ 8-212(1)--(2) and 8-214; and
(d) The names of the old and relocated businesses are identical;
and
(e) The type of business contemplated at the new location will
be operated and maintained in a manner which is substantially similar
to the type of business purchased (e.g., supermarket convenience store,
etc.)
8-17
(4) In the event a license expires as a result of the change of the name
of a business, the license which expired as a result thereof shall be awarded to
the previous license holder if, and only if:
(a) The previous license holder files an application for a license
which identifies the new name of the business; and
(b) The previous license holder otherwise meets the
requirements set forth in § 8-212 (1)-(2) and § 8-214; and
(c) The business operated and maintained under the new
business name is substantially similar to that which was operated and
maintained under the former business name (e.g., supermarket,
convenience store, etc.); and
(d) The business operated under the new business name
remains at the same location as that which operated under the former
business name.
In the event the previous license holder does not satisfy one or more of the
foregoing four requirements, the license shall be awarded as set forth elsewhere
herein. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998)
8-217. Temporary occasion licenses. (1) The board of commissioners
may grant temporary occasion licenses to bona fide charitable, non-profit
organizations and businesses with an on- or off-premises beer license (as long
as the on-premises beer licensee does not also hold an on-premises
liquor-by-the-drink license from the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission)
for such temporary occasions involving the sale of beer for consumption or the
inclusion of beer for consumption in conjunction with the sale of other products
or food items or serving beer in conjunction with any temporary occasion for
which there is any charge, entrance fee, or request for donation, and upon such
terms and conditions as it shall in its sole discretion deem appropriate.
Temporary occasion licenses are also allowed for The Pavilion at Founders Park,
Founders Park, and the pedestrian areas containing flood control measures
installed by the city bounded by Roan Street, King Street, Boone/Commerce
Streets and State of Franklin Road, subject to the restrictions of this title. No
temporary occasion licensee shall sell beer for consumption or allow taking beer
off of the premises whereon the temporary occasion occurs, unless such is
allowed at a special event/street festival. Such permits shall not be issued for
longer than one (1) consecutive forty-eight (48) hour period, subject to the
limitations on the hours of sale imposed by law.
(2) For the purposes of this section, "bona fide charitable, non-profit
organization" means any corporation or organization recognized as exempt from
federal taxes under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3)or(4).
(3) The fee for each such temporary occasion license shall be
seventy-five dollars ($75.00); this fee may be adjusted by resolution of the board
of commissioners.
(4) Any charitable, non-profit organization or licensed business
possessing such a temporary occasion license shall obtain beer for sale or
8-18
distribution at any such temporary occasion only from licensed sources provided
pursuant to law.
(5) For charities, applications for such temporary occasion licenses
shall state the applicant's status as a charitable, non-profit organization and
shall include documentation showing recognition of its status as a non-profit
organization under federal law, the type of organization, its name, its mailing
address, its officers, the location of the premises upon which beer shall be
served, the purpose for the request, the person or persons in charge of and
responsible for such occasion, the persons, groups or entities benefitting from
such occasion, and such other information as the city manager or his designee
may require. For businesses with beer licenses, the application shall include a
copy of the beer license, the name of the applicant, the applicant's mailing
address, the address/location of the premises upon which beer shall be served,
the person(s) in charge of and responsible for the occasion, and such other
information as the city manager or his designee may require.
(6) Temporary occasion beer licenses shall be issued by the city to and
in the name of a particular natural person or persons and in the name of the
bona fide charitable, non-profit organization or licensed business, and shall be
issued for a particular premises or location. All such temporary occasion beer
licenses shall be issued subject to all provisions pertaining to signage contained
in this chapter or elsewhere in the Johnson City Municipal Code.
(7) All temporary occasion licensees shall use servers possessing
server's permits issued by either the city or the State of Tennessee to serve beer
during the temporary occasion. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998, as replaced
by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006, and Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-218. License suspension, revocation generally, calculations of
time and number of violations, etc. (1) A license issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be suspended by the city manager:
(a) Whenever it is brought to the attention of the city manager
that the licensee, principal, any employee, representative or other person
operating or assisting in the operation of the licensed premises has
committed or been convicted of a state or federal felony, or has violated
any provision of the ordinance comprising this chapter or any condition
of the license issued hereunder;
(b) If the city manager has reason to believe that the licensee
is not, or has ceased to be, entitled to a license regulated under this
chapter;
(c) If the city manager has reason to believe that the licensee
is conducting or operating or has conducted or operated any place of
business herein regulated in violation of or contrary to any provision of
this chapter, or at any place, or for any purpose, or in any manner other
than as stated in his application for such license, or has made any false
or misleading statement in his application for such license or any report
required hereunder, or has failed to furnish any information;
8-19
(d) If occurrences at the licensee's place of business reasonably
appear to have adversely affected the public health, safety and welfare or
morals; or
(e) If the licensee's place of business is not operating as a retail
beer sales outlet and has been inoperative as such for thirty (30)
consecutive days.
(2) For the first violation of any provision of this chapter, the city
manager shall suspend a license for five (5) days by notice in writing given not
less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to effecting said suspension, and may
reinstate the license if the cause of circumstances warranting the suspension
has been corrected. If the license holder refuses to accept the city manager's
suspension, then the license holder must appeal to the board of commissioners
by giving notice in writing to the city manager by certified mail. The city
manager must receive this notice within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the
city manager's decision to suspend.
(3) Upon appeal of the city manager's suspension by a first time
offender (as calculated in § 8-218(10) below), or upon a second or subsequent
violation of any provision of this chapter within a five (5) year period after the
date of a prior violation, the city manager shall present this matter to the board
of commissioners and give written notice to the license holder. Such notice shall
be sufficient if sent by first-class mail or delivered to the place for which the
license is issued. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the next regular
meeting of the board of commissioners coming not less than three (3) days
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, from the date of the alleged
violation, informing the licensee that consideration may be given to the
revocation as well as the suspension of the license.
(4) At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of
commissioners not less than three (3) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays, from the date of the alleged violation, the board of commissioners
shall consider the alleged violation. The board may, however, postpone the
hearing until another specified time according to its discretion. The licensee
shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall be entitled to testify and
offer evidence on his own behalf. The burden of proof on such appeal shall be
upon the appellant to show cause why the license should not be suspended or
revoked. Failure to appear or to be otherwise represented by counsel shall be
considered as admission of charges brought forth.
(5) Concerning any violation of this chapter, regardless of the number
of alleged violations, the board of commissioners shall not be limited as to their
decision, which may include but not be limited to suspending the license until
a certain date or until certain actions or requirements are met, or revocation of
the license. The minimum punishment for a second or subsequent violation
within a five (5) year period from the date of a prior violation shall be a
suspension of fifteen (15) days. (See § 8-218(10) for calculating the number of
violations.)
(6) In the alternative, the city manager or his designee may initiate
suspension or revocation proceedings directly before the board of commissioners,
8-20
by petitioning said board of commissioners, either orally or in writing, for
initiation of such proceedings and the setting of a hearing. If the board of
commissioners elects to schedule such a hearing, said hearing shall proceed as
provided hereinabove. In any instance in which the aforementioned board of
commissioners is petitioned to set a hearing to consider the suspension or
revocation of a license issued hereunder, as provided hereinabove, and considers
the allegations upon which the request for such hearing is made likely to
indicate a hazard to the health, safety, or morals of the citizens of the City of
Johnson City, then and in such an event the board of commissioners may in its
absolute discretion suspend the license in question pending such hearing.
(7) No license issued hereunder shall be construed or deemed as
vesting a property right in any licensee, but shall instead be deemed a privilege.
(8) Should there be any change in any name, address, or other
information required to be submitted for any license sought or issued herewith,
the applicant or license holder shall file a supplemented report with the city
recorder within ten (10) days of such change. Failure to strictly adhere to this
requirement may result in denial, suspension, or revocation of such license.
(9) For purposes of calculating suspensions, a "day" shall be defined
as twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, and a suspension shall "begin" on the
cited effective date thereof at twelve (12:00) noon and end at 11:59 A.M. on the
last day of the suspension. Suspensions shall be served in consecutive operating
days, excluding days on which the subject location is not open for business.
(10) For purposes of calculating the number of violations in § 8-218 or
noise violations in § 8-219 following the effective date of these two sections, no
suspension or revocation of any beer license imposed prior to the effective date
of the ordinance comprising these sections shall be counted.
(11) For off-premises establishments, refer to state law regarding
license suspensions, revocations, penalties, etc. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct.
1998, as replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006)
8-219. License--suspension for noise violations, calculations of
time and number of violations, etc. (1) The city manager, or the assistant
city manager, in the city manager's absence (hereinafter referred to collectively
as the "city manager") following a recommendation made by the chief of police,
shall suspend a license issued pursuant to title 8 of the Johnson City Code when
the city manager is satisfied, based on the evidence presented to him, that two
(2) or more violations of the maximum permitted sound levels set forth in §
11-503 of title 11 of the Johnson City Code (hereinafter referred to collectively
as "noise violations") have occurred. Each day on which the maximum permitted
sound level is exceeded shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) In the event the city manager is satisfied that the requisite
showing set forth in subsection (1) of this section has been made with respect to
noise violations, the city manager's suspension of a beer license or setting of a
show cause hearing shall be made in conformance with, and subject to, the
following guidelines:
(a) Noise violations.
8-21
(i) If the noise violation is the second such violation
within three (3) years next preceding the date of said violation and
following the effective date of the ordinance comprising this
section, the city manager's suspension shall be for a duration of not
more than two (2) days; or
(ii) If the noise violation is the third such violation within
three (3) years next preceding the date of said violation and
following the effective date of the ordinance comprising this
section, the city manager's suspension shall be for a duration of not
more than four (4) days; or
(iii) If the noise violation is the fourth such violation
within three (3) years next preceding the date of said violation and
following the effective date of the ordinance comprising this
section, the city manager's suspension shall be for a duration of not
more than six (6) days; or
(iv) If the noise violation is the fifth such violation within
three (3) years next preceding the date of said violation and
following the effective date of the ordinance comprising this
section, the city manager's suspension shall be for a duration of not
more than ten (10) days.
(v) If the noise violation is the sixth or more such
violation within three (3) years next preceding the date of said
violation and following the effective date of the ordinance
comprising this section, a show cause hearing shall be convened
before the board to consider and determine whether the subject
beer license should be revoked.
(b) Any suspension by the city manager imposed pursuant to
this subsection shall apply only to the license issued for the location at
which the noise violation(s) allegedly occurred and shall not apply to any
other location(s) at which the relevant beer licensee holds a beer license.
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as limiting the
discretion of the board of commissioners with respect to any license or
licenses held by any licensee.
(3) Notice of impending suspensions or show cause hearings for alleged
violations of this section ("Notice") shall be provided to the beer licensee in
writing, and said notice shall be sufficient if it is either:
(a) Sent by first class mail, or
(b) Delivered by hand, to the beer licensee or to the location for
which the subject beer license is issued. If a suspension is being imposed,
said notice shall set forth the dates and times such suspension shall begin
and end, together with a succinct statement of the grounds or reasons
therefor. If a show cause hearing is being convened, said notice shall set
forth the date, time and location of the show cause hearing, together with
a succinct statement of the grounds or reasons therefor.
(4) Upon notice of an impending suspension for the second through
fifth violation of the aforementioned maximum sound levels provisions,
8-22
pursuant to this section, the beer licensee or an authorized representative shall
accept the suspension imposed by the city manager pursuant to subsection (2),
in writing, or appeal the city manager's suspension in writing to the board.
Written notification of said appeal shall be timely only if delivered to, or
otherwise received by, the city manager before said suspension is ratified by the
board pursuant to subsection (5) of this section.
(5) Suspensions imposed by the city manager pursuant to subsection
(2) of this section shall become effective on the date and at the time set forth in
the notice, following ratification by the board.
(6) At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, coming not
less than three (3) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, from
the receipt by the city manager of an appeal by a beer licensee of a suspension
imposed by the city manager pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the board
shall hear and consider the beer licensee's appeal of such suspension at a show
cause hearing. The board may, however, continue the show cause hearing and
its consideration of any such appeal in its discretion.
(7) The city manager may initiate suspension or revocation
proceedings for violations of this section directly before the board by petitioning
the board, either orally or in writing, for the setting of a show cause hearing.
(8) In any instance in which the board is petitioned to set a show case
hearing to consider the suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
this title of the Johnson City Code, and considers the allegations upon which the
requests for such hearing is made likely to indicate a hazard to the health,
safety, or morals of the citizens of the City of Johnson City, the board of
commissioners may in its absolute discretion suspend the license in question
pending such hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be provided to the licensee
in writing together with a succinct statement of the grounds or reasons for the
proposed action, and shall be sent by first-class mail or delivered by hand to the
place for which the license is issued at least three (3) days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays before the date of the hearing.
(9) The beer licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel at
suspension or revocation hearings conducted by the board and shall be entitled
to testify and offer evidence on his or her own behalf. The burden of proof shall
be upon the appellant to show cause why the license should not be suspended
or revoked. Failure by the beer licensee to appear or to be otherwise
represented at a board hearing about which the beer licensee has received a
notice shall be considered by the board as an admission of all charges. The
board of commissioners shall not be limited as to their decision, which may
include suspension or revocation.
(10) For purposes of calculating suspensions, a "day" shall be defined
as twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, and a suspension shall "begin" on the
cited effective date thereof at twelve (12:00) noon and end at 11:59 A.M. on the
last day of the suspension. Suspensions shall be served in consecutive operating
days, excluding days on which the subject location is not open for business.
(11) For purposes of calculating the number violations in § 8-218 or
noise violations in § 8-219 following the effective date of these two sections, no
8-23
suspension or revocation of any beer license imposed prior to the effective date
of the ordinance comprising these sections shall be counted.
(12) For off-premises establishments, refer to state law regarding
license suspensions, revocations, penalties, etc. (Ord. #3674, May 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006)
8-220. Alcohol awareness training. (1) All holders of licenses issued
pursuant to title 8 of the code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee their
principals and/or all employees directly working in a capacity or serving, selling
or otherwise dispensing alcoholic beverages regulated pursuant to this chapter
are required to successfully complete a program of alcohol awareness training
by an entity certified by the city manager to have an adequate training
curriculum for alcohol awareness. Said training is to be completed at least once
every three (3) years.
(2) The city manager shall certify any organization or entity seeking
to provide alcohol awareness training for servers or sellers or both, upon
adequate demonstration to the city manager that the faculty, materials and
facilities of the organization or entity meet such minimum standards as shall be
fixed by the city manager or his designee and that the curriculum, at a
minimum, includes the following components:
(a) Effects of alcohol on the human body.
(I) Review of blood alcohol content;
(ii) Absorption rates and factors affecting absorption of
alcohol;
(iii) Behavioral effects of alcohol;
(iv) Interaction and combined effects of mixing alcohol
with legal and/or illegal drugs;
(v) Identification of problem drinkers.
(b) Identify situations in which seller/server intervention is
appropriate.
(c) Handling situations and people in non-confrontational
manner.
(d) Suggested responses by servers/sellers to situations
involving intoxicated and/or underage persons.
(e) Review of Tennessee and City of Johnson City ordinances,
law, rules and regulations regarding the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages.
(f) Review of acceptable identification; spotting fake
identification; acceptable secondary identification; responsibility for
checking identification. (Ord. #3674, May 1999)
8-221. Seller/server permits. For server permits for off-premises
establishments, refer to state law.
(1) It is unlawful for a licensee, any principal, manager, or any other
employee to personally sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages
regulated pursuant to this chapter without a valid seller/server permit issued
8-24
pursuant to subsections (3) and (4) herein. It is made the duty of the licensee
to ensure that each person selling, serving, or dispensing alcoholic beverages in
his, her, or its place of business has a valid seller/server permit. The violation
of the licensee of his, her, or its duty to ensure proper permitting of each person
selling, serving, or dispensing alcoholic beverages regulated pursuant to this
chapter in his, her, or its place of business shall result in a suspension of that
license or revocation thereof under the provisions of § 8-218. Said permit must
be on the person of the seller, server, or dispenser or upon the premises of the
licensee at all times subject to inspection by the city's duly authorized agent.
(2) Any individual may be eligible for a seller/server permit by
completing an application for such permit on forms provided by the city
recorder's office. An applicant for a seller/server permit must demonstrate to
the city that the applicant meets the following requirements:
(a) The applicant has not been convicted of committing any
state or federal felony, any DUI/DWI/implied consent laws, or violating
any criminal laws regarding theft, burglary, crime of violence, child
abuse, spousal abuse, prostitution, or pandering within the five (5) year
period next preceding the date of application.
(b) The applicant has not been convicted of or violated any
statute, rule, or regulation against the prohibition, sale, consumption,
manufacture, handling, or transportation of beer within the five (5) year
period next preceding the date of application or the possession, sale,
manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquor or any crime of
moral turpitude within the ten (10) year period next preceding the date
of the application.
(c) The applicant has not been convicted of or violated any
statute, rule, or regulation regarding any controlled substances within
the five (5) year period next preceding the date of application.
(d) The applicant has not had a seller/server permit or similar
permit issued in a foreign jurisdiction revoked by any issuing authority
within the five (5) year period next preceding the date of application.
(e) Within one (1) year prior to the submission of the
application, the applicant shall successfully complete a program of alcohol
awareness training for persons involved in the direct service of alcohol,
wine, or beer by an entity certified by the city manager to have an
adequate training curriculum for alcohol awareness; and
(f) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(3) The city manager or his designee may issue a temporary
seller/server permit to an applicant, which temporary permit shall not exceed
sixty-one (61) days, upon the filing of a completed application, submitted under
penalty of perjury, establishing that the applicant meets the requirements
imposed by this section. No licensee shall be liable for a violation of this section
involving the employment of a person who fails to meet the requirements for
employment, if that person has been issued a temporary seller/server permit.
8-25
(4) Each seller/server permit shall be valid for three (3) years.
Applications for renewal shall be made in the same manner as application for
original permits upon forms prescribed by the city recorder's office. Applicants
for renewal must successfully complete a program of alcohol awareness training
pursuant to § 8-220(1).
(5) Upon the conviction of a seller/server permit holder for beer sales
violations, said permit shall be revoked.
(6) A seller/server permit that is lost may be replaced by completing
another application if the applicant has successfully completed a program of
alcohol awareness training within one (1) year prior to the submission of the
application pursuant to subsection (3) of this section.
(7) The city may conduct a criminal record review for any applicant for
a seller/server permit to ensure the applicant's compliance with the
requirements of this section.
(8) The city may assess an application and renewal fee for the permits
to be issued under this section. The city may assess a certification fee to any
organization or entity seeking certification pursuant to §8-220(2). (Ord. #3674,
May 1999, as replaced by Ord. #4223-06, Oct. 2006, and amended by Ord. #4271-
07, Sept. 2007)
8-222. Application fee; privilege tax; permits. Each applicant for a
license issued hereunder shall pay to the city a non-refundable application fee
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and each holder of a license issued
hereunder shall pay to the city an annual privilege tax of one hundred dollars
($100.00), and shall also be subject to any and all other provisions of Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-5-104, to which reference is here made and which section
is incorporated in its entirety by reference into this section as fully as set forth
verbatim. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998)
8-223. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders,
applicants, licensees, and employees. (1) The following acts or conduct on
premises licensed by the city are deemed contrary to public policy, and therefore
no beer permit issued by the city shall be held at any premises where the
following conduct or acts are permitted, suffered, or allowed to occur:
(a) To employ, use or allow any person in the sale or service of
beer in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or
in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the
male or female breasts below the top of the areola or of any portion of the
pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttock, vulva, or genitals;
(b) To employ, use or allow the services of any host, hostess or
other person to mingle with the patrons while such host, hostess or other
person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in
subsection (a) hereinabove;
8-26
(c) To encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises
to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any
other person;
(d) To encourage or permit any act prohibited by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-4-204, or other applicable law or ordinance.
(e) To publicly perform acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, or any other sexual acts prohibited by law.
(f) To publicly engage in the actual or simulated touching,
caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
(g) To publicly engage in the actual or simulated displaying of
the pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva, genitals, or any portion thereof, or
breasts below the top of the areola of any person.
(h) To publicly wear or use any device or covering, exposed to
public view, which simulates the human breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks,
pubic hair or any portion thereof.
(2) Live entertainment shall be permitted on any licensed premises,
subject to all other applicable laws and ordinances, except that:
(a) No licensee or employee of licensee shall permit any person
to perform acts of or acts which simulate the following:
(I) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law;
(ii) The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals;
(iii) The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or
genitals.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove, any
entertainer who is employed in whole or in part or otherwise suffered or
allowed by the licensee to dance or otherwise perform at such licensee's
premises, shall perform only on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches
above the immediate floor level and removed at least six (6) feet from the
nearest patron.
(3) No licensee or employee of any licensee shall permit any person to
use artificial devices or any animate objects to depict any of the prohibited
activities described above, nor shall any licensee or employee of any licensee
permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who is exposing
to public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.
The following conduct or acts on licensed premises are deemed contrary
to public policy, and therefore no license for the sale, dispensing or possession
of beer, issued or in any way caused to be issued by the city shall be held or
retained at any premises where such conduct or acts hereinafter enumerated are
permitted:
8-27
The showing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, or other
visual reproductions depicting the following:
(a) Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which
are prohibited by law;
(b) Any person being touched, caressed, or fondled on the
breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals;
(c) Scenes wherein the person displays the vulva or the anus or
the genitals;
(d) Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the
prohibited activities described above.
(4) The police bureau of the City of Johnson City is hereby empowered
to conduct investigations into alleged violations of the provisions of this section,
of any pertinent section of Tennessee Code Annotated, and of any and all other
applicable laws or ordinances, rules, regulations, and that said bureau shall
report such violations to the appropriate authorities for such action as may be
proper.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
engaging by persons of either sex in swimming or related activities on licensed
premises while clad in attire customarily worn for such purposes within the
community.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
broadcast or display or any television program subject to regulation by the
Federal Communications Commission of the United States on licensed premises.
(Ord. #3154, Sept. 1993)
8-224. Training of licensees, employees, etc. Any person holding a
license hereunder, or owning any business or any interest in any business
licensed hereunder, or employed to operate or work in the same as a manager,
cashier or other person completing the sale on behalf of the license holder, shall,
within six (6) weeks of acquiring such license, ownership, ownership interest or
employment satisfactorily complete a program of training, which program shall
be in form and content satisfactory to the city manager or his/her designee,
provided that any such person may be excused from the provisions of this
section by waiver granted by the city manager or his/her designee if it is proven
by evidence satisfactory to the aforesaid official, in his/her sole and absolute
discretion:
(1) That such person is already sufficiently familiar with applicable
laws and ordinances pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to
this chapter so as to merit such a waiver; or
(2) That such person holds a "server permit" issued by the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-106 (a).
8-28
An appropriate charge will be made for such training program in an amount to
be set by the city manager. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998)
8-225. [Repealed]. (Ord. #3167, Oct. 1993, as repealed by Ord. #4223-
06, Oct. 2006)
8-226. Drive-through window sales. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages pursuant to this chapter through a
drive-through window.
The foregoing sentence notwithstanding, nothing contained herein shall
be construed as prohibiting sales or delivery of such beverages through drive-in
windows on premises which were properly licensed for off-premises sales at the
same location on or before the date of passage of the ordinance comprising this
section on third and final reading, for so long as said premises remained
continuously licensed at that location. For the purposes of this subsection, the
term "continuously licensed" shall mean licensed without any break, whether
the same is due to expiration, suspension, or revocation, in excess or thirty (30)
days. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct. 1998)
8-227. Grandfathered status. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
be construed as granting "grandfathered" status to signage or any other practice
or procedure except as expressly herein provided. (Ord. #3623 Version B, Oct.
1998)
8-228. Downtown special events/street festivals. (1) This section
applies to downtown special events/street festivals such as the Blue Plum and
UMOJA festivals. The area of Downtown Johnson City to which this section
applies shall be: East Market Street from Colonial Way to Buffalo Street (but
not including Colonial Way which shall remain open at all times); East Main
Street from Colonial Way to Buffalo Street (but not including Colonial Way
which shall remain open at all times); South Roan Street from State of Franklin
Road to its intersection with Buffalo Street; Buffalo Street from its intersection
with South Roan to its intersection with State of Franklin Road; Wilson Avenue
and the pedestrian walkway reserved on former Wilson Avenue to its
intersection with South Commerce Street; South Commerce Street from its
intersection with Wilson Avenue to Lamont Street as the same borders
Founders Park to before the railroad crossing gates at State of Franklin Road;
Founders Park; The Pavilion at Founders Park; Tipton Street; McClure Street;
Spring Street from State of Franklin Road to its intersection with East Main
Street; South Commerce Street to West Market Street to Windsor Way to West
Main Street to South Commerce Street, and the pedestrian areas containing
flood control measures installed by the city bounded by Roan Street, King
Street, Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin Road. Also included are
all public sidewalks, public easements, public alleys, public squares, public
8-29
parking lots, or other public ways or public spaces within the boundary of the
areas listed above.
(2) An applicant for a downtown special event/street festival involving
the public consumption of beer within the area or part of the area described in
subsection (1) above shall apply for a permit using the City of Johnson City's
special events application. Events that involve the consumption or sale of beer
at Founders Park, the Pavilion at Founders Park, or the pedestrian areas
containing flood control measures installed by the city bounded by Roan Street,
King Street, Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin Road may also
require an application and scheduling through the Johnson City Development
Authority or another entity that the board of commissioners designates for such
purposes.
(3) The applicant shall submit with the application to the city a map
that details the area or part of the area described in subsection (1) above for the
closing of streets, public sidewalks, public alleys, etc. whereon the possession
and consumption of beer is requested to occur. The area depicted on the map,
after approval by the board of commissioners in its sole, absolute discretion,
shall become the "permitted area" within which the possession and consumption
of beer will be allowed for the duration of the downtown special event/street
festival. This map is in addition to any information required in any other
application. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to alter or to
refuse to approve the map and application in its sole, absolute discretion. The
board of commissioners shall have the absolute authority to approve a
downtown special event/street festival but disallow the possession, consumption,
or sale of beer within any or all areas depicted on the map submitted with the
application for the special event/street festival. The regulations in this section
pertaining to the possession, consumption, or sale of beer during downtown
special events/street festivals shall only apply in those areas where the board
of commissioners has approved the same; otherwise, the possession,
consumption, or sale of beer shall not be permitted.
(4) The possession and consumption of beer within the permitted area
shall not be allowed on Sundays. On all other days of the special event/street
festival, the possession and consumption of beer in the permitted area shall be
allowed no earlier than 1:00 P.M. and no later than 11:00 P.M.
(5) All beer shall be purchased from persons, firms, corporations and
other entities that are duly licensed to sell beer on premises that front the
streets closed within the permitted area. No serving, dispensing, or pouring of
beer shall take place outside of the confines of the interior walls and serving
areas of the licensed premises that are currently licensed under applicable state
statutes and municipal ordinances governing the sale of beer within the
permitted area fronting the streets closed in the permitted area. All points of
sale, kegs, and taps shall be confined within the interior walls of the licensed
premises. No points of sale, kegs, or taps shall be allowed on sidewalks where
8-30
an establishment has received a special exception from the board of zoning
appeals for sidewalk dining.
(6) No serving, dispensing, or pouring of beer shall be allowed upon the
public sidewalks, public easements, public alleys, public squares, or other public
ways or public spaces within the permitted area, except as set forth in a current,
valid sidewalk dining special exception authorized by the board of zoning
appeals. No licensed restaurants shall serve beer to any person who is not
within the board of zoning appeals permitted sidewalk dining area or within the
confines of the interior walls and serving area of the licensed premises.
(7) Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, an
organization that sponsors a special event/street festival is allowed to serve,
dispense, and pour (but not sell) beer using servers possessing server's permits
issued by either the city or the State of Tennessee at one (1) location within the
permitted area within the confines of a tent on any day except Sunday and only
between the hours of 5:00 P.M. and 9:00 P.M. on each day of the special
event/street festival (except Sundays). All kegs and taps shall be confined within
the tent.
(8) Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, the sale
of beer on public property during a special event/street festival is allowed only
at Founders Park (and also on the streets bordering Founders Park), The
Pavilion at Founders Park (but not on the streets bordering The Pavilion at
Founders Park), and the pedestrian areas containing flood control measures
installed by the city bounded by Roan Street, King Street, Boone/Commerce
Streets and State of Franklin Road. Beer sales at Founders Park (and on the
portion of South Commerce Street bordering it), at The Pavilion at Founders
Park (but not on the streets bordering it), and within the pedestrian areas
containing flood control measures installed by the city bounded by Roan Street,
King Street, Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin Road shall be
authorized only for qualified organizations pursuant to a separate temporary
occasion license obtained prior to the special event/street festival from the board
of commissioners in accordance with § 8-217. Beer sales shall begin no earlier
than 1:00 P.M. and shall end no later than 10:30 P.M. on each day that the
temporary occasion license authorizes the sale of beer.
(9) All sales of food, non-alcoholic beverages, and merchandise from
vendors with permits from the sponsoring organization for vending sites shall
be permitted from 8:00 A.M. until 11:00 P.M. on each day of the special
event/street festival in the permitted area. All such vendors shall obtain a
special event vendor’s license from the city, unless they possess a valid
Tennessee business license.
(10) No person shall carry or bring any outside beer or other alcoholic
beverages for personal consumption into or out of the permitted area.
(11) Only pedestrian traffic and vehicles pertaining to the special
event/street festival shall be allowed in the permitted area, and all other traffic
except police, EMS, fire or other such emergency equipment shall be prohibited.
8-31
(12) Coolers, glass bottles, glass thermos bottles, and breakable glasses
or containers shall be prohibited within the permitted area. No container of beer
shall be capable of containing more that sixteen (16) fluid ounces within the
permitted area. All beer containers in the permitted area shall be clear plastic.
(13) Alcoholic beverages, wine, and high alcohol content beer as defined
in this title shall not be allowed for possession or consumption within the
permitted area and must be consumed within the licensed establishments
fronting the streets closed in the permitted area.
(14) Any music associated with a special event/street festival shall
conclude at 11:00 P.M.
(15) The authorized license holder making the sale shall be responsible
at the entrance to the business premises for checking all identification in order
to ensure legal compliance with the laws pertaining to legal drinking age and
no such license holders shall allow beer as permitted herein to leave the licensed
premises for off-premises consumption after 10:30 P.M.
(16) Each violation of a provision of this section shall subject a violator
to a fine as specified in the Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, in
§ 1-104; furthermore, a violator with a beer license is subject to all fines,
suspensions, and revocations as set forth in title 57 of the Tennessee Code,
§ 1-104 of the Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, and title 8 of the
Code of the City Of Johnson City, Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #4596-15, March
2016)
8-32
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OF MORE THAN FIVE PERCENT
ALCOHOLIC CONTENT
SECTION
8-301. Definitions.
8-302. Selling, storing, transporting, manufacturing; generally.
8-303. Wholesale business generally.
8-304. Sale at retail.
8-305. Licensee responsible for officers and agents.
8-306. Violations of federal, state statutes, etc..
8-307. Location of liquor store.
8-308. Time of operation.
8-309. Records kept by licensee.
8-310. Inspections--generally.
8-311. Inspections--fees.
8-312. Selling or furnishing to minors, etc.
8-313. Consumption on premises of liquor store.
8-314. Maximum number of licenses.
8-315. License--qualifications of applicant.
8-316. State privilege tax.
8-317. License--issuance; term; renewal.
8-318. License--display.
8-319. Restrictions upon licensees and employees.
8-320. License--transfer.
8-321. Nature of license; suspension or revocation.
8-322. Certificate of compliance--application--filing; contents.
8-323. Certificate of compliance--misrepresentation; concealment of
fact.
8-324. Certificate of good moral character--consideration.
8-325. Certificate of compliance--restriction upon issuance.
8-301. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings unless the context necessarily requires
otherwise:
(1) "Alcoholic beverage." This definition shall be the same as provided
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-101, as the same may be amended.
(2) "Applicant." The person applying for a license.
(3) "Application." The form or forms an applicant is required to file in
order to obtain a license.
(4) "Certificate of compliance." The certificate mentioned in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-3-208, as the same may be amended, in connection with
the prescribed procedure for obtaining a state liquor retailer's license.
8-33
(5) "Federal statutes." The statutes of the United States now in effect
or as they may hereafter be changed.
(6) "Inspection fee." The monthly fee a licensee is required by this
chapter to pay, the amount of which is determined by a percentage of the gross
sales of a licensee.
(7) "License." A license issued under the provisions of this chapter for
the purpose of authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of selling
alcoholic beverages at retail in the city.
(8) "License fee." The annual fee a licensee is required by this chapter
to pay at or prior to the time of the issuance of a license.
(9) "Licensee." The holder of a license.
(10) "Liquor store." The building or the part of a building where a
licensee conducts any of the business authorized by the license held by such
licensee.
(11) "Manufacture." Distilling, rectifying and operating a winery.
(12) "Manufacturer." A distiller, vintner and rectifier.
(13) "Retail sale" or "sale at retail." A sale to a consumer or to any
person for any purpose other than for resale.
(14) "State alcoholic beverage commission." The Tennessee Alcoholic
Beverage Commission, provision for which is made in the state statutes,
including the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-1-101 through
57-1-209.
(15) "State liquor retailer's license." A license issued under the state
statutes (including the provisions contained in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§§ 57-3-101 through 57-3-412) for the purpose of authorizing the holder thereof
to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail.
(16) "State rules and regulations." All applicable rules and regulations
of the state applicable to alcoholic beverages, as now in effect or as they may
hereafter be changed, including without limitation the local option liquor rules
and regulations of the Tennessee alcoholic beverage commission.
(17) "State statutes." The statutes of the state now in effect or as they
may hereafter be changed.
(18) "Wholesale sale" or "sale at wholesale." A sale to any person for
purposes of resale.
(19) "Wholesaler." Any person who sells at wholesale any beverage for
the sale of which a license is required under the provisions of Tennessee Code
Annotated, §57-3-101 through 57-3-412.1
(20) "Wine." This definition shall be the same as provided in Tennessee
Code Annotated, §57-3-101, as the same may be amended. (1985 Code, § 3-65,
as amended by Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
1State law reference
Definitions: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-101.
8-34
8-302. Selling, storing, transporting, manufacturing; generally.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling, storing, transporting or distributing, or to purchase or possess, alcoholic
beverages within the corporate limits of this city except as provided by
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, and by rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder and as provided under this chapter.
(2) The manufacture of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within the
corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code, § 3-66, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15,
March 2016)
8-303. Wholesale business generally. No person shall engage in the
business of selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale within the corporate limits
of the city. (1985 Code, § 3-67)
8-304. Sale at retail. It shall be lawful for a licensee to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail in a liquor store; provided, that all such sales are made in
strict compliance with all federal statutes, all state statutes, all state rules and
regulations and all provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 3-68)
8-305. Licensee responsible for officers and agents. Each licensee
shall be responsible for all acts of such licensee's officers, employees, agents and
representatives, so that any violation of this chapter by any officer, employee,
agent or representative of a licensee shall constitute a violation of this chapter
by such licensee. (1985 Code, § 3-69)
8-306. Violations of federal, state statutes, etc. Any licensee who,
in the operation of such licensee's liquor store, shall violate any federal statute,
any state statute or any state rule or regulation concerning the purchase, sale,
receipt, possession, transportation, distribution or handling of alcoholic
beverages shall be guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter. (1985
Code, § 3-70)
8-307. Location of liquor store. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or maintain a liquor store in the city unless the liquor store is located
in a zone district permitting such business and as recorded on the zoning map
of the city dated December 5, 1963, and subsequent revisions thereof and on file
in the recorder's office. Such liquor store shall not be located within one hundred
feet (100') of any school, child daycare center, park, playground, church or other
bona fide religious establishment. The said one hundred feet (100') shall be
measured from the center of the front door of the licensed premises to the center
of the nearest entrance/exit door of any school building, child day care center or
8-35
church building in a straight line. For playgrounds and parks the one hundred
foot (100') measurement shall be from the center of the front door of the licensed
premises to the nearest point on the property line bounding the playground or
park in a straight line. No liquor store shall be located at any place where
excessive congestion is present or is likely to develop. Off-street parking space
shall be provided as stated in Article V, section 2 of the zoning ordinance of the
city. To assure that these requirements are satisfied, no original or renewal
license and no original or renewal certificate of compliance for an applicant for
a license shall be issued for any location until a majority of the members of the
board of commissioners have approved the proposed location as being suitable
for the location of a liquor store after a consideration of this matter at a meeting
of the board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 3-71, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15,
March 2016)
8-308. Time of operation. No liquor store shall be open and no licensee
shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage on Christmas Day, on
Thanksgiving Day or on any Sunday. On other days, no liquor store shall be
open and no licensee shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage before 8:00
A.M. or after 11:00 P.M. In the event of any emergency, liquor stores shall be
closed upon the order of the city manager or the chief of police.1 (1985 Code,
§ 3-72)
8-309. Records kept by licensee. In addition to any records specified
in the rules and regulations promulgated by the city recorder pursuant to
§ 8-311, each licensee shall keep on file at such licensee's liquor store the
following records:
(1) The original invoices of all alcoholic beverages bought by the
licensee;
(2) The original receipts for any alcoholic beverages returned by such
licensee to any wholesaler;
(3) A current daily record of the gross sales by such licensee, with cash
register tapes for each day's sales; and
(4) An accurate record of all alcoholic beverages lost, damaged, given
away or disposed of other than by sale, and showing for each such transaction
the date thereof, the quantity and brands of alcoholic beverages involved and the
name of the person or persons receiving the same.
1State law reference
Regulation of retail sales: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-406.
8-36
All such records shall be preserved for a period of at least fifteen (15)
months unless the city recorder gives the licensee written permission to dispose
of such records at an earlier time. (1985 Code, § 3-73)
8-310. Inspections--generally. The city manager and the city recorder,
or the authorized representative of either of them, are authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any licensee at any and all reasonable times for the
purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
observed. The city manager, the city recorder, the chief of police and any police
officer of the city are authorized to enter and inspect the premises of a liquor
store at any time the liquor store is open for business. Any refusal to permit the
examination of the books, papers and records of a licensee, or the inspection and
examination of the premises of a liquor store, shall be a violation of this chapter
and shall constitute sufficient reason for the revocation of the license of the
offending licensee, or for the refusal to renew the license of the offending
licensee. (1985 Code, § 3-74)
8-311. Inspections--fees. (1) Amounts--generally. There is hereby levied
on each licensee, including retail food store licensees, pursuant to Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-3-501, as the same may be amended, an inspection fee of
five percent (5%) of the gross purchase price of all alcoholic beverages and wine
acquired by the licensee for sale from any wholesaler or any other source.
Collection of such inspection fee shall be made by the wholesaler or other source
vending to the licensee at the time the sale is made to the licensee or at the time
the retailer makes payment for the delivery of the alcoholic beverages and/or
wine, and in such case, payment for the delivery of the alcoholic beverages
and/or wine, and in such case, payment of the inspection fee by such collecting
wholesaler or other source shall be made to the city recorder on or before the
twentieth day of each calendar month for all collections in the preceding
calendar month. Nothing herein shall relieve the licensee of the obligation of the
payment of the inspection fee, and it shall be the licensee's duty to see that the
payment of the inspection fee is made to the city recorder on or before the
twentieth day of each calendar month for the preceding month. There is also
imposed on a manufacturer of high alcohol content beer with an on-premises
retail license a fifteen percent (15%) inspection fee to inspect the retail store in
which such products are sold by the manufacturer, pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-3-501, as the same may be amended. This inspection fee is
imposed on the wholesale price of the high alcohol content beer supplied
pursuant to § 57-3-204(e)(7)(B) by a wholesaler for those products manufactured
and sold by the manufacturer at its retail store as authorized pursuant to §
57-3-204(e)(7).
8-37
(2) Amounts--private clubs. An annual liquor inspection fee of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid to the city by the operators of private
clubs.
(3) Reports. The city recorder shall prepare and make available to
each wholesaler or other source vending alcoholic beverages to licensees
sufficient forms for the monthly report of inspection fees payable by each
licensee making purchases from such wholesaler or other source; the city
recorder is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to
facilitate the reporting and collection of inspection fees and to specify the records
of such sales and fees to be kept by each wholesaler or other vending source.
(4) Failure to pay fees. The failure to pay the inspection fees and to
make the required reports accurately and within the time prescribed in this
chapter shall, at the sole discretion of the city manager, be cause for the
suspension of the offending licensee's license for as much as thirty (30) days, and
at the sole discretion of the board of commissioners, be cause for the revocation
of such license; and such action may be taken by giving written notice thereof
to the licensee, no hearing with respect to such an offense being required.
(5) Use of funds. All funds derived from the inspection fees imposed
herein shall be used to defray expenses in connection with the enforcement of
this chapter, including particularly the payment of the compensation of officers,
employees or other representatives of the city in investigating and inspecting
licensees and applicants, and in seeing that all provisions of this chapter are
observed; and the board of commissioners finds and declares that the amount
of these inspection fees is reasonable and that the funds expected to be derived
from these inspection fees will be reasonably required for such purposes.1 (1985
Code, § 3-75, as amended by Ord. #4596-15, March 2016)
8-312. Selling or furnishing to minors, etc. It shall be unlawful for
any licensee to sell, furnish or give away any alcoholic beverage to a minor, or
to a person visibly intoxicated or to any habitual drunkard or person of known
intemperate habits. It shall be unlawful for any such person to enter or remain
in a liquor store or to loiter in the immediate vicinity of a liquor store. It shall
be unlawful for a licensee to allow any such person to enter or remain in such
licensee's liquor store or any part of the licensee's premises adjacent to such
licensee's liquor store. It shall be unlawful for any such person to buy or receive
any alcoholic beverage from any licensee or from any other person. It shall be
unlawful for a minor to misrepresent his age in an attempt to gain admission to
1State law reference
Municipal inspection fees: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-501,
et seq.
8-38
a liquor store or in an attempt to buy any alcoholic beverage from a licensee.
(1985 Code, § 3-76)
8-313. Consumption on premises of liquor store. Except as
permitted by Tennessee law, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or
furnish any alcoholic beverage, wine, beer, or high alcohol content beer for
consumption in such licensee's liquor store or on the premises used by the
licensee in connection therewith. Except as permitted by Tennessee law, it shall
be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, beer, or
high alcohol content beer in a liquor store or in the immediate vicinity of a liquor
store. Except as permitted by Tennessee law, it shall be unlawful for any
licensee to allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, beer, or
high alcohol content beer in such licensee's liquor store or on the premises used
by the licensee in connection therewith. (1985 Code, § 3-77, as replaced by Ord.
#4596-15, March 2016)
8-314. Maximum number of licenses. No more than one (1) license
shall be issued and outstanding for each five thousand five hundred (5,500)
persons, or any fraction thereof, residing in the city according to the official
census for the city as certified by the State of Tennessee Department of
Economic and Community Development or any successor Tennessee department
certifying the city's population. (1985 Code, § 3-89, as replaced by Ord. #4480-13,
March 2013)
8-315. License--qualifications of applicant. To be eligible to apply
for or to receive a license, an applicant must satisfy all of the requirements of
the state statutes and of the state rules and regulations for a holder of a state
liquor retailer's license. (1985 Code, § 3-90, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15,
March 2016)
8-316. State privilege tax. Before any person shall engage in the sale
of alcoholic beverages, a privilege tax shall be paid as required by state laws and
regulations. (1985 Code, § 3-91)
8-317. License--issuance; term; renewal. Each license shall expire
on December thirty-first of each year. A license shall be subject to renewal each
year by compliance with all applicable state statutes, all applicable state rules
and regulations and the provisions of this chapter. The city recorder shall not
be authorized to issue any license until the applicant has qualified as a liquor
retailer under the state statutes and has exhibited to the city recorder the state
liquor retailer's license issued to the applicant by the Tennessee alcoholic
beverage commission. The license issued by the city recorder shall be of no
8-39
effect after the expiration of the period for which issued or at any time while the
license is suspended or revoked. (1985 Code, § 3-92)
8-318. License--display. The licensee shall display and post, and keep
displayed and posted, his license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's liquor
store at all times when any activity or business authorized thereunder is being
done by the licensee. (1985 Code, § 3-93)
8-319. Restrictions upon licensees and employees. (1) Applicant
to pay fee. The license fee for every license hereunder shall be payable by the
person making application for such license and to whom it is issued, and no
other person shall pay for any license issued under this chapter.
(2) Public officers and employees. No retailer's license shall be issued
to a person who is a holder of a public office, either appointive or elective, or who
is a public employee, either national, state, city or county. It shall be unlawful
for any such person to have any interest in such retail business, directly or
indirectly, either proprietary or by means of any loan, mortgage or lien, or to
participate in the profits of any such business.
(3) Felons--retailers. No retailer shall be a person who has been
convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years prior to the
time he or the legal entity with which he is connected shall receive a license;
provided, that this provision shall not apply to any person who has been so
convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been restored or judgment of
infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction; and in the case
of any such conviction occurring after a license has been issued and received, the
license shall immediately be revoked, if such convicted felon is an individual
licensee, and if not, the partnership, corporation or association with which he
is connected shall immediately discharge him.
(4) Felons--employees. No retailer shall employ in the storage, sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages, any person who, within ten (10) years prior
to the date of his employment, shall have been convicted of a felony involving
moral turpitude, and in case an employee should be convicted he shall
immediately be discharged; provided, that this provision shall not apply to any
person who has been so convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been
restored or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(5) Liquor offenses. No license shall under any condition be issued to
any person who within ten (10) years preceding application for such license or
permit shall have been convicted of any offense under the laws of the state or of
any other state or of the United States prohibiting or regulating the sale,
possession, transportation, storing, manufacturing or otherwise handling
intoxicating liquors or who has, during such period, been engaged in business
8-40
alone or with others, in violation of any of such laws or rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, or as they existed or may exist thereafter.
(6) Wholesalers. No manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler shall have
any interest in the licensee's rental, occupancy or revenues.
(7) Disclosure of interest. It shall be unlawful for any person to have
ownership in or participate, either directly or indirectly, in the profits of any
retail business licensed, unless his interest in such business and the nature,
extent and character thereof shall appear on the application; or if the interest
is acquired after the issuance of a license, unless it shall be fully disclosed to the
city manager and approved by him. Where such interest is owned by such
person on or before the application for any license, the burden shall be upon
such person to see that this section is fully complied with, whether he, himself,
signs or prepares the application or whether the same is prepared by another;
or if such interest is acquired after the issuance of the license, the burden of
such disclosure of the acquisition of such interest shall be upon the seller and
the purchaser.
(8) Citizenship. No person shall be employed in the sale of alcoholic
beverages except a citizen of the United States.
(9) Minors. No retailer or any employee thereof engaged in the sale
of alcoholic beverages shall be a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, and
it shall be unlawful for any retailer to employ any person under eighteen (18)
years of age for the physical storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages,
or to permit any such person under such age in his place of business to engage
in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
(10) Advertising. No advertising by a licensee on signs, displays,
posters or designs intended to advertise any alcoholic beverage, is permitted
within the corporate limits of the city, except a sign approved by the city
manager, in letters not larger than eight (8) inches in height, designating the
premises as " package store." Only one (1) such sign, and no other, shall
be permitted and no sign shall extend or project from the building. The lettering
on the approved sign shall be in gold or silver leaf, white enamel or plastic or
similar material, and the same shall not be artificially illuminated, other than
by exterior flood or spot lights.
(11) Off-premises business. All retail sales shall be confined to the
premises of the licensee. No curb service is permitted, nor shall there be
permitted drive-in windows. No licensee shall employ any canvasser, agent,
solicitor or other representative for the purpose of receiving an order from a
consumer for any alcoholic beverages at the residence or place of business of
such consumer, nor shall any such licensee receive or accept any such order
which shall have been solicited or received at the residence or place of business
of such consumer. This paragraph shall not be construed so as to prohibit the
8-41
solicitation by a state licensed wholesaler of any order from any licensed retailer
at the licensed premises.
(12) Location; entrance. No liquor store shall be located in the city on
any premises above the ground floor. Each such store shall have only one (1)
main entrance for use by the public as a means of ingress and egress for the
purpose of purchasing alcoholic beverages at retail; provided, that any liquor
store adjoining the lobby of a hotel or motel may maintain an additional
entrance into such lobby so long as such lobby is open to the public.1 (1985 Code,
§ 3-94)
8-320. License--transfer. A licensee shall not sell, assign or transfer
his license or any interest therein to any other person. No license shall be
transferred from one (1) location to another location without the prior written
approval of the board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 3-95)
8-321. Nature of license; suspension or revocation. The issuance
of a license does not vest a property right in the licensee but is a privilege
subject to revocation or suspension. Any license shall be subject to suspension
or revocation by the board of commissioners for any violation of this chapter by
the licensee or by any person for whose acts the licensee is responsible, but the
licensee shall be given reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before
the board of commissioners suspends or revokes a license for any violation other
than one established by final judgment in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
If the licensee is convicted of a violation of this chapter by a final judgment in
any court and the operation of the judgment is not suspended by an appeal, on
written notice to the licensee, the city manager may suspend the license for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days and the board of commissioners may revoke
the license on the basis of such conviction. Notwithstanding any provision
contained in this section, a license shall be subject to revocation or suspension
without a hearing whenever such action is expressly authorized by other
provisions of this chapter stating the effect of specified violations. (1985 Code,
§ 3-96)
1State law references
Employment of eighteen-year-olds: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 1-3-113.
Licensee to display sign prohibiting weapons: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-3-204.
"Minor" defined: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 1-3-105.
8-42
8-322. Certificate of compliance--application--filing; contents.
(1) Each applicant for a certificate of compliance shall file with the city
manager a completed form of application, on a form to be provided by the city
manager, and which shall contain all of the following information:
(a) The name and street address of each person to have any
interest, direct or indirect, in the license as owner, partner or stockholder
or otherwise;
(b) The name of the liquor store to be operated under the
license;
(c) The address of the liquor store to be operated under the
license and the applicable zoning designation; and
(d) The agreement of each applicant to comply with the state,
federal and city laws and ordinances and with the rules and regulations
of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission with reference to the
sale of alcoholic beverages, and the agreement of each applicant as to the
validity of and the reasonableness of the regulations, inspection fees and
taxes provided in this chapter with reference to the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(2) The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of each
questionnaire form and other material to be filed by the applicant with the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission in connection with this same
application, and shall also be accompanied by five (5) copies of a scale plan
drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), giving the
following information:
(a) The shape, size and location of the lot upon which the liquor
store is to be operated under the license;
(b) The shape, size, height and location of all buildings, whether
they are to be erected, altered, moved or existing, upon the lot;
(c) The off-street parking space and the off-street loading and
unloading space to be provided including the vehicular access to be
provided from these areas to a public street; and
(d) The identification of every parcel of land within one hundred
feet (100') of the lot upon which the liquor store is to be operated
indicating ownership thereof and the locations of any structures situated
thereon, and the use being made of every such parcel. The application
form shall be signed and verified by each person to have any interest in
the license either as owner, partner or stockholder or otherwise. If at any
time the applicable state statutes should be changed so as to dispense
with the requirement of a certificate of compliance, no original or renewal
license shall be issued until an application in the same form has been
filed with the city recorder. (1985 Code, § 3-108, as replaced by Ord.
#4596-15, March 2016)
8-43
8-323. Certificate of compliance--misrepresentation; concealment
of fact. If any applicant misrepresents or conceals any material fact in any
application form filed for the purpose of complying with the requirements
contained in § 8-322, such applicant shall be deemed to have violated the
provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 3-109, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15,
March 2016)
8-324. Certificate of good moral character--consideration. In
making the initial certification of good moral character for the first six (6)
persons, firms or corporations, the board of commissioners will consider all
applications filed before a closing date to be fixed by it and select from such
applications the persons by it deemed to have the qualifications required by law
and the most suitable circumstances for the lawful conduct of the business for
which they seek licenses, without regard to the order or time in which
applications are filed. (1985 Code, § 3-110)
8-325. Certificate of compliance--restriction upon issuance.
(1) The mayor and the board of commissioners are authorized to refuse
to consider the issuance of a certificate of compliance whenever the number of
such previously issued and outstanding certificates of compliance, when added
to the number of outstanding licenses, equals or exceeds the number of licenses
authorized by this chapter.
(2) No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless a license issued
on the basis thereof can be exercised without violating any provision of this
chapter.
(3) No member of the board of commissioners shall sign any certificate
of compliance for any applicant until:
(a) Such applicant's application has been filed with the city
recorder;
(b) The location stated in the certificate has been approved by
the board of commissioners as a suitable location for the operation of a
liquor store; and
(c) The application has been considered at a meeting of the
board of commissioners and approved by the vote of at least three (3)
members thereof. (1985 Code, § 3-111, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15,
March 2016)
8-44
CHAPTER 4
PRIVILEGE TAX FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES
SECTION
8-401. Definition.
8-402. Consumption on premises; privilege taxes levied.
8-401. Definition. The term "alcoholic beverages," for the purpose of
this chapter, shall mean whiskey, wine, rum, gin and all other alcoholic
beverages, as defined by the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-101. (1985 Code, § 3-128)
8-402. Consumption on premises; privilege taxes levied. (1) It is
hereby declared that every person is exercising a taxable privilege who engages
in the business of selling at retail in this city alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. For the exercise of such privilege, the following
taxes are levied for city purposes to be paid annually, to wit:
(a) Private club . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 300.00
(b) Hotel and motel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,000.00
(c) Restaurant, according to seating capacity, on
licensed premises:
75 to 125 seats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 600.00
126 to 175 seats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 750.00
176 to 225 seats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 800.00
226 to 275 seats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 900.00
276 seats and over . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,000.00
(2) The privilege tax levied by this section shall be remitted annually
to the city treasurer, no later than December thirty-first of each year.1 (1985
Code, § 3-129)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-301.
9-1
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
2. AMUSEMENTS.
3. POOLROOMS.
4. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.
5. MASSAGE PARLORS.
6. BARBERS.
7. JEWELRY AUCTIONS.
8. PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS.
9. JUNK DEALERS, JUNKYARDS.
10. FORTUNETELLERS.
11. COAL AND COKE.
12. FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
13. RESTAURANTS.
14. MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS.
15. SLAUGHTERHOUSES.
16. VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
17. DRIVER'S PERMIT.
18. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
19. SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
20. GARAGE SALES.
21. AMBULANCE SERVICES.
22. CABLE TELEVISION.
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION
9-101. Applicability of state law.
9-102. Sundays.
9-101. Applicability of state law. For the use and benefit of the city,
the taxes provided for in Chapter 387 of the Public Acts of Tennessee of 1971,
known as the “Business Tax Act,” are hereby enacted, ordained, imposed, levied
and assessed and shall be paid, collected and enforced on the businesses,
business activities, vocations and occupations carried on in the city at the
maximum rates and in the manner prescribed by such act. (1985 Code, § 14-1)
9-2
9-102. Sundays. Except where prohibited by law or this code, it shall
be lawful to carry on any business, trade, vocation, occupation, profession or
calling within the city on the first day of the week as may be lawfully done on
any other day of the week, subject, however, to all presently applicable
restrictions on the hours of intoxicating liquors and/or intoxicating drinks as
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-2-101 and beer and alcoholic
beverages containing alcoholic content of five (5) percent or less as defined in
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-2-101 and 57-3-101.1 (1985 Code, § 14-2)
1Municipal code reference
Alcoholic beverages and beer: title 8.
9-3
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION
9-201. Shooting galleries.
9-202. X-rated films.
9-201. Shooting galleries. (1) All shooting galleries operated within
the city shall have a steel back stop of at least three-sixteenths of an inch in
thickness, and shall have wings extending forward from the target board at
least six (6) feet, which wings shall be made of three-sixteenths of an inch sheet
steel, or one-inch solid boards. The top shall be covered with one-inch solid
board.
(2) The counter shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet from the back
stop or target board.
(3) Rifles of greater than twenty-two (22) caliber shall not be used in
any shooting gallery operated within the city, and such rifles shall be loaded
only with twenty-two-caliber short cartridges.
(4) All shooting galleries operated within the city shall be housed in
brick buildings, which buildings shall have solid brick walls of not less than
eight (8) inches in thickness, the rear wall of which buildings shall have solid
brick walls, without openings for doors or windows. If the second floor of any
building in which a shooting gallery is operated within the city is occupied, the
back stop or target board shall be covered with sheet steel, which shall be not
less than three-sixteenths of an inch thick.
(5) No shooting gallery shall be operated within the city by any person
under twenty-one (21) years of age. (1985 Code, § 14-19)
9-202. X-Rated films. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit for
public consumption, whether or not such exhibition is for compensation, any
motion picture, film, movie or videotape which is rated “X” by a recognized
movie rating authority or which depicts sexual conduct as defined in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 39-6-1101 unless such exhibition is within a theater
auditorium or other enclosed area which effectively removes such exhibition
from the view of members of the public who are not voluntarily engaged in
viewing such motion picture, film, movie or videotape. (1985 Code, § 14-20)
9-4
CHAPTER 3
POOLROOMS
SECTION
9-301. Permitting minors to play.
9-302. Persons under eleven years of age.
9-303. Family recreation businesses.
9-301. Permitting minors to play. It shall be unlawful for any
proprietor, owner or manager of any bagatelle, poolroom, or billiard room within
the city to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to play
bagatelle, pool, billiards or any other game played on pool tables, unless such
proprietor, owner or manager shall have in his possession and on file, for
inspection by the law enforcement officers, a written permit for such minor to
play at such game, signed by the parent or guardian of such minor, and the
signature of such parent or guardian witnessed in writing, or otherwise certified
to be genuine by the recorder. (1985 Code, § 14-32)
9-302. Persons under eleven years of age. It shall be unlawful for
any person under the age of eleven (11) years to remain or loiter in any room or
place referred to in § 9-301 without the written permit required in such section.
(1985 Code, § 14-33)
9-303. Family recreation businesses. Businesses engaged exclusively
in family recreation which neither sell nor permit alcoholic beverages on the
premises and which have an adult supervisor or manager present at all times
the business is open and which are designed in such a way so as to permit
visibility from the exterior along the main entrance of said establishment are
exempt from this chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-34)
9-5
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION
9-401. Privilege declared.
9-402. Applicability to farmers, etc.
9-403. Peddling within fire district.
9-401. Privilege declared. It shall be a privilege for any person to go
upon, travel upon or otherwise use any of the public sidewalks, streets, roads,
alleys or other public property of the city, for the purpose of , and while engaged
in the business of, soliciting orders for merchandise, printed matter, pictures or
other property, or making contracts for the future delivery of same in sale to the
ultimate purchaser, user or consumer of such merchandise, printed matter or
other property; provided, however that this chapter shall not apply to regularly
licensed insurance agents or hucksters or peddlers paying privilege taxes as
otherwise provided by law, nor to traveling salesmen of wholesalers and jobbers
selling merchandise to retail merchants or dealers or other wholesalers or
jobbers, nor to representatives of retail merchants of the city nor to persons
engaged in selling or soliciting orders for Bibles, religious songbooks or religious
papers, magazines, periodicals or other religious literature of whatsoever kind;
provided further, that such persons shall sell only religious books or periodicals.
(1985 Code, § 14-51)
9-402. Applicability to farmers, etc. Section 9-401 shall not apply to
farmers or truck growers taking orders for future delivery of products of farms,
gardens or orchards, grown or raised by such farmers or truck growers; neither
shall the provisions of such sections apply to any person who manufactures,
makes, grows, raises or produces the article, merchandise or product he offers
for sale; provided, however, that such person shall personally manufacture,
make, grow, raise or produce by hand labor the article or merchandise he offers
for sale. (1985 Code, § 14-52)
9-403. Peddling within fire district. No person shall peddle, sell or
offer for sale, at retail, any fruits, vegetables, melons, produce, wood, coal or
anything from trucks, wagons, carts or other vehicles, upon the sidewalks,
streets, alleys, parkways, or public property of the city (except as allowed by
§ 16-105(2) of this code or at a marketplace or farmers' market designated or
allowed as such on public property of the city), within the fire limits or fire
district of the city. (1985 Code, § 14-53, as replaced by Ord. #4553-14, Aug. 2014)
9-6
CHAPTER 5
MASSAGE PARLORS1
SECTION
9-501. Definitions.
9-502. Penalty.
9-503. Right of entry for inspection.
9-504. Register of patrons.
9-505. Standards for premises.
9-506. Unlawful acts.
9-507. When massages may not be administered.
9-508. Outcall massages.
9-509. Permits--required.
9-510. Massage parlor permit--application procedure.
9-511. Permits--suspension.
9-512. Individual massager permits.
9-513. Permits--display.
9-514. Permits--transfer.
9-515. Permits--renewal.
9-516. Permits--revocation.
9-501. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires:
(1) “Employee” means any and all persons, other than massagers, who
render any service to patrons of massage parlors.
(2) “Massage” means the administration by any person of any method
of exerting or applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human
body, and/or the rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding, tapping or otherwise
manipulating a part or the whole of the human body or the muscles or joints
thereof, by any physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
(3) “Massage parlor” means any establishment having a fixed place of
business where the administering of massages or the arranging for the
administering of massages is a business purpose or activity that is conducted on
or from the premises. This definition shall not be construed to include a
hospital, nursing home, medical clinic or the office of a duly licensed physician,
surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor or osteopath, this being expressly
excluded from said definition.
1State law reference
Massage Licensure Act of 1995: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 63-18-201, et seq.
9-7
(4) “Massager” means any person who administers a massage to
another person at a massage parlor.
(5) "Outcall massage" means massage performed only by a licensed
massager when performing massages at a location other than the address of a
licensed massage parlor.
(6) “Permittee” means the individual, partnership, association, joint
stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character, that is the legal holder of a massage parlor permit as provided by this
chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-70, as amended by Ord. #2604, Dec. 1986)
9-502. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
violation, and each day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation. (1985 Code, § 14-71)
9-503. Right of entry for inspection. The chief of police or his duly
authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
any premises in the city for which a massage permit has been issued pursuant
to this chapter during business hours to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1985 Code, § 14-72)
9-504. Register of patrons. Every permittee shall maintain a daily
register, showing the names and addresses of all patrons, along with the name
of the massagers assigned and the fee charged. The daily register shall be kept
in a permanent, well bound book; it shall be kept on file for at least one (1) year.
(1985 Code, § 14-73)
9-505. Standards for premises. No massage parlor shall be operated,
established or maintained in the city that does not comply with the following
minimum standards:
(1) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
(2) Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly
covered containers or cabinets, which containers shall be kept separate from the
clean storage areas.
(3) Clean linens and towels shall be provided for each massage patron.
No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.
9-8
(4) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which can be readily disinfected.
(5) Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
(6) Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be
provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. Separate bathing,
dressing, locker, toilet and massage room facilities shall be provided for male
and female patrons.
(7) All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms
and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or
steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be
throughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers
shall be throughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors,
it shall be kept dry.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services.
(9) Eating in the massage areas shall not be permitted.
(10) Animals, except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work areas. (1985 Code, § 14-74)
9-506. Unlawful acts. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person in a
massage parlor to place his or her hand upon or to touch with any part of his or
her body, or to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital part of
any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breast of a female.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose
his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person.
It shall also be unlawful for any person in the massage parlor to expose the
sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, of any other person.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person while in the presence of any
other person in a massage parlor to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering
the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing
a massage parlor knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage
parlor any agent, employee or any other person under his control or supervision
to perform any act prohibited in this chapter.
(5) Massagers issued permits under this chapter may not administer
massages at any places other that at a massage parlor which has also been
issued a permit hereunder, except when performing outcall massages in strict
compliance with § 9-508.
9-9
(6) Every person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor
shall post a copy of this chapter in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor so
that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any massage parlor to remain open or
provide services at any time between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 10:00 A.M. or
at any time on Sundays.
(8) The administering of massages shall not be conducted in private
rooms or areas but shall be conducted in separate general areas for males and
females.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any establishment subject to licensing
under this chapter to advertise on the premises or near the premises except that
each establishment may maintain two (2) signs which shall not be larger than
two (2) feet by three (3) feet nor shall the same be illuminated in any manner.
(1985 Code, § 14-75, as amended by Ord. #2604, Dec. 1986)
9-507. When massages may not be administered. No massager shall
administer a massage at a massage parlor if the massager knows or should
know that he or she is not free of any contagious or communicable disease; nor
shall a massager administer a massage at a massage parlor to any patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption,
unless the patron presents a statement from a physician licensed by the state
certifying that the patron may be safely massaged and prescribing the
conditions therefor. Each massager shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before and after the administration
of each massage. (1985 Code, § 14-76)
9-508. Outcall massages. Outcall massages shall be allowed by any
licensed massager, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) Outcall massages shall be performed only by licensed massagers;
(2) The police department shall be given notice of at least twenty-four
(24) hours in advance of the scheduled outcall massage;
(3) Outcall massages shall be recorded in a daily register as described
elsewhere in these sections;
(4) All other requirements of this chapter must be complied with,
except that the premises where an outcall massage is being performed shall not
be required to maintain equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable
instruments or materials used in administering such massages. (Ord. #2604,
Dec. 1986)
9-509. Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor in the city without a valid
permit issued pursuant to this chapter; it shall be unlawful for any person to
perform the services of a massager at a massage parlor in the city without a
valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-88)
9-10
9-510. Massage parlor permit-application procedure.
(1) Application form; fee. Any person desiring a massage parlor permit
to establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor in the city shall make
application to the city recorder on an application form provided by the city,
which application form shall contain the name and address of the place where
the applicant proposes to operate, maintain or establish a massage parlor in the
city. Each massage parlor permit application shall be accompanied by an
investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(2) False statements on application. The application shall state
thereon that “It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement on this
application. The making of a false statement shall constitute grounds for denial
of an application or revocation of a permit.”
(3) Contents of application. The application shall include a business,
occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application. It shall also include the
detailed statement of any and all convictions, pleas of nolo contendere,
forfeitures, adverse adjudications or proceedings suffered by the applicant (if the
applicant is a partnership or association, any partner or member thereof; or if
the applicant is a corporation, any officer, director or manager thereof, or any
shareholder thereof) on any charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering,
obscenity, lewdness, keeping and maintaining a disorderly house, frequenting
a disorderly house, disorderly conduct, adamitism, anilingus, cunnilingus,
coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, frottage, masturbation, sodomy or urolagnia
as proscribed by § 11-301 of this code, or any provision of any similar law or
ordinance in any other jurisdiction, or any law or ordinance which is a felony or
involves moral turpitude.
(4) Fingerprinting; photographs. The recorder shall arrange to have
the fingerprints of each applicant taken by the police department, which
fingerprints shall constitute a part of the application. There shall be filed with
the application at least two (2) portrait photographs of the applicant (or the
partners, members, managing officers or representatives otherwise of the
applicant) taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of
application, which photographs shall be not less than two (2) inches by two (2)
inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishable manner.
(5) Investigation. Upon receipt of the application and investigation
fee, the chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the
applicant, which shall include:
(a) The court records of the applicant;
(b) Communication with the employers, business associates or
fellow employees of the applicant during five (5) years next preceding the
investigation;
(c) Determination of whether the premises proposed to be
utilized by the applicant comply with the provisions of this chapter and
9-11
all zoning ordinances and building, fire, plumbing and electrical codes;
and
(d) Any and all other matters which the chief of police deems to
be material to a reasonable consideration of the applicant.
(6) Filing of investigative report. The chief of police shall file his
investigative report, with all supporting material and documentation, with the
recorder not later than twenty-one (21) days following the date of application;
however, the chief of police may file an amended report at any time additional
material or information concerning the applicant comes to his attention.
(7) Review of report; scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of the report
of the chief of police, the recorder and the city manager shall review and docket
the application on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the board of
commissioners, at which time a hearing shall be conducted on the application.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing before the board shall be posted in
a conspicuous place upon the premises specified in the application at least five
(5) days prior thereto, and the applicant shall maintain said notice in readable
condition, on open, public display until after the hearing. The board, after a
consideration of the application and investigative report, after an open
examination of the applicant, after opportunity has been given for introduction
of additional information by any interested person, and after a full and complete
consideration of all relevant facts and circumstances, shall authorize the
issuance of a massage parlor permit at the premises designated in the
application within one (1) week following the hearing, unless it finds that the
application is deficient; the application contains false information; the applicant
has not complied with all applicable laws or ordinances; the applicant has been
convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on a charge of
prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, keeping and
maintaining a disorderly house, frequenting a disorderly house, disorderly
conduct, adamitism, anilingus, bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellation,
flagellation, frottage, masturbation, sodomy or urolagnia as proscribed by
§ 11-301 of this code; or any provision of any similar law or ordinance in any
jurisdiction, or any law or ordinance which is a felony or involves moral
turptitude.
(8) Additional requirements. The board of commissioners shall not
authorize the issuance of a permit to an applicant unless the proposed premises
for the establishment, maintenance or operation of a massage parlor are within
a proper zone according to the zoning ordinance of the city. No person shall
operate or receive a permit to operate a massage parlor unless such person or
applicant or the manager of said applicant shall meet the same qualifications
as are required of a massager and in addition thereto shall have acquired an
advanced course of training in the art or science of massaging from an
accredited school of instruction as further specified in § 9-511. (1985 Code, § 14-
89)
9-12
9-511. Permit- suspension. If the chief of police finds that the massage
parlor for which the massage parlor permit was issued does not conform to this
chapter or the permittee has refused the chief of police or his duly authorized
representative the right to enter the premises to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, the chief of police may temporarily suspend the massage parlor permit,
pending a hearing before the board of commissioners. A copy of the temporary
suspension shall be sent to the city manager for docketing on the next regular
agenda of the board, and sent addressed to the permittee at his place of business
by certified mail, which shall set forth the reason for said suspension. No
person shall operate a massage parlor when subject to an order of suspension.
The board of commissioners may, after an open hearing, reinstate a suspended
massage parlor permit when no fact or condition exists which would otherwise
warrant the refusal to grant a massage parlor permit under the terms of this
chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-90)
9-512. Individual massager permits. (1) Application form; fee. Any
person desiring a permit to act as a massager in a massage parlor in the city
shall make application to the recorder on an application form provided by the
city, which application form shall contain spaces for the applicant’s name,
address, telephone number, all previous addresses within the year immediately
preceding the date of application, date of birth, place of birth, height, weight,
massage training and current employment. Each massager permit application
shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(2) False statements on application; conviction, etc; record The
application shall state thereon that “It is unlawful for any person to make a
false statement on this application. The making of a false statement shall
constitute grounds for denial of an application or revocation of a permit.” The
application shall also include a detailed statement of any and all convictions,
pleas of nolo contendere or forfeitures suffered by the applicant on any charge
of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, keeping and
maintaining a disorderly house, frequenting a disorderly house, disorderly
conduct, adamitism, anilingus, bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellatio,
flagellation, frottage, masturbation, sodomy or urolagnia as proscribed by
§ 11-301 of this code, or any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any
similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction, or any law or ordinance which
is a felony or involves moral turptitude.
(3) Fingerprinting. The chief of police shall arrange to have the
fingerprints of each applicant taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part
of the application.
(4) Physician’s certification. Every person who desires to act as a
massager at a massage parlor in Johnson City shall attach to his or her
application a certification from a physician currently licensed by the state that
the applicant has submitted to a physical examination for contagious and
communicable diseases, and that the applicant is either free from any
9-13
contagious or communicable diseases or is incapable of communicating any such
diseases to others. The physical examination shall include a recognized blood
test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, and a chest X-ray which shall be made
and interpreted by a trained radiologist.
(5) Investigation. Upon receipt of the application and investigation
fee, the recorder shall refer the same to the chief of police, who shall make or
cause to be made an investigation of the applicant, which shall include:
(a) The criminal record of the applicant;
(b) Communication with the employers, business associates,
fellow employees of the applicant during the five (5) years next preceding
the investigation;
(c) Referral of the medical examination submitted with the
application to the city physician for review and comment; and
(d) Any and all other matters which the chief of police deems to
be material to a reasonable consideration of the applicant.
(6) Filing of investigative report. The chief of police shall file his
investigative report, with all supporting material and documentation, with the
recorder not later than twenty-one (21) days following the date of application;
however, the chief of police may file an amended report at any time additional
material or information concerning the applicant comes to his attention.
(7) Review of report; scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of the report
of the chief of police, the recorder and the city manager, if the report of the
applicant shall be complete, shall docket the application on the agenda of the
next regular meeting of the board of commissioners, which, after a consideration
of the application and investigative report, after an open examination of the
applicant and applicant’s supporting evidence or witnesses, and after
opportunity has been given for the introduction of additional information by any
interested person, and following a full and complete consideration of all relevant
facts and circumstances, shall authorize the issuance of a massager’s permit
within one (1) week following the hearing, unless it finds that the application is
deficient; that the application contains false or misleading information; that the
applicant has been convicted, has pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a
forfeiture on a charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity,
lewdness, adamitism, anilingus, bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellatio,
flagellation, frottage, masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or urolagnia as
proscribed by § 11-301 of this code, or any provision of this chapter, or any
provisions of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction.
(8) Follow-up testing. All massagers who possess valid permits for
administering massages in a massage parlor in the city shall undergo physical
examinations, including the aforementioned tests for contagious and
communicable diseases, at least once every six (6) months following the issuance
of their massager’s permits. When the chief of police, the city recorder, the city
manager or his duly authorized representative has cause to believe that the
9-14
massager is capable of communicating any contagious diseases to others, he may
at any time require an immediate physical examination of any such person.
(9) Course of study. No person shall give or offer to give or hold
oneself out to offer a massage or be licensed as a massager within the meaning
of this chapter, or employ or engage as an independent contractor any massager
who gives or offers to give or holds himself or herself out to offer a massage
unless such person shall have satisfactorily completed a course or courses of
study in body massage in an approved school of instruction or training which is
accredited by, approved by or recognized by the American Massage and Therapy
Association or a similar accrediting association. Said courses shall pertain to
anatomy, physiology, hygiene, first aid, exercise therapy, massage techniques
and related aspects of the art and science of massage or physical therapy. Such
course of instruction or training shall include classroom or clinical training in
therapeutic massage and reflexology techniques, classroom or clinical
instruction or contraindications for massage, and classroom or clinical or
laboratory instruction to develop a knowledge of anatomy and physiology of the
systems of the body with emphasis on the muscular and skeletal systems. Such
training shall pertain to understanding of the benefits of massage, and assist
the student in developing an awareness of massage as a therapeutic process
through a period of one (1) year’s supervised or clinical training in the art and
science of massage and physical therapy. (1985 Code, § 14-91)
9-513. Permit display. (1) Every permittee to whom a massage parlor
permit shall have been granted shall display said permit in a conspicuous place
in the massage parlor or establishment so that it may be readily seen by persons
entering the premises.
(2) Every person to whom a massager’s permit shall have been granted
shall, while in a massage parlor, openly display said permit by pinning or
clasping it to his or her outer garments, so that it may be readily seen by
patrons and other interested persons.
(3) No permit shall be altered or defaced in any manner by any
permittee or massager. (1985 Code, § 14-92)
9-514. Permit transfer. No permit issued under this chapter shall be
transferable by operation of law or otherwise. (1985 Code, § 14-93)
9-515. Permit renewal. Each massage parlor permit shall expire one
(1) year from the date if its issue; and each massager’s permit shall also expire
one (1) year from the date of issue. The application for renewal of either a
massage parlor permit or massager’s permit shall be accompanied by an
investigative fee of ten dollars ($10.00). (1985 Code, § 14-94)
9-516. Permit revocation. (1) Any massage parlor permit or
massager’s permit granted under this chapter shall be revoked by the board of
9-15
commissioners, after notice of hearing, if the permittee or massager has been
convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on any charge of
prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, adamitism, anilingus,
bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, frottage, masturbation,
sexual intercourse, sodomy or urolagnia as proscribed by § 11-301 of this code,
or any provision of this chapter or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in
any other jurisdiction.
(2) The notice required by this section shall be sent by certified mail
addressed to the permittee or massager at this last known address at least five
(5) days prior to the date set for the hearing before the board of commissioners.
(3) If any massager or other employee of any permittee violates any
provisions of this chapter, it shall be presumed that such violation was with the
knowledge and consent of the permittee; if any permittee fails to overcome said
presumption, the massage parlor permit issued to him shall be subject to
permanent revocation in the manner set out in this section. (1985 Code,
§ 14-95)
9-16
CHAPTER 6
BARBERS1
SECTION
9-601. Definitions.
9-602. Inspection.
9-603. Sign required.
9-604. View of interior to be unobstructed.
9-605. Sanitation.
9-606. Hours and days of operation--generally.
9-607. Hours and days of operation--on Sunday.
9-601. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
(1) “Barber.” Any person who engages in any one (1) or any
combination of the following practices, when done for payment, directly or
indirectly, or without payment, for the public generally:
(a) Shaving or trimming the beard;
(b) Cutting or styling the hair;
(c) Giving facial and scalp massages or treatments with oils,
creams, lotions, or other preparations either by hand or mechanical
appliances;
(d) Singeing, curling, shampooing, coloring, bleaching or
straightening the hair or applying hair tonics;
(e) Cutting, fitting, measuring and forming head caps for wigs
or hair pieces; or
(f) Hair weaving, excluding medical or surgical procedures.
(2) “Barbershop.” Any place where the work or business of a barber is
done. (1985 Code, § 14-112)
9-602. Inspection. The health officer shall have the right during
business hours to inspect any barbershop for the purpose of determining
whether or not any violation of this chapter exists. (1985 Code, § 14-113)
1State law reference
Municipal regulation of barbers: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 62-3-131.
9-17
9-603. Sign required. There shall be displayed in front of every
barbershop operated in the city a sign indicating that it is a barbershop. (1985
Code, § 14-114)
9-604. View of interior to be unobstructed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate, maintain or conduct a barbershop or do any barbering
business in any building in which or to which the full view of any part thereof
to the interior is obstructed by the use of blinds, shades, screens, painted or
frosted glass or any other device or means used to, or which will, prevent a free
and unobstructed view of such barbershop and all parts thereof from the
exterior of the same. (1985 Code, § 14-115)
9-605. Sanitation. (1) Infectious, etc., diseases. No barber shall
practice in the city who is infected with the germ of, or suffering from the effects
of, one (1) or more of the following diseases: tuberculosis, influenza, coryza,
gonorrhea, syphilis, cancer, smallpox, chicken pox, measles, whooping cough,
scarlet fever, septic sore throat, eczema, scabies, pediculosis, leprosy,
pemphygus, psoriasis, favus, scrofulosis, lupus, tinea or other diseases capable
of being communicated from person to person.
(2) Cleanliness, ventilation, etc. Every barbershop, its furniture,
equipment, tools, utensils, floors, walls and ceilings shall, at all times, be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, well lighted and well ventilated; hot and cold
running water must be provided in each establishment. The dipping of towels,
mugs, tools or utensils of any kind in hot or cold water tank is prohibited.
Cuspidors shall be cleaned every day and a disinfectant solution left in them at
all times.
(3) Hand washing, etc. Any barber or employee in a barbershop whose
work causes him to touch the skin of a person shall wash his hands with soap
and water before beginning work on any other person.
(4) Receptacles, etc. At least two (2) receptacles must be provided in
each barbershop, in one (1) of which shall be deposited shaving papers, and used
towels in the other. Shaving mugs and brushes shall be thoroughly washed with
hot water, the temperature of which is not less than two hundred (200) degrees
Fahrenheit before each patron is served. A towel used on one (1) patron shall
not be used again on another patron until relaundered.
(5) Head and neck sanitation. The head rest on each chair must be
provided with a clean towel or sheet of clean paper for each patron. A strip of
clean sanitary material must be placed around the patron's neck so that the
chair does not come in contact with the neck.
(6) Bathrooms, razors, utensils, etc. All baths, bathrooms, toilets and
other adjoining rooms in a barbershop shall be kept clean and in a sanitary
condition. Bathtubs and basins shall be thoroughly cleaned after each patron’s
use. Individual soap and clean towels shall be given to each patron. No
brushes, sponges or wash rags shall be left in bathrooms for the use of patrons.
9-18
The use of powder puffs, finger bowls, sponges and styptic pencils is prohibited.
Razors, scissors, tweezers, combs, rubber discs and parts of vibrators and all
other utensils, appliances or anything that comes in contact with the head, face
or neck must be immersed in boiling water or in a disinfectant solution and
placed in a compartment until used again.
(7) Sterilization of instruments, etc. All instruments and articles used
in rendering of any service by any person engaged in the business of barbering
within the city shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized before applying and
using same in the performance of any service to any individual and this shall
include all instruments, towels, combs and brushes and every other article used
in the performing or administering of any service to any individual customer.
(1985 Code, § 14-116)
9-606. Hours and days of operation--generally. It shall be unlawful
for any barbershop or place of barbering business located within the city or for
any person engaged in the practice of barbering to open such barbershop,
barbering business or barbering place of business or to engage in the practice of
or do any barbering work prior to 8:00 A.M., and it shall be unlawful for any
such person engaged in the practice of barbering to remain open for business or
to accept or do any act of service pertaining to any barbering business at such
place after 6:00 P.M. on any day except Saturdays and on days immediately
preceding any national holiday and on such last named days it shall be unlawful
for any barbershop or barbering business engaged in the practice of barbering,
to do any act of service pertaining to such business after 8:00 P.M. (1985 Code,
§ 14-117)
9-607. Hours of operation on Sunday. No work of a barber shall be
carried on on Sunday. (1985 Code, § 14-118)
9-19
CHAPTER 7
JEWELRY AUCTIONS
SECTION
9-701. Applicability.
9-702. Hours.
9-703. Articles tagged or labeled--generally.
9-704. Articles tagged or labeled--delivery to purchaser.
9-705. "Cappers"; "boosters"; false bids.
9-701. Applicability. This chapter shall not apply to judicial sales or
sales by executors and administrators, receivers or assignees in insolvent and
bankrupt estates. (1985 Code, § 14-135)
9-702. Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any auction
sale of diamonds and other precious and semiprecious stones or imitation
thereof, watches, clocks, jewelry, gold, silver or plated ware, chinaware and
other merchandise of like kind, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(1985 Code, § 14-136)
9-703. Articles tagged or labeled--generally. It shall be unlawful for
any person to offer for sale or sell diamonds and other precious and semiprecious
stones, or imitations thereof, watches, clocks, jewelry, gold, silver or plated
ware, chinaware and other merchandise of like kind, unless there is securely
attached to each of such articles a tag or label upon which shall be plainly
written or printed, in English, a true and correct statement of the kind and
quality of the metal of which such article is made or composed and the
percentage or karat of the purity of such metal; and in case such articles are
plated or overlaid, then such tag or label shall contain a true statement of the
kind of material or metal covered; and when precious or semiprecious stones are
offered for sale or sold, such written statement shall set forth the true name,
weight, quality and fineness of such stones, and imitations shall be described as
such; and when watches and clocks are sold, the true names of the
manufacturers shall be stated in writing. No part of the movements or
mechanism shall be substituted or contain false and misleading names or trade
marks, nor shall second or old movements be offered for sale in new cases,
without a true statement to that effect. (1985 Code, § 14-137)
9-704. Articles tagged or labeled-delivery to purchaser. The tags
or labels required by § 9-703 shall remain securely attached to any such article
or merchandise and shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct
description and representation of the article sold. (1985 Code, § 14-138)
9-20
9-705. ”Cappers”, “boosters”; false bids. It shall be unlawful for any
person to act, or to employ another to act, as a by-bidder or what is commonly
known as a “capper” or “booster” at any auction sale under this chapter, or to
make or accept any false or misleading bid, or to pretend to buy or sell any such
articles sold or offered for sale at any auction. (1985 Code, § 14-139)
9-21
CHAPTER 8
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS1
SECTION
9-801. Applicability.
9-802. Purchasing, pawning, etc., property from minors.
9-803. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--required.
9-804. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--description.
9-805. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--inspection.
9-806. Waiting period prerequisite to selling, etc., certain articles.
9-801. Applicability. This chapter shall apply not only to dealers in
used or secondhand personal property but shall apply also to pawnbrokers or
other persons taking such properties in pledge or pawn or otherwise as security
for indebtedness. (1985 Code, § 14-156)
9-802. Purchasing, pawning, etc., property from minors. It shall
be unlawful for any person affected by this chapter to take in pawn or pledge
any property from persons under eighteen (18) years of age. A person engaged
in business as a dealer in used or secondhand personal property and not also
engaged in the business of taking properties in pledge or pawn may purchase
property from persons under eighteen (18) years of age, provided that all other
provisions of this chapter are complied with. (1985 Code, § 14-157)
9-803. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--required.
It shall be the duty of all pawnbrokers and dealers in second-hand automobile
tires and accessories and dealers in secondhand wearing apparel or other
personal property, each to keep a well bound book, in which every article taken
by them in pawn or purchased by them shall be registered giving a sufficient
description of such article clearly to identify same. (1985 Code, § 14-158)
9-804. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--description.
All persons affected by this chapter shall furnish the best possible description
of the property purchased by them; it being required that such description shall
include the serial number or other identification number or any letters, words
or markings of any nature intended to furnish or furnishing a description or part
of the description item so reported. (1985 Code, § 14-159)
1State law reference
Pawnbrokers Act of 1988: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 45-6-201, et
seq.
9-22
9-805. Registration of articles pawned or purchased--inspection.
The book or register required by § 9-803 shall be kept in the place of business
of the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer and shall at all times be open for
inspection by the chief of police or any police officer of the city or by any
interested private citizen; the purpose of this chapter being to aid in curbing
theft and aid in the recovery of stolen property. (1985 Code, § 14-160)
9-806. Waiting period prerequisite to selling, etc., certain articles.
All articles by pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers in pawn or purchased shall
not be sold or resold until they have been in the possession of such persons for
a period of at least ten (10) days. (1985 Code, § 14-161)
9-23
CHAPTER 9
JUNK DEALERS, JUNKYARDS1
SECTION
9-901. Definitions.
9-902. Fire district.
9-903. Dealers--record of purchases.
9-904. Dealers--scrap brass, copper, etc., segregated.
9-905. Dealing with minors; identification.
9-906. Location; visibility of junk.
9-901. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
(1) “Junk” shall mean any motor vehicle, machinery, appliance,
product or merchandise with parts missing, or scrap metal, or other scrap
materials that are damaged, deteriorated or that are in a condition which
prevents their use for the purpose for which they were intended.
(2) “Junk dealer” shall mean any person, in any way acquiring, buying,
selling, exchanging, trading or dealing in scrap iron, brass, secondhand metals
or parts of any sort.
(3) “Junkyard” shall mean any open or uncovered land on which
dilapidated automobiles, rags, old papers, boxes, barrels or other used articles
defined as junk herein are assembled for purposes of trade. (1985 Code,
§ 14-178, as amended by Ord. #4518-13, Feb. 2014)
9-902. Fire district. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, operate
or maintain a junkyard within the limits of any fire district of the city. (1985
Code, § 14-179)
9-903. Dealers--record of purchases. Every junk dealer in the city
shall keep a book in which shall be entered the names of all persons from whom
he buys or gets scrap iron, brass or other materials of any sort, followed by the
date of purchase, the amount paid therefor, the kind of metal purchased or
gotten and the number of pounds of each kind. Such entries shall be made in
chronological order from day to day, as the business is transacted, and such
books shall be at all times open to inspection of the police or other officer, or any
1State law reference
Junk dealers: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 62-9-101, et seq.
Local regulation of junkyards: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 54-20-122.
9-24
person who may desire to see the same; and shall be in good faith kept and
preserved by each dealer for convenient inspection. (1985 Code, § 14-180)
9-904. Dealers--scrap brass, copper, etc., segregated. Every junk
dealer shall keep on hand and in separate packages, and not allowed to be mixed
or confused with other purchases, in order that identification may be easy, all
scrap brass, copper, lead and all other metals (except scrap iron and castings)
bought or gotten from any person, the same to be kept separate and subject to
easy and convenient inspection of any person desiring to investigate, for a period
of not less than ten (10) days after the purchase or in any way acquired. (1985
Code, § 14-181)
9-905. Dealing with minors; identification. (1) No person shall
purchase or receive, in any way, any scrap brass, copper, lead or other metals
from any minor under sixteen (16) years of age, whether the same are gotten
directly from or through or by aid of such minor.
(2) Junk dealers shall deal only with persons sixteen (16) years of age
or over who are to them personally known, or of whose identification they are
certain, and shall promptly give to any officer or other person inquiring about
them information to enable the seller to be identified. (1985 Code, § 14-182)
9-906. Location; visibility of junk. It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep or store junk, as defined in § 9-901, in the city, unless such junk is
located in a zone allowing the storage of such junk, and only then if such junk
is stored in such a manner as to not be visible from adjacent property, including
public streets. In no event shall it be lawful for any person to allow junk, as
defined in this chapter, to accumulate on any property not properly zoned for the
storage of junk. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent
persons who repair motor vehicles, appliances, etc., from accumulating
unserviceable articles left with them in the normal course of their business,
provided, however, such unserviceable articles shall not be visible from
adjoining property. (1985 Code, § 14-183)
9-25
CHAPTER 10
FORTUNETELLERS
SECTION
9-1001. Privilege.
9-1002. Annual tax--generally.
9-1003. Annual tax collection; delinquency.
9-1004. Lien; distress warrants.
9-1001. Privilege. It is declared to be a privilege for any person to
engage in the business or vocation of a fortuneteller, clairvoyant, hypnotist,
spiritualist, palmist or phrenologist in the city. (1985 Code, § 14-200)
9-1002. Annual tax--generally. (1) Each person before exercising any
privilege mentioned in § 9-1001, shall pay a city privilege tax of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), per annum to the city recorder-treasurer, which privilege tax
shall be paid annually, in advance.
(2) The taxes provided in this chapter shall be levied and collected as
other privilege taxes, and one (1) full year’s tax on such privilege shall be paid
in advance. Neither this chapter, nor the imposition of any tax hereunder shall
be construed to operate as a release or exemption from any other privilege tax
required by law. This chapter shall not be construed as repealing any section
of this code, imposing a privilege tax, but shall be in addition thereto. (1985
Code, § 14-201)
9-1003. Annual tax collection; delinquency. It shall be the duty of
each person exercising any privilege mentioned in this chapter to promptly pay
the tax levied under the provisions hereof when the same becomes due, and
before engaging in any of the vocations mentioned; and in case any such tax is
not promptly paid, a penalty of ten (10) per cent on the amount of delinquent tax
for the first month’s delinquency, or any fractional part thereof, shall be added
and, thereafter, there shall be added one (1) per cent for each additional month
or fractional part thereof of delinquency. Such penalty shall be on the total
amount of tax delinquency and shall be collected for the use and benefit of the
city. (1985 Code, § 14-202)
9-1004. Lien; distress warrants. The tax levied or imposed by § 9-1002
shall be a lien upon the property of the person exercising such privilege as in the
case of ad valorem tax, and in case the tax herein levied or imposed shall become
due and delinquent as provided, the city recorder shall issue a distress warrant
for the collection of such tax principal, interest and penalty due from each such
delinquent taxpayer, which distress warrant shall be served by the chief of
police or any other police officer. (1985 Code, § 14-203)
9-26
CHAPTER 11
COAL AND COKE
SECTION
9-1101. Definitions.
9-1102. Scope.
9-1103. Enforcement.
9-1104. License--required.
9-1105. License--prerequisites to issuance generally.
9-1106. License--issuance of stickers for trucks, etc.
9-1107. Discrimination by retail dealer.
9-1108. Weighing; delivery ticket.
9-1109. Delivery ticket produced; verification of weight.
9-1110. Coal peddlers.
9-1111. Coal delivered over streets to be weighed.
9-1112. Brakes on vehicles hauling coal, etc.
9-1113. Delivering split loads after weighing.
9-1101. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
(1) “Coal dealer.” Any person of any kind or nature, trucking, hauling
or otherwise distributing coal or coke from any source of supply except that of
a licensed coal dealer, which coal is not being delivered for his own use, shall be
deemed a coal dealer.
(2) “Retail sale.” The sale of truck load or wagon load lots of coal, coke
or other hard fuels where the weight of such load exceeds five hundred (500)
pounds, to individuals, industries or consumers of any kind, and to cover the
sale of such fuels in all cases except when sold to regularly licensed retail coal
dealers in car load lots, or when purchased by individuals, industries,
institutions or firms in car load lots for their own consumption. Should such
persons purchase coal in wholesale lots and resell or distribute it to employees,
friends, relatives or others, this shall be construed as a retail business and
requires a retail license. (1985 Code, § 14-220)
9-1102. Scope. It is the purpose and intention of this chapter to cover
the entire field pertaining to the regulation of the retail coal business and to
exclusively regulate the same, distribution, weighing and delivering of coal, coke
and other hard fuels within the city; provided, however, nothing herein
contained shall be construed as relieving any retail coal dealer from paying the
privilege taxes or licenses prescribed by the general revenue ordinances of the
city. (1985 Code, § 14-221)
9-27
9-1103. Enforcement. The city manager or his designee is hereby
vested with police power for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-222)
9-1104. License required. Any coal dealer as set out in § 9-1102 shall
be liable to pay the required license fee and to conform to the requirements of
this chapter. (1985 Code, § 14-223)
9-1105. License--prerequisites to issuance generally. Before a
license shall be issued to any retail coal dealer, the applicant for license shall
show that he possesses and owns proper equipment for the operation of such
retail business, which must consist of a coal yard, reasonable storage facilities
and office used expressly for such purposes, and not less than one (1) standard
inspection wagon scale or truck scale of at least four (4) tons’ capacity, and the
same shall be located and maintained within the city. (1985 Code, § 14-224)
9-1106. License--issuance of stickers for trucks, etc. All licensed
coal dealers, when applying to the city recorder for a license to engage in the
retail coal business as provided in this chapter, shall file with the recorder a full
description of the truck used by such retail coal dealer in the delivering of coal,
coke or other hard fuels, such description to include the make, model, capacity
and motor number of such trucks. Upon the listing of such trucks and
simultaneously with the issuing of a license, the city recorder shall issue to each
truck owner a plate or sticker, giving the name of the licensee, the make, model,
motor number and capacity of the truck and the expiration date of the license.
All retail coal dealers shall display such stickers or plates either on the
windshields or at some other conspicuous place on their trucks so that the same
may be easily seen by the city manager or his designee and by the general
public. When any retail coal dealer exchanges a truck for another truck, then
he may surrender the sticker or plate issued for the truck so exchanged to the
city recorder and obtain a similar one for the new truck. The city recorder shall
collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each plate or sticker issued to the truck
owner. (1985 Code, § 14-225)
9-1107. Discrimination by retail dealer. Licensees operating under
the provisions of this chapter shall supply, without discrimination and to the
best of their ability, the regular day-to-day demand for coal. (1985 Code,
§ 14-226)
9-1108. Weighing; delivery ticket. All drivers, licensees or other
persons having charge of conveyances for the purpose of transporting coal, coke
or other hard fuels intended for sale in the city, shall have in their possession
when such vehicles are loaded with such coal, coke or other hard fuels within
the city, a ticket in duplicate showing gross net and tare weights of the load.
9-28
Such weight tickets must be signed by the person weighing the load and must
also show the location by the person weighing the load and must also show the
location of the scale, the date of weighing and the name of the purchaser, and
it shall be the duty of the driver to deliver to the purchaser, and it shall be the
duty of the driver to deliver to the purchaser such duplicate copy of such weight
ticket. The owner or driver of the vehicle shall be responsible for any charge or
expense incident to such weighing. In the event any vehicle shall be loaded with
coal, coke or other hard fuels before entering the city, when the same is intended
to be sold within such city, the driver shall first weigh the gross load on an
approved scale and, after making delivery of the load, shall return the empty
vehicle to the same scale and have it weighed for the purpose of obtaining the
net and tare weights and, after receiving a ticket showing such weights, shall
deliver such ticket to the customer; provided, however, that if any such vehicle
leaves the city empty and returns the same day to the city loaded with coal, coke
or other hard fuels intended for sale in the city, it is permissible for the driver
thereof to have the empty vehicle weighed before leaving the city and have the
loaded vehicle weighed immediately upon re-entering the city later in the day.
(1985 Code, § 14-227)
9-1109. Delivery ticket produced; verification of weight.
(1) When any person who has sold, peddled or agreed to deliver coal
or coke within the city and such fuel is being delivered, the city manager or his
designee, or any of the city’s police officers, shall have the right to demand the
production of the ticket provided for in § 9-1805 and on such demand being
made, such seller or his agent or employee, or other person in charge of such fuel
being delivered, shall immediately produce, exhibit and allow inspection of the
ticket.
(2) Whenever any of the persons under this section making such
demands shall further demand that the weight of the coal or coke being
delivered as shown by such ticket be verified, it shall thereupon become the
immediate duty of the person selling such coal or coke and of his agents,
representatives or employees or other person in charge of such fuel being
delivered, to convey such fuel immediately to the nearest and most convenient
private scales officially tested so as to determine the net weight thereof, and
thereafter as soon as such fuel has been delivered, the person representing the
seller, or others, shall immediately return to the same scales where such
conveyance and fuel were weighed together ans shall permit the conveyance and
equipment which were used in the delivery of such fuel to be weighed, so as to
ascertain the net weight of the fuel so sold and delivered; provided, however,
that if requested, the privilege of reweighing such coal or coke, or the
conveyance and equipment in which same was delivered on another and
different scale from the person who demanded the verification of the weight of
such fuel as provided, shall be granted on condition, however, that he is
permitted to be present and inspect such reweighing. (1985 Code, § 14-228)
9-29
9-1110. Coal peddlers. (1) Any person operating a truck for sale of coal
not covered as retail coal dealers, that is, delivering coal from any source not
specified by this chapter, by truck, shall be defined as a coal peddler and shall
have such coal weighed on an approved scale and deliver a copy of such scale
ticket to the purchaser as provided for retail coal dealers.
(2) Nothing in this chapter shall apply to the peddler who buys from
accredited dealers, and who shall have standard measures, and who shall sell
by the bushel or fraction thereof. (1985 Code, § 14-229)
9-1111. Coal delivered over streets to be weighed. It shall be
unlawful for any person to haul coal, coke or other hard fuels intended for sale
in the city on and over any street, alley or roadway within the city unless the
same has been weighed upon some scale approved and designated by the city
manager or his designee. In the event any vehicle shall be loaded with coal,
coke or other hard fuel before entering the city, then the driver of such vehicle
shall have the load weighed as soon as the vehicle can be driven to an approved
scale. (1985 Code, § 14-230)
9-1112. Brakes on vehicles hauling coal, etc. It shall be unlawful for
any person to haul coal, coke or other hard fuels over the streets, alleys or
roadways in the city unless the vehicle in which the same are being hauled shall
have had its brakes inspected and approved within ten (10) days before such
hauling, such inspection and approval to be by the city manager or his designee.
(1985 Code, § 14-231)
9-1113. Delivering split loads after weighing. After having his load
of coal, coke or other similar fuel weighed on an approved scale and receiving a
weight ticket therefor, it shall be unlawful for any driver or licensee under this
chapter to split such load and make delivery thereof to more than one (1)
customer. (1985 Code, § 14-232)
9-30
CHAPTER 12
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS1
SECTION
9-1201. Right of entry.
9-1202. Protection of food from contamination.
9-1203. Misrepresentation as to quality, wholesomeness.
9-1201. Right of entry. All places in the city or its police jurisdiction
where food products are stored, offered for sale or sold, shall be subject to
inspection by the health officer, who shall have the right to enter such places for
the purpose of inspecting the food products therein, and who shall condemn as
unfit for human consumption any spoiled, tainted or unwholesome food, and
dispose of the same as he may see fit. (1985 Code, § 11-1)
9-1202. Protection of food from contamination. (1) The owner,
lessee or agent occupying any room, stall or place where food products are
stored, offered for sale or sold, shall keep such room, stall or place and all
appurtenances in a clean, wholesome condition, under such direction as may be
given by the health officer.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale any article of
food for human consumption, unless the same is protected and screened from
dust, flies and other insects. (1985 Code, § 11-2)
9-1203. Misrepresentation as to quality, wholesomeness. No food
products shall be exchanged, labeled or representations made in respect thereto
under a name or quality, or as being what the same is not, as regards
wholesomeness, soundness, safeness or fitness, for human food or drink. (1985
Code, § 11-3)
1State law reference
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 53-1-101,
et seq.
9-31
CHAPTER 13
RESTAURANTS
SECTION
9-1301. Definitions.
9-1302. Code adopted.
9-1303. Compliance.
9-1304. License.
9-1305. Permit required.
9-1306. Permit--power of health officer to suspend or revoke; reinstatement.
9-1307. Inspections--generally.
9-1308. Inspections--examination of samples of food, etc.
9-1309. Control of communicable diseases.
9-1310. Procedure when infection suspected.
9-1311. Itinerant restaurants.
9-1301. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
(1) “Employee” shall mean any person who handles food or drink
during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or
cooking utensil, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared
or served.
(2) “Health officer” shall mean the health officer of the city or his
authorized representative
(3) “Itinerant restaurant” shall mean a restaurant operating for a
temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or
other similar gathering.
(4) “Restaurant” shall refer to a coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe,
luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain and all other eating or
drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or
drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.
(5) “Utensil” shall include any kitchenware, tableware, glassware,
cutlery, utensils, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes
in contact during storage, preparation or serving. (1985 Code, § 11-20)
9-1302. Code adopted. The 1976 Edition of the United States Public
Health Service Model Food Service Sanitation Ordinance, three (3) copies of
which are on file at the city recorder’s office, is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out at length in this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision
of said ordinance shall be punished as provided in § 1-104. (1985 Code, § 11-21)
9-32
9-1303. Compliance. No restaurant shall be operated within the city,
or its police jurisdiction, unless it conforms with the requirements of this
chapter; provided, that when any restaurant fails to quality the health officer
is authorized to suspend the permit. (1985 Code, § 11-22)
9-1304. License. Every person operating a restaurant in the city shall
obtain an authorization form from the health officer signifying that the terms
of this chapter have been complied with before he can purchase a city license.
(1985 Code, § 11-23)
9-1305. Permit required. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a restaurant in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from
the health officer. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
(2) Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter
shall be entitled to receive and retain such permit.
(3) A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall secure a permit
and may retain the same. (1985 Code, § 11-24)
9-1306. Permit--power of health officer to suspend or revoke;
reinstatement. (1) The permit required by § 9-1305 may be temporarily
suspended by the health officer upon the violation by the holder of any of the
terms of this chapter or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the health
officer upon serious or repeated violation.
(2) Any restaurant operator whose permit has been suspended may at
any time make application for the reinstatement of the permit.
(3) Within one (1) week after the receipt of a satisfactory application,
accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the
violated provisions of this chapter have been conformed with, the health officer
shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional reinspections as
he may deem necessary to assure himself that the applicant is again complying
with the requirements and in case the findings indicate compliance, shall
reinstate the permit. (1985 Code, § 11-25)
9-1307. Inspections--generally. (1) At least once every six (6) months
the health officer shall inspect every restaurant located within the city. In case
the health officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall make
a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the
defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in determining
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Any violation of the same
item of this chapter on such second inspection shall call for immediate
suspension of the permit.
(2) One (1) copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the health
officer upon an inside wall of the restaurant, and such inspection report shall
9-33
not be defaced or removed by any person except the health officer. Another copy
of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the heath department.
(3) The person operating the restaurant shall upon request of the
health officer permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit
copying any or all records of food purchased. (1985 Code, § 11-26)
9-1308. Inspections--examination of samples of food, etc. Samples
of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the health
officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or
adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause
to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or
adulterated. (1985 Code, § 11-27)
9-1309. Control of communicable diseases. No person who is
affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such disease,
shall work in any restaurant, and no restaurant shall employ any such person
or any person suspected of being affected with any disease in a communicable
form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the restaurant manager suspects
that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has
become a carrier of such a disease he shall notify the health officer immediately.
A placard containing this section shall be posted in all toilet rooms. (1985 Code,
§ 11-28)
9-1310. Procedure when infection suspected. When suspicion arises
as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any restaurant employee
the health officer is authorized to require any and all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from the restaurant;
(2) The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further
danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the health officer;
(3) Adequate laboratory examinations as may be indicated. (1985
Code, § 11-29)
9-1311. Itinerant restaurants. Itinerant restaurants shall be
constructed and operated in an approved manner. (1985 Code, § 11-30)
9-34
CHAPTER 14
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
SECTION
9-1401. Penalties.
9-1402. Milk ordinance adopted.
9-1403. Grade A pasteurized milk and milk products to be sold.
9-1401. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) or such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each
day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(1985 Code, § 11-47)
9-1402. Milk ordinance adopted. The production, transportation,
processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling and sale of all
milk and milk products sold for ultimate consumption within the corporate
limits of the city or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy herds, dairy
farms and milk plants; the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers,
haulers and distributors shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of
Part II of the “Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance-1978 Recommendations of
the United States Public Health Service/Food and Drug Administration,” three
(3) copies of which are filed in the office of the city recorder; provided that § § 9
and 16 of such unabridged ordinance shall be replaced, respectively, by
§§ 9-1401 and 9-1403 of this chapter, and that § 17 of such unabridged ordinance
shall be elided therefrom. (1985 Code, § 11-48)
9-1403. Grade A pasteurized milk and milk products to be sold.
Only grade A pasteurized milk and milk products shall be sold to the final
consumer or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores or similar
establishments; provided, that in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and
milk products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown,
may be authorized by the health authority; in which case, such milk and milk
products shall be labeled “ungraded.” (1985 Code, § 11-49)
9-35
CHAPTER 15
SLAUGHTERHOUSES
SECTION
9-1501. Slaughtering of animals generally.
9-1502. Inspection fees generally.
9-1503. Inspection and approval prerequisite to sale of fresh meat.
9-1504. Inspection of dressed carcasses of beef, etc.--required.
9-1505. Inspection of dressed carcasses of beef, etc.--fees.
9-1506. Manner of displaying, etc., meats to be sold, etc.
9-1507. Condemnation.
9-1508. Federal standards adopted.
9-1501. Slaughtering of animals generally. (1) All animals not
considered “game” slaughtered for human consumption or that are to be used for
public trade or sold within the city or the police jurisdiction of the city shall be
slaughtered at such slaughterhouse, as shall be licensed by the board of
commissioners, except as provided thereby, and such slaughter shall be under
the supervision and inspection of an official inspector of this city, and such
slaughterhouse shall be regulated by the board of commissioners.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain a slaughter
pen or any kind, or to carry on the business of slaughtering within the city, and
no such pen or houses shall be used within one (1) mile of the city, unless the
same is at all times kept in a condition of cleanliness as not to prove offensive
or injurious to the health of the neighborhood. Whenever any territory shall be
annexed to the city, any slaughterhouses in operation in such annexed territory
at the time of annexation shall be permitted to continue in operation so long as
they comply with all the necessary health and sanitary requirements. (1985
Code, § 11-66)
9-1502. Inspection fees generally. An inspection fee shall be charged
for each carcass slaughtered at any slaughterhouse, to be paid by the owner of
such carcass to the inspector. (1985 Code, § 11-67)
9-1503. Inspection and approval prerequisite to sale of fresh
meat. No fresh or processed meat shall be sold or offered for sale within the city
or its police jurisdiction, unless the same bears the stamp indicative of
inspection and approval of the inspector, excepting meats bearing the stamp
indicative of the inspection and approval of the Bureau of Animal Industry,
United States Department of Agriculture. (1985 Code, § 11-68)
9-36
9-1504. Inspection of dressed carcasses of beef, etc., required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, within the city
any dressed carcasses, until the same is accompanied by the heart, liver, lungs,
kidneys and tongue, and shall have been inspected by the health officer and the
fees therefor, as established, shall have been paid. (1985 Code, § 11-69)
9-1505. Inspection of dressed carcasses of beef, etc--fees. The fees
collectable for inspections required by § 9-1504 shall be as designated by the
board of commissioners. These fees shall apply to all dried or cured meats, as
well as to fresh meats; provided, however, that this section and § 9-1504 shall
not apply to meats which have been inspected and approved by the inspection
of the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture.
(1985 Code, § 11-70)
9-1506. Manner of displaying, etc.,meats to be sold, etc.. All meat
exposed for sale, sold or stored, shall be placed so as to prevent contamination
by flies, dust and decaying or infectious material, and such meats shall be
subject to inspection at any time or place. (1985 Code, § 11-71)
9-1507. Condemnation. All meats inspected and found unfit for human
consumption shall be condemned, stamped and disposed of as the inspector may
direct. (1985 Code, § 11-72)
9-1508. Federal standards adopted. In the inspection of all livestock
or the dressed carcasses or parts thereof, and in condemning any of the above
as unfit for human consumption, the inspector shall be guided by the rules and
regulations of the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of
Agriculture. (1985 Code, § 11-73)
9-37
CHAPTER 16
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
SECTION
9-1601. Violations.
9-1602. Parking or standing within fire limits.
9-1603. Certificate--generally.
9-1604. Certificate--application fee.
9-1605. Certificate--suspension; revocation.
9-1606. Insurance.
9-1607. Posting privilege license.
9-1608. Operating rights.
9-1609. Trademark and number displayed.
9-1610. Sidewalk solicitation.
9-1611. Identification.
9-1612. Intoxication.
9-1613. Illegal use.
9-1601. Violations. Any person who willfully or deliberately violates or
fails to comply with, or aids or abets in the violation of , any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, the first
offense shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the
second offense shall be punished by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). The city court
shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the state courts for such offenses. (1985
Code, § 23-1)
9-1602. Parking or standing within fire limits. It shall be unlawful
for any person to park or leave standing on the streets or other public ways of
the city, within the fire limits, any vehicle used for transporting persons or
freight for hire; provided, however, that such vehicle used may be left standing
on the streets for such time as may be necessary to load or unload passengers
or freight. (1985 Code, § 23-2)
9-1603. Certificate--generally. No person shall operate any passenger
motor vehicle for hire within the city, unless there is enforced with respect to
such person a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the board
of commissioners. A certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be
issued to any qualified applicant thereby authorizing the operation of a
passenger motor vehicle for hire within the city, if it is found that the applicant
is fit, willing and able to properly perform the services proposed and to conform
to the provisions of this chapter, and that the proposed service authorized by
such certificate is, or will be, required by the present or future public
convenience and necessity. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. No
9-38
certificate issued under this chapter shall confer any proprietary or property
rights in the use of the streets and highways within the city. All applications
for certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be made to the board of
commissioners in writing, giving the name and address of the applicant, the
number and character of passenger motor vehicles to be operated for hire, the
reasons why such certificate should be issued and such other information as
may be pertinent to the application for an issuance of such certificate. The
application shall be verified under oath and shall be in such form and
accompanied by proof sufficient to authorize the board of commissioners to grant
the certificate applied for. No new certificates for public convenience and
necessity to operate a passenger motor vehicle for hire shall be issued by the
board of commissioners until and unless a public hearing is held on the request
for a certificate of public convenience and necessity. Said hearing shall be held
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application for certificate of public
convenience and necessity. If the city commission determines that there is
additional need for services which can be provided by the applicant, said
certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued. (1985 Code,
§ 23-3)
9-1604. Certificate--application fee. Each application for a certificate
of public convenience and necessity required by this chapter shall be
accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) (1985 Code, § 23-4)
9-1605. Certificate--suspension; revocation. All certificates of public
convenience and necessity issued to operators of passenger motor vehicles for
hire are subject to suspension and /or revocation at any time by the city
commission for good cause. (1985 Code, § 23-5)
9-1606. Insurance. Before any passenger motor vehicle for hire is
licensed to be operated in the city, the owner or operator thereof shall exhibit a
liability insurance policy, written by a company authorized to issue liability
insurance policies in the state, on which the premium has been paid for at least
one (1) year. Such liability insurance policy shall ensure the occupants and the
public against bodily injury and property damage in the limits of not less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for bodily injury or death of one (1) person,
and forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) for bodily injury or death of all persons
injured or killed in any one (1) accident, and property damage in any one (1)
accident in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), and uninsured
motorist coverage with the same minimum limits. Such policy shall provide that
it shall not be canceled or withdrawn until after thirty (30) days’ notice in
writing shall have first been given to the city and said thirty (30) days' notice
shall commence upon the date that notice is actually received at the office of the
city manager. In the event such policy is so canceled or withdrawn, the license
for the operation of the passenger motor vehicle for hire insured thereby shall
9-39
be suspended until said policy is replaced with a like policy on which the
premiums have been paid for at least one (1) year. (1985 Code, § 23-6)
9-1607. Posting privilege license. All persons doing a taxi business
in the city shall be required to post, in a conspicuous place in their offices or
business houses, the license issued to them by the city, for the privilege of
operating such business within the city. (1985 Code, § 23-7)
9-1608. Operating rules. All persons who hold certificates of public
convenience and necessity to operate passenger or motor vehicles for hire in the
city shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
(1) They shall have a place of business and shall do business from said
place of business and shall not park vehicles which are not carrying passengers
on the streets.
(2) They shall have their trademark or name, telephone number and
permit number shown on each side and the rear of each vehicle in permanent
paint.
(3) They shall not cruise or park any vehicle on any street in the city
for the purpose of soliciting business.
(4) They shall not have such office or place of business where alcoholic
beverages are sold.
(5) They shall have at least monthly inspections for all operational
vehicles for the purpose of safety to passengers, baggage and the public.
Records of said inspections shall be kept for at least one (1) year and shall be
open to inspection by the city at all times.
(6) They shall not permit any of said vehicles to be operated by a
person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. (1985 Code, § 23-8)
9-1609. Trademark and number displayed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a passenger motor vehicle for hire in the city unless said
vehicle shall have a trademark of the company represented painted on each side
and on the back so that said trademark, and number of permit, shall be visible
for at least one hundred (100) feet. (1985 Code, § 23-9)
9-1610. Sidewalk solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person
engaged in the transfer or transportation of passengers for hire in the city to
solicit any person upon the public sidewalks of the city for patronage. (1985
Code, § 23-10)
9-1611. Identification. Each driver must have an identification card
with a picture of the driver, certified by the chief of police, posted in a
conspicuous place in each passenger vehicle during the time said vehicle is
driven by the authorized driver. (1985 Code, § 23-11)
9-40
9-1612. Intoxication. The operator or driver of any passenger motor
vehicle for hire who shall have been licensed for such purpose by the city, upon
the first conviction for the offense of driving said vehicle while intoxicated and
in addition to the other penalties provided, shall have his license or permit
suspended for a period of one (1) year from the date of the violation; upon a
second conviction for a like offense, said permit or license shall be permanently
revoked. (1985 Code, § 23-12)
9-1613. Illegal use. No passenger motor vehicle for hire authorized to
be operated in the city shall be used for any illegal purpose. (1985 Code,
§ 23-13)
9-41
CHAPTER 17
VEHICLES FOR HIRE--DRIVER'S PERMIT
SECTION
9-1701. Required; application.
9-1702. Investigation.
9-1703. Chauffeur's license.
9-1704. Approval; appeal.
9-1705. Contents; fees; term.
9-1706. Display.
9-1707. Suspension; revocation
9-1701. Required; application. No person shall operate any passenger
motor vehicle for hire in the city, or permit another to operate such a vehicle
owned or controlled by him/her for hire, unless the driver of such vehicle has
first obtained and has in force a permit as required by the provisions of this
chapter. An application for a permit to operate a passenger motor vehicle for
hire in the city shall be filed with the city manager on forms provided by the city
and such application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following
information:
(1) Age of applicant. Applicant must be at least twenty-one (21) years
of age;
(2) A list of experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;
(3) The applicant’s chauffeur’s license number;
(4) A concise history of the applicant’s employment; and
(5) Such other information as may be reasonably required. (1985
Code, § 23-30)
9-1702. Investigation. The chief of police shall cause a background
investigation to be conducted on each applicant to determine if the applicant has
a criminal record and if the applicant is of good moral character. (1985 Code,
§ 23-31)
9-1703. Chauffeur’s license. Before any application for a driver’s
permit is finally passed upon by the city manager, the applicant shall exhibit a
current motor vehicle chauffeur’s license issued by the state. (1985 Code,
§ 23-32)
9-1704. Approval; appeal. The city manager shall pass upon each
application for a driver’s permit and shall not approve the application if, in the
opinion of the city manager, the applicant is not of good moral character and
competent to operate a passenger motor vehicle for hire. If an applicant is
9-42
rejected by the city manager, such applicant may file a written request with the
city manager within ten (10) days after such rejection to appear personally
before the city commission for a review of his application. The action of city
commission on such appeal shall be final. (1985 Code, § 23-33)
9-1705. Contents; fees; term. Upon approval of an application and
payment of a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00), the chief of police shall issue a
permit to operate a passenger motor vehicle for hire in the city which shall bear
the name, address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. Such permit
shall be in effect for the remainder of the city’s licensing year. A permit for each
year thereafter shall be issued upon payment of two dollars ($2.00) unless the
permit for the preceding year has been revoked, in which event a new
application is required. (1985 Code, § 23-34)
9-1706. Display. Each driver of a passenger motor vehicle for hire shall
post his driver’s permit in such vehicle as to be in full view of all passengers
while such driver is operating said passenger motor vehicle for hire. (1985 Code,
§ 23-35)
9-1707. Suspension; revocation. The city commission, at any time it
is deemed to be in the best interest of the welfare of the city and the citizens
thereof, may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The
city commission, if it desires to do so, may grant to such permit holder an
opportunity to be heard before suspension or revocation is effective. The city
manager, upon recommendation of the chief of police, and when he deems it to
be in the best interest and welfare of the city, may suspend any permit issued
under the terms of this chapter. Such suspension shall be effective until the
next regular meeting of the city commission, at which time the city commission
shall either reinstate, continue such suspension or revoke such permit as it
deems to be in the best interest and welfare of the city. (1985 Code, § 23-36)
9-43
CHAPTER 18
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
SECTION
9-1801. Authority of board of commissioners generally.
9-1802. Department created.
9-1803. Standards--generally.
9-1804. Standards--state standards for certain transactions.
9-1805. Standards--coal and coke dealers.
9-1806. Full, honest and correct weight or measure.
9-1807. Compliance; hindering, obstructing, etc., sealer.
9-1801. Authority of board of commissioners generally. The board
of commissioners may from time to time prescribe the rules and regulations
necessary to enforce this chapter, as it may deem necessary or expedient. (1985
Code, § 25-1)
9-1802. Department created. A department of standard weights and
measures for the city is hereby created. (1985 Code, § 25-2)
9-1803. Standards--generally. The weights and measures fixed by the
United States, under the acts of resolutions of Congress, approved June 14,
1936, and additions thereto, and renewals thereto, certified by the national
bureau of standards, and such other weights, measures, balances and apparatus
as are the property of the city so made or added by the sealer of weights and
measures, which are in conformity to, and certified by the national bureau of
standards, shall be the standards by which all standards of weights and
measures of the city shall be tried, proved and sealed. The board of
commissioners shall provide the sealer of weights and measures with the
necessary working sets of weights, measures, balances and apparatus for his
use. (1985 Code, § 25-3)
9-1804. Standards--state standards for certain transactions. The
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 47-26-101 are incorporated in this
section by reference setting forth the legal and uniform standard of weights and
measures in the city for the sale and purchase of products of the farm, orchard
and garden, and articles of merchandise contained therein. (1985 Code, § 25-4)
9-1805. Standards--coal and coke dealers. In addition to the
standard of weights and measures referred to in § § 9-1803 and 9-1804, all retail
coal and coke dealers, operating or delivering within the city, shall furnish the
sealer of weights and measures with a list of all their wagons, trucks, or other
devices used in delivering coal and coke, which list shall contain an accurate
9-44
description of such vehicles and the weight of same; and in the weighing of coal
and coke sold or to be sold by all such coal and coke dealers, the driver shall not
remain in the wagon, truck or vehicle at the time such coal or coke is weighed;
and all coal and coke sold by such dealers shall weigh at least two thousand
(2,000) pounds per ton, and at the same time such coal or coke is weighed, a
ticket or slip shall be made up by the persons so weighing this coal or coke,
which ticket or slip shall be in duplicate, the carbon copy of which shall be
delivered to the purchaser by the driver of such vehicle so delivering the coal or
coke, and the original shall be kept on file in the dealer’s office, subject to the
inspection of the sealer of weights and measures; and these slips shall contain
a statement of the gross and net weight of the coal or coke, and also the weight
of the vehicle. (1985 Code, § 25-5)
9-1806. Full, honest and correct weight or measure. All persons
within the city selling goods, wares and merchandise, groceries, meat, flour,
bread, fruit, fish, fowl, coal, ice or any other form or kind of merchandise, and
selling by weight or measure, shall give at all times a full, honest and correct
weight or measure of the commodity sold and delivered; and, upon demand,
shall furnish the purchaser an itemized statement in writing showing the
weight or measure of the article purchased and the price thereof. (1985 Code,
§ 25-6)
9-1807. Compliance; hindering, obstructing, etc., sealer. No person
shall hinder, obstruct or interfere in any way with the sealer of weights and
measures, while in the performance of his official duties, or shall fail to produce,
upon demand by the authorized sealer of weights and measures, any weights,
measures, balances, weighing devices or measuring devices in or upon his
premises, place of business or in his possession for use in manufacture or trade.
No person shall sell anything within the terms of this chapter which is less by
weight or measure than the standards referred to in this chapter. (1985 Code,
§ 25-7)
9-45
CHAPTER 19
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
SECTION
9-1901. Appointment; duties generally.
9-1902. Salary; term of employment.
9-1903. Powers--generally.
9-1904. Powers--spot checks of packages, etc.
9-1905. Powers--right of entry.
9-1906. Prosecution of violators generally.
9-1907. Sealing, weighing or measuring devices.
9-1908. Condemnation, etc., and correction of weights, measures, etc.
9-1909. Records and reports.
9-1910. Approved standards, etc., to be provided.
9-1911. Police powers.
9-1901. Appointment; duties generally. The city manager may
appoint a sealer of weights and measures, who shall have and keep a general
supervision of the weights, measures, weighing devices and measuring devices
within the city; shall enforce all laws regarding them; and shall have the care
and custody of all weights, measures, balances and other apparatus provided by
the city, for the enforcement of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 25-24)
9-1902. Salary; term of employment. The salary and term of
employment of the sealer of weights and measures shall be fixed by the board
of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 25-25)
9-1903. Powers--generally. The sealer of weights and measures shall
have power within the city to inspect, try and ascertain, if they are correct, all
weights, scales, beams, measures of every kind, instruments or mechanical
devices for measurements and tools, appliances or accessories connected with
any and all such instruments or measures kept or exposed for sale, sold or used,
or employed within the city, by any person in proving the size, quantities,
things, produce, articles for distribution or consumption, for or submitted for
sale, hire or reward. (1985 Code, § 25-26)
9-1904. Powers--spot checks of packages, etc. The sealer of weights
and measures shall from time to time weigh or measure packages or amounts
of commodities of any kind kept with intent to sell, sold or in the process of
delivery, in order to determine whether the same contain the amounts of
represented or are sold in a manner in accordance with the law. (1985 Code,
§ 25-27)
9-46
9-1905. Powers--right of entry. The sealer of weights and measures,
at least once in a year, and more often as he may deem necessary, shall enter
and go into, or upon, without formal warrant, any place, building or premises,
or stop any vendor, peddler, junk dealer or any dealer whatsoever, and require
him, if necessary to proceed to some place which the keeper of weights and
measures shall specify for the purpose of making proper test. (1985 Code,
§ 25-28)
9-1906. Prosecution of violators generally. Whenever the sealer of
weights and measures finds a violation of any section of this chapter relating to
weights and measures, he shall cause the violator to be prosecuted. (1985 Code,
§ 25-29)
9-1907. Sealing, weighing or measuring devices. Whenever the
sealer of weights and measures compares weights, measures, weighing devices
or measuring devices and finds that they correspond, or if he causes them to
correspond, with the standards in his possession, he shall seal or mark such
weights, measures, weighing devices or measuring devices with a seal to be
approved and provided by the board of commissioners. (1985 Code, § 25-30)
9-1908. Condemnation, etc., and correction of weights, measures,
etc. (1) The sealer of weights and measures shall condemn, seize and may
destroy inaccurate weights, measures, weighing devices or measuring devices,
which in his best judgment are not susceptible to repair, but such as are
inaccurate and yet may be repaired, he shall mark, or tag as “condemned for
repairs,” and the owners or operators of apparatuses so condemned shall have
same corrected or repaired within ten (10) days and may not use nor dispose of
same in any manner without permission from the sealer of weights and
measures.
(2) Any apparatus, which has been “condemned for repairs,” and has
not been repaired as required above, shall be confiscated by the sealer of weights
and measures. (1985 Code, § 25-31)
9-1909. Records and reports. The sealer of weights and measures
shall keep a complete record of his official acts, and shall make an annual report
to the board of commissioners, duly sworn to, and also an annual report, duly
sworn to, on the first day of December of each year, to the commissioner of the
state department of agriculture, on blanks to be furnished by such
commissioner. (1985 Code, § 25-32)
9-1910. Approved standards, etc.,to be provided. The board of
commissioners shall provide the sealer of weights and measures with suitable
quarters, a set of standards to be approved by the commissioner of the state
department of agriculture, and all other equipment for the proper performance
9-47
of his duties; and all such standards shall, so furnished to the sealer of weights
and measures, be tried, approved and sealed under the direction of the
commissioner, and shall be returned to him for verification at least once in every
five (5) years. (1985 Code, § 25-33)
9-1911. Police powers. The sealer of weights and measures is made a
special policeman and, after first taking the oath and making bond, may arrest,
without formal warrant, any violator of this code or any ordinance, in relation
to weights and measures, and seize for use as evidence, without formal warrant,
any false or insulated weight, measure weighing devices or measuring devices
or packages, or amounts of commodities offered or exposed for sale or sold in
violation of this Code or any city ordinance. (1985 Code, § 25-34)
9-48
CHAPTER 20
GARAGE SALES
SECTION
9-2001. Definitions.
9-2002. Requirements.
9-2003. Exemptions.
9-2004. Enforcement.
9-2001. Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when
used in this chapter shall have the meanings described to them in this section:
(1) "Garage sale" means and includes the sale of personal property
from a residence. It includes all general sales open to the public including but
not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room,"
"backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sales, as well as other sales of
personal property from a residence not exempted hereunder. This definition
shall not include the sale of personal property not in excess of five (5) items,
provided that such items are specifically named or identified in the
advertisement.
(2) "Personal property" means any property other than real property.
(3) "Residence" shall mean a single address of a single-family residence
(including mobile homes), duplexes, apartments, or condominiums. (Ord. #3322,
Sept. 1995)
9-2002. Requirements. (1) No garage sale shall be conducted unless
and until the person desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor
from the city finance department. Members of more than one residence may
collectively obtain a permit for a garage sale to be conducted at one of the
residences.
(2) Upon compliance with the provisions of this section and the
payment of the proper fee, the finance department shall issue a permit the same
day which shall designate the location of the sale and day(s) upon which sale
shall be conducted.
(3) Only one (1) sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in size may be
displayed on the premises where such sale is being conducted. Such sign shall
not be erected or placed closer than five (5) feet to the front or side property
lines and shall be removed immediately following the termination of the sale or
exhibited no more than two days prior to the sale.
(4) Such a garage sale shall be held only between the hours of 7:30
A.M. and 7:00 P.M.
(5) No more than three (3) garage sales shall be held from the same
address within any calendar year with not more than two (2) garage sales
permitted within a thirty (30) day period.
9-49
(6) Each garage sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days.
(7) There shall be no fee charged for any permit issued.
(8) The garage sale permit shall be prominently displayed from the
front of the building from which such sale is conducted. Upon the request of any
code enforcement personnel of the City of Johnson City, the owner or lessee of
the property shall exhibit such permit.
(9) Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale may be displayed
within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or the yard. No personal
property may be offered for sale at a garage sale in any public right-of-way.
(10) Exceptions. (a) If a garage sale is not held on the dates for which
the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of
inclement weather conditions, the city may issue another permit to the
applicant. No additional permit fee is required.
(b) A fourth garage sale shall be permitted in a calendar year
if satisfactory proof of change in ownership of the real property is first
presented to the city recorder or his duly authorized representative.
(11) Revocation and refusal. (a) Any permit issued under this chapter
may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by
the city recorder if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder
contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement.
(b) If any individual is convicted of an offense under this
chapter, the city recorder shall cancel any existing garage sale permit
held by the individual convicted and not to issue such individual another
garage sale permit for a period of two years from the time of cancellation.
(Ord. #3322, Sept. 1995)
9-2003. Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply or
affect the following:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
(3) Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other
business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would
be permitted by the zoning regulations of the city or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances.
(4) Any sale conducted by a bona fide charitable, non-profit,
educational, cultural, or governmental institution or organization from or at the
place of business for the institution or organization when the proceeds from the
sale are used directly for the institution's or organization's charitable purposes
and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. (Ord. #3322, Sept.
1995)
9-50
9-2004. Enforcement. (1) A police officer or any other official
designated by any city ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or
regulating ordinance or to enforce the same shall have the right of entry to any
premises showing evidence of a garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or
inspection and may close the premises from such a sale and/or charge the
individual(s) conducting or working in such a sale with violation of this chapter.
(2) Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. #3322, Sept. 1995)
9-51
CHAPTER 21
AMBULANCE SERVICES1
SECTION
9-2101. General provisions.
9-2102. Annual permit.
9-2103. Organization identification.
9-2104. Operating base.
9-2105. Medical director.
9-2106. Insurance.
9-2107. Vehicles and equipment.
9-2108. Ambulance personnel.
9-2109. Disasters and mutual aid.
9-2110. Revenue.
9-2111. Refusal of service.
9-2112. Monitoring and enforcement.
9-2113. Penalties.
9-2101. General provisions. (1) Each service licensed hereunder shall
conform to all Class "A" or "B" ambulance standards as defined by the
Tennessee Department of Health and Environment, Division of Emergency
Medical Services.
(2) This chapter shall apply solely to services as referred to
hereinabove operating point to point transports within the geographic
boundaries of Washington County or the City of Johnson City and operating
under a business license from the City of Johnson City.
(3) No such service shall cause or permit any ambulance to be
dispatched on the basis of information obtained by scanning radio traffic. All
dispatches shall be made and answered by established base operations for each
service.
(4) No such service shall make an emergency response to the scene of
any call without the permission of the Washington County - Johnson City 911
Communications Center.
(5) Such services permitted to operate within the area of Washington
County and the City of Johnson City shall first notify the 911 Communications
Center if, while transporting a patient, it becomes necessary to change from
non-emergency to emergency traffic. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2102. Annual permit. Each such service operating and initiating
calls within the area of Washington County and the City of Johnson City,
1State law reference
Ambulance services: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-61-101, et seq.
9-52
respectively, shall be required to obtain a permit from Washington County and
the City of Johnson City or their designated agent. The following information
shall be submitted annually to the respective government entities, no later than
April 1st of each year, and shall be expressly contingent on processing of the
state ambulance license renewal by the State of Tennessee, to wit:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the owner(s) of the
service.
(2) The trade or fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does
business and/or proposes to do business.
(3) The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation
and care of patients.
(4) A copy of the completed state licensure package along with a copy
of the applicant's state license.
(5) A current copy of the business/privilege license issued by the
county clerk or City of Johnson City.
(6) An accompanying fee, mutually agreed upon by the Washington
County Executive and the City Manager of Johnson City, and which fee shall be
published from time to time.
(7) Ambulance services will supply the city government with evidence
of compliance with the current annual State of Tennessee ambulance permits
at the A or B level. This can be done through supplying a copy of the annual
license or by letter from the regional director for the Tennessee Department of
Health and Environment - Division of Emergency Medical Services. (Ord.
#3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2103. Organization identification. (1) The ambulance service shall
boldly display its company name on all facilities, visible to the public.
(2) No entity providing ambulance service shall use the name
"Washington County" or "Johnson City," or any part thereof, in their name or
any other phrase or wording that would tend to cause the public to believe that
it is associated with the Washington County or Johnson City Governments.
This provision shall not apply to the Washington County-Johnson City EMS Inc.
or the Johnson City Rescue Squad, both of which have established their names
prior to the ordinance comprising this chapter. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2104. Operating base. Each such service accepting calls originating
and terminating in Washington County or the City of Johnson City shall do the
following:
(1) Maintain a fixed base of operations within the boundaries of
Washington County or within the City of Johnson City.
(2) Such base shall house necessary equipment for communications
and business functions.
9-53
(3) Maintain twenty-four (24) hour per day communications with the
public, with other services and with the emergency departments of the various
hospitals.
(4) The address and telephone number(s) of such fixed base shall be
published and available to the public. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2105. Medical director. All physician medical directors for
ambulance services operating within the area of Washington County or the City
of Johnson City shall be physicians practicing predominantly within the
boundaries Washington County or the City of Johnson City. (Ord. #3513, Sept.
1997)
9-2106. Insurance. All ambulance services operating hereunder of shall
maintain insurance policies consistent with the state law for emergency medical
services, workers compensation and financial responsibility. Such insurance
policies shall be issued by insurance companies authorized to do business in the
State of Tennessee. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2107. Vehicles and equipment. (1) All vehicles used as ambulances
shall conform to the regulations of the Tennessee Department of Health
concerning specifications and equipment.
(2) Each emergency ambulance shall be equipped for communication
with the 911 communications center and the hospitals from the vehicle as well
as portable communications.
(3) Each emergency ambulance shall be equipped to provide advanced
life support including but not limited to those items required by the Department
of Public Health, State of Tennessee.
(4) Each ambulance shall display its company name and unit number
on the outside of the vehicle.
(5) Each emergency ambulance shall be equipped with essential
emergency pediatric equipment.
(6) Each ambulance shall have available snow tires or chains to enable
the vehicle to travel in times of snow or ice.
(7) All vehicles used as non-emergency ambulances shall be no more
than seven (7) years old from the date of manufacture and have no more than
200,000 actual miles.
(8) Ambulances shall be kept in sanitary condition. Units shall be
cleaned immediately after each call. All services shall conform to the provisions
of occupational health regulations regarding bloodborne pathogens, specifically
under conditions established under CFR1910.1030 and any other applicable law
or regulation. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2108. Ambulance personnel. (1) Emergency medical technicians
and paramedics employed by ambulance services operating within the
9-54
boundaries of Washington County or within the City of Johnson City shall be
licensed by the Tennessee Department of Health.
(2) All emergency medical technicians and paramedics shall be clean
in dress and person and shall display his/her name and level of license in an
appropriate manner visible to the patient. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2109. Disasters and mutual aid. All permitted services within the
boundaries of Washington County and within the City of Johnson City shall be
required to:
(1) Respond, in the case of disaster, upon the request of the 911
communications center and report for coordination by the appropriate level of
authority of the Washington County-Johnson City Emergency Medical Services,
the state EMS regional director and/or the emergency management agency or
their designees in accordance with the incident command system.
(2) Establish mutual aid agreements with the surrounding EMS and
rescue services for assistance in the event of major disaster situations or
incidents that exceed the capabilities of the primary EMS service, consistent
with state statutes regarding the provisions of emergency medical services.
(Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2110. Revenue. Each service licensed hereunder shall be Medicare
and TennCare enrolled and currently approved with a valid Tennessee provider
number and will accept assignment on all Medicare and TennCare claims. Each
service shall have the capability and shall provide electronic billing with
Medicare. Computer billing shall be used for all patient accounts receivables.
Business office hours shall be established for the general public at least forty
(40) hours per week and at least during normal daylight office hours. (Ord.
#3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2111. Refusal of service. No service licensed hereunder shall deny
emergency care or transportation to any patient based on race, creed, sex,
national origin, patient condition, or ability to pay. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-2112. Monitoring and enforcement. The Washington
County-Johnson City Medical Advisory Board and the Regional Director for the
Tennessee Division of EMS under the Department of Health and Environment,
shall jointly monitor all licensed services operating in Washington County and
within the City of Johnson City for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
Permits issued under § 9-2102 shall be subject to revocation for violations
as provided herein, by the issuing body and that revocation shall be subject to
review as provided by law. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-55
9-2113. Penalties. (1) Any person or service violating or failing to
comply with any provision of the ordinance comprising this chapter shall be
assessed a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation and
payable in equal sums to the governments of Washington County and the City
of Johnson City.
(2) Two (2) violations within a six (6) month period shall subject the
service to revocation of its permit. (Ord. #3513, Sept. 1997)
9-56
CHAPTER 22
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-2201. To be furnished under franchise.
9-2201. To be furnished under franchise. Cable television shall be
furnished to the City of Johnson City and its inhabitants under franchise
granted by the board of commissioners of the city. The rights, powers, duties
and obligations of the City of Johnson City and its inhabitants are clearly stated
in the franchise agreements executed by, and which shall be binding upon the
parties concerned.1
1Ordinances providing complete details relating to cable television
franchise agreements are of record in the office of the city recorder.
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
2. SPAY/NEUTER REGULATIONS FOR DOGS AND CATS.
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
SECTION
10-101. Definitions.
10-102. Registration of animals.
10-103. Restraint.
10-104. Impoundment and violation notice.
10-105. Animal care.
10-106. Keeping of wild animals.
10-107. Nuisance animal.
10-108. Performing animal exhibitions.
10-109. Animal waste.
10-110. Dead animals.
10-111. Compliance.
10-112. Near residence or business.
10-113. Approval of health officer; factors considered.
10-114. Maintenance of stalls, stables, pens, etc.
10-115. Removal upon failure to maintain premises.
10-116. Pounds, kennels, etc., dangerous or detrimental to human life, etc.
10-117. Right of entry.
10-118. Enforcement.
10-119. Penalties.
10-101. Definitions. As used in this ordinance the following terms
mean:
(1) “Animal.” Any live, vertebrate or invertebrate creature, domestic
or wild, warm or cold blooded, other than a human being.
(2) “Animal control officer.” Any person designated by the city
manager with primary responsibility in the area of animal control.
(3) “Animal shelter.” Any facility operated by the city for the purpose
of impounding animals held under the authority of the city or state.
(4) “Nuisance animal.” Any animal or animals which:
(a) Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
(b) Attacks other animals;
(c) Trespasses on school grounds;
10-2
(d) Is repeatedly at large;
(e) Damages private or public property; or
(f) Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or
untimely fashion, or adversely affects the health or disturbs the repose
of any neighbor or disturbs the peace and quiet a of neighborhood.
(5) “Owner.” Any person, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall
be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days
or more.
(6) “Pet.” Any animal kept for pleasure rather than commercial use.
(7) “Restraint.” Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the
control of a responsible person, or within the real property limits of its owner,
or confined within a vehicle.
(8) “Vicious animal.” Any animal or animals that attacks, bites, or
injures or poses a threat to human beings or other animals without adequate
provocations; or which, because of temperament, conditioning or training, has
a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings or other animals.
(9) “Wild animal.” Any live monkey (nonhuman primate), racoon,
skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other
warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state. (Ord.
#3425, March 1998, as amended by Ord. #4155-06, March 2006)
10-102. Registration of animals. (1) All residents owning, keeping,
harboring, or having custody of animals over three months of age within the city
limits shall register that animal with the City of Johnson City by making
application in written form to the Animal Control Center. This provision shall
not apply to the keeping of small, caged birds; rodents; reptiles; or aquatic and
amphibian animals as pets.
(2) Written applications for registration shall be made to the
Washington County/Johnson City Animal Control Center. There shall be no fee
for registration. Upon filing of the application and proof of current rabies
vaccination, a license from the City of Johnson City shall issue evidencing such
registration. The Animal Control Center shall handle the issuance of such
license. Included on the application shall be the name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant, a description of the animal, rabies certificate number
issued by a licensed veterinarian as required by state law.
(3) The registration shall be good for three years for all animals.
(4) At the time of registration, an appropriate certificate (See Appendix
1 herein)1 shall be issued under subsection (2) and the Animal Control Center
shall also deliver a registration tag bearing the serial number of the registration
certificate and the year in which it was issued. The owner shall affix the
1Appendix 1 is available in the office of the recorder.
10-3
registration tag to a collar or harness to be worn at all times when the animal
is off the premises of the owner.
(5) If registration of seeing eye dogs or governmental police dogs can
be demonstrated with national organizations in such manner so as to provide
for accurate identification of individual animals so registered, then and in such
event registration shall not be required hereunder for those animals so
registered.
(6) The Animal Control Center shall maintain a record of the
identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to
the public as a public record.
(7) A duplicate tag can be obtained for two dollars ($2.00). Licenses
are non-transferable, are to be paid in advance and are non-refundable.
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring
an animal within the city limits to fail to register such animal as required by
this section.
(9) A kennel license will be required for any facility and/or person who
keeps more than two dogs or cats for breeding purposes and sells or otherwise
disposes of the offspring of their animals for a consideration.1
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, or harbor any
dog or cat within the city limits unless such dog or cat is inoculated against
rabies.2
(11) The city, acting by and through the Animal Control Center, may
revoke any license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply
with this ordinance, the regulations promulgated by the city manager, or any
law governing the protection of animals as contained in the state rabies laws,
Tennessee Code Annotated § 68-8-101 et seq., at the time of the passage of this
ordinance on third and final reading.
(12) Any person whose license is revoked shall, within ten (10) days
thereafter:
(a) Remove; or
(b) Humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored
by such person; or
(c) Fully comply with the provisions of this ordinance and file
proof of such compliance with the Animal Control Center. No part of the
license fee, however, shall be refunded.
(13) If the applicant has withheld, has falsified any information, or if
the information is incomplete or incorrect, the city acting by and through the
Animal Control Center shall refuse to issue a license or, if issued, shall
1State law references
Registration fee for kennels: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-8-104.
2State law reference
Rabies control: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-8-104.
10-4
immediately and forthwith revoke at the same. Appeals from such refusal to
issue or from revocation shall be to the city manager or his designee. (Ord.
#3425, March 1998, as amended by Ord. #3686, June 1999, and Ord. #4155-06,
March 2006)
10-103. Restraint. (1) Running at large prohibited.1 It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having an animal in his
care, custody or possession to suffer or allow it to run at large unattended on or
about the streets and highways of Johnson City, or on the property of another
person without permission of the owner or occupant of that property, or of the
person in possession of that property.
(2) Duty to keep animal under restraint while off of property. It shall
be the duty of the of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his
care, custody or possession to keep said animal under control at all times while
the animal is off of the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian.
For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed "under control" when it is
confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, is secured by a leash or other
device held by a competent person, or is properly confined within an enclosure
with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located.
(3) Vicious animals. As determined by the animal control officer, each
vicious animal will be confined by the owner or custodian of the animal within
a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled and restrained or
caged whenever off the premises of its owner. (Ord. #3425, March 1998, as
amended by Ord. #4155-06, March 2006)
10-104. Impoundment and violation notice. (1) Unrestrained dogs
and nuisance animals shall be taken by the animal control officers and
impounded in an animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.
(2) If by a license, tag or other means, the owner of an impounded
animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon
impoundment notify the owner by telephone or mail or other appropriate,
reasonable means.
(3) An owner reclaiming an impounded animal will pay a fee of thirty
dollars ($30) plus two dollars ($2.00) per day the animal has been impounded
and the cost of all medical treatment or other cost or expense incurred as
deemed necessary by the animal control officer.
(4) The adoption fee for impounded cats will be twenty dollars ($20.00)
plus cost of sterilization.
(5) The adoption fee for impounded dogs will be twenty dollars ($20.00)
plus cost of sterilization.
1State law reference
Running at large: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 44-8-401, et seq.
10-5
(6) All dogs or cats re-claimed will be inoculated against rabies, the
cost of which will be in addition to the re-claiming or the adoption fee.
(7) Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three days will
become the property of the city and will be placed for adoption in a suitable
home or humanely euthanized. An owner of an unclaimed animal, whether
licensed or not, will be charged with having an unrestrained animal.
(8) In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large,
the animal control officer or police officer may issue to the known owner of such
animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice, if uncontested, shall impose
upon the owner a penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150) which may, at the discretion of the animal
owner, be paid to the animal control center within seventy-two hours (excluding
Saturday and Sunday) in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event
such penalty is not paid within the seventy-two (72) hour time period prescribed,
a citation or warrant will be issued and additional costs assessed for the same.
(Ord. #3425, March 1998, as amended by Ord. #3686, June 1999)
10-105. Animal care. (1) No owner or custodian shall fail to provide
his/her animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather, and veterinary care when needed to
prevent suffering, and shall provide such animals with humane care and
treatment. No owner or custodian shall fail to seek medical treatment for an
injured or sick animal. If an owner refuses or fails to respond to repeated
warnings, an animal control officer can and shall remove such animal to provide
medical treatment or transport to the center to be humanely euthanized.
(2) No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork
or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, suffer or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans.
(3) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(4) No person except a licensed veterinarian shall crop a dog’s ears nor
dock a dog's tail.
(5) Chickens, ducklings or rabbits under two (2) pounds will not be
sold or offered for sale as pets, toys, premiums or novelties.
(6) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
reasonable and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s
owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator
shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(7) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be ingested by an
animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his/her
10-6
own property common rat poison.1 (Ord. #3425, March 1998, as amended by
Ord. #4155-06, March 2006)
10-106. Keeping of wild animals. (1) No person shall keep or permit
to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed
to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
(2) No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
This does not affect keeping wild animals for rehab or other purposes allowed
by state permit. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-107. Nuisance animal. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any
animal which barks, howls, or whines in an excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion; creates a nuisance; or adversely affects the health or disturbs the repose
of any neighbor, or disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood. Owners of
such animals will receive one (1) warning from the police or animal control to
correct the situation, a citation will be issued if the police or animal control have
to respond to repeated complaints. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-108. Performing animal exhibitions. (1) No performing animal
exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or
encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or
manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical
injury or suffering.
(2) All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and
be in good working condition. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-109. Animal waste. The owner of every animal shall be responsible
for the removal of any excreta deposited by his/her animal(s), or animals in
his/her custody, on public walks, recreation areas, private property and public
parks. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-110. Dead animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
throw any dead animal onto the streets, or other public places within the city
limits of Johnson City. The bodies of all animals dying of any causes, shall be
the responsibility of the owner of said animal, to be disposed of, or buried in an
appropriate, licensed disposal facility or outside the city limits as soon as
possible. In the alternative, the owner shall contact the appropriate agency to
1State law reference
Cruelty to animals: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-202.
Dyed baby fowl and rabbits: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-204.
10-7
remove the body of said animal which shall be bagged or otherwise
appropriately contained. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-111. Compliance. No owner, lessee, tenant or subtenant of any
property, public or private, located within the city shall keep, maintain or cause
to be kept any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, swine, chickens, turkeys, ducks,
geese, goats, sheep, hares or similar animals or fowl either domesticated or
nondomesticated except under conditions set forth in the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-112. Near residence or business. No animals, fowl, swine or
poultry described in § 10-111 shall be kept within a distance of one thousand
(1,000) linear feet of any residence or place of business or industry within the
city, without the approval of the health officer. The health officer shall approve
the keeping of the animals and fowl on public and private premises only when
in his opinion the keeping of such animals and fowl will not injuriously affect
the public health and welfare. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-113. Approval of health officer; factors considered. The health
officer is authorized to prohibit the keeping of animals and fowl described in
§ 10-111 within the city when it has been determined that the keeping of such
animals and fowl is not in compliance with the provisions included in § 10-112,
or when in his opinion the keeping of such animals and fowl may prove
detrimental to the public health by creating or causing situations conducive to
the breeding and attracting of flies and other injurious and obnoxious insects,
the breeding, feeding and harboring of rats, and which may give rise to offensive
smells and odors. Approval for the maintenance of such animals or fowl may be
at the discretion of the health officer. Owners and keepers of such animals and
fowl, when not specifically notified to dispose of them within a reasonable
specified time, may construe their failure to receive such notice as evidence of
approval and that they may maintain such animals or fowl for as long as their
maintenance does not constitute a hazard to the public health and welfare.
(Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-114. Maintenance of stalls, stables, pens, etc.. (1) No animals or
fowl described in § 10-111 shall be kept in any place in which manure or liquid
discharges from such animals or fowl shall collect or accumulate to any degree
of offensiveness. Such manure and liquids shall be at once removed to some
proper place of disposal or effectively stored between periods of removal in
closed containers, which shall provide for the maximum practical fly, rodent and
odor control.
(2) Stalls, stables, pens, yards and appurtenances in which such
animals and fowl are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and
wholesome condition, so that no offensive odor shall be allowed to escape
10-8
therefrom, and no rodents, flies or other insects will be able to breed therein or
become attracted thereto.
(3) Buildings, pens, yards and appurtenances constructed for the
purpose of housing and impounding animals and fowl shall be located with the
view of adequate drainage and constructed so as to facilitate routine cleaning.
(Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-115. Removal upon failure to maintain premises. It shall be the
duty of the health officer to issue orders requiring the removal of animals and
fowl from the city when the keeping of such animals and fowl is in violation of
this chapter and at all times when the keeping of such animals or fowl may
constitute a hazard to the public health. The health officer may issue orders
requiring the owners of animals and fowl, or owners, tenants and lessees of
properties where such animals and fowl are quartered, to clean routinely stalls,
stables, pens and yards and to maintain such appurtenances in a clean and
sanitary condition. Failure to maintain premises in a satisfactory condition at
any and all times following the receipt of such orders from the health officer will
be considered as justification to cause the removal of such animals or fowl from
the city. Every keeper of such animals and fowl shall cause feed provided
therefor to be stored and kept in a ratproof, flytight building, box or receptacle.
(Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-116. Pounds, kennels, etc., dangerous or detrimental to human
life, etc.. No keeper of any pound, kennel, coop, pen, veterinary hospital or
other such place where animals or fowl may be kept or impounded shall allow
the same or any animal therein, by reason of want of care, food, ventilation or
cleanliness or otherwise, to be or to become dangerous or detrimental to human
life, health or welfare. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-117. Right of entry. It shall be the duty of the health officer to enter
onto any premises, public or private, at any reasonable hour of the day to make
inspections for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
#3425, March 1998)
10-118. Enforcement. The civil provisions or this chapter shall be
enforced by those persons or agencies designated by city manager. It shall be
a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer in the
performance of his/her duties. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-119. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
will be punished in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the charter
and ordinances of the city and the statutes of Tennessee. Each separate day
during which an offense occurs under this chapter shall constitute a separate
chargeable offense. (Ord. #3425, March 1998)
10-9
CHAPTER 2
SPAY/NEUTER REGULATIONS FOR DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-201. Spaying and neutering requirements.
10-202. Obtaining an unaltered permit.
10-203. Enforcement.
10-201. Spaying and neutering requirements. Any person owning,
keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat six (6) months of age or
older is required to spay or neuter said animal, except:
(1) Persons who own, keep, harbor, or have custody of registered
service dogs or working police dogs;
(2) Persons who are nonresidents of the city and reside temporarily
herein for a period not to exceed a total of thirty (30) days within a twelve (12)
month period;
(3) Animal shelters and veterinary hospitals;
(4) Persons who own, keep, harbor, or have custody of a dog or cat and
who are in possession of a certification signed by a licensed veterinarian stating
that the animal is unfit to be spayed or neutered because the procedure would
endanger the life of or be detrimental to the health or well-being of the animal;
(5) A "commercial breeder" which is defined as any person licensed as
such by the State of Tennessee, who possesses or maintains, under his or her
immediate control, twenty (20) or more unsterilized adult female dogs or cats in
this city for the purpose of selling the offspring as companion animals.
"Commercial breeder" does not include any person who possesses or maintains,
under his or her immediate control, dogs or cats in this city:
(a) For the primary purpose of:
(i) The practice of veterinary medicine;
(ii) Hunting as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 70-1-101(a)(19); or
(iii) Training and/or handling; or
(b) For the exclusive purpose of engaging in the business of
boarding and/or grooming; and
(6) Persons who hold an unaltered animal permit for a particular dog
or cat issued prior to any enforcement under § 10-203 below by the Washington
County/Johnson City Animal Control Center or any successor agency authorized
by law to issue said permit shall have a valid permit for the life of the animal.
Persons who obtain an unaltered permit in conjunction with the first
enforcement under § 10-203 below shall have a valid unaltered permit, unless
a subsequent enforcement action occurs involving the same animal, in which
case the unaltered permit shall become void automatically. (as added by
Ord. #4513-13, Dec. 2013)
10-10
10-202. Obtaining an unaltered permit. Applicants for unaltered
permits must apply to the Washington County/Johnson City Animal Control
Center. The fee for the unaltered animal permit shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per animal. A certificate will be issued identifying each animal as an
unaltered animal and must be available for inspection at all times. (as added by
Ord. #4513-13, Dec. 2013)
10-203. Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
as follows:
(1) Enforcement of this chapter on spaying and neutering shall only
occur if a person is alleged to have violated § 10-103 (Restraint) of the Code of
the City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(2) For the first violation of a provision of § 10-103 (Restraint) of the
Code of the City of Johnson City, the enforcing officer shall issue to the alleged
violator citations for the violation of § 10-103 (Restraint) of the Code of the City
of Johnson City and for a violation of the spay/neuter requirements of this
chapter.
(a) If the alleged violator has already obtained an unaltered
permit prior to this first enforcement, then he/she shall present it to the
municipal court at the hearing on the citations, and the citation regarding
the spay/neuter violation shall be dismissed. All unaltered permits
obtained prior to this first enforcement are valid for the life of the animal.
(b) If the alleged violator has not already obtained an unaltered
permit prior to this first enforcement, then he/she will be given the option
to obtain an unaltered permit prior to the hearing in municipal court. If
the alleged violator presents the unaltered permit to the municipal court
at the hearing regarding the first enforcement, then the citation
regarding the spay/neuter violation shall be dismissed. This unaltered
permit, obtained in conjunction with the first enforcement action, shall
become void automatically with regard to any subsequent enforcement
action regarding § 10-103 (Restraint) of the Code of the City of Johnson
City involving the same animal.
(3) Subject to the exceptions in § 10-201(1) through (6) above, for any
subsequent violations of a provision of § 10-103 (Restraint) of the Code of the
City of Johnson City concerning the same animal involved in the first
enforcement action, the violator shall be punished in accordance with § 1-104 of
the Code of the City of Johnson City, each separate day during which an offense
occurs being a separate offense.
(4) The officer charged with enforcement shall schedule all hearings
pertaining to alleged violations of the spay/neuter provisions of this chapter at
least thirty (30) days from the date of the citation's issuance to give the alleged
violator time to comply with this chapter's requirements.
(5) Presentation to the municipal court of a proper unaltered permit
shall constitute a defense solely with respect to the citation alleging a violation
10-11
of the spay/neuter requirements of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #4513-13,
Dec. 2013)
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER
1. OFFENSES--MISCELLANEOUS.
2. ADVERTISING.
3. PROSTITUTION; ASSIGNATION.
4. GAMBLING.
5. NOISE.
6. EMERGENCY ALARM DEVICES.
7. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
CHAPTER 1
OFFENSES--MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-101. State misdemeanor law adopted.
11-102. Return of library materials.
11-103. Profane, obscene, etc., language.
11-104. Assault and battery.
11-105. Injuring, defacing, etc., buildings.
11-106. Injuring, defacing, etc., street signs, etc.
11-107. Blasting operations.
11-108. Sale of explosive to minor.
11-109. Trespass.
11-110. Occupying private buildings.
11-111. Loitering--generally.
11-112. Loitering--obstructing streets.
11-113. Loitering--between the hours of midnight and 5:00 A.M.
11-114. Removal, damage, etc., of personal property.
11-115. Sale, etc., of tobacco to minors.
11-116. Pinball machines--near school.
11-117. Pinball machines--nuisance.
11-118. Pinball machines--operation by minors.
11-119. Abandonment of airtight containers.
11-120. Disturbing the peace.
11-121. Vagrancy.
11-122. Begging.
11-123. Discharge of firearms, etc.; fires.
11-124. Air guns, slingshots, etc.
11-125. Throwing balls, bows, etc., into streets.
11-126. Disturbing lawful assembly or religious service.
11-2
11-127. Unlawful assembly.
11-128. Cemeteries; marking, defacing, etc., monuments, etc.
11-129. Drunkenness.
11-130. Indecent exposure, language, pictures, etc.
11-131. Material harmful to minors.
11-132. Fighting, quarreling, etc.
11-133. Contamination of springs, etc.
11-134. Carrying concealed weapons.
11-135. Sale of poison--records.
11-136. Sale of poison--minors.
11-137. Railroad, etc., whistles.
11-138. Climbing, displacing, etc., utility poles.
11-139. Fireworks.
11-140. Smoking, eating, etc., on transit vehicles.
11-141. Spitting, etc., upon sidewalks, etc., prohibited.
11-142. Camping on public property.
11-101. State misdemeanor law adopted. No person shall commit
within the city any act which, while not specifically prohibited by this Code or
other ordinance, constitutes a misdemeanor under the statutes of the state or
at common law and punishable by state statute or common law by fine,
imprisonment or both. (1985 Code, § 16-1)
11-102. Return of library materials. (1) Any person or persons having
been given temporary custody of books or other materials that are owned by the
Johnson City Public Library, a free public library of the city, being ninety (90)
days past due in returning said books or materials, who after being notified by
certified mail sent to the last known address of said person or persons that said
library materials are overdue, and who shall fail to return said books or
materials so past due within fifteen (15) days when said notice is posted and pay
all fines with reference to said books or materials, or in the alternative shall fail
to pay to the library the cost of replacing said books or materials, together with
all fines with reference to said overdue books or materials, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(2) In the prosecution of this section, failure to return books or other
library materials within fifteen (15) days after the posting of the written pastdue
notice, above mentioned, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud
the city.
(3) A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in an
amount equal to fifty dollars ($50.00) per day each day during which said books
or materials shall not be returned, after receipt of notice as hereinbefore
provided, or twice the replacement value of said books or materials, not to
exceed the aggregate sum computed at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
day of violation. Said fine may be suspended by the court upon return of said
overdue library materials and the payment of the fine for not returning said
11-3
materials when due, or upon the payment of the replacement value for such
overdue materials and the fine for not returning said materials when due, not
to exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day of violation. (1985 Code,
§ 16-2)
11-103. Profane, obscene, etc., language. No person shall use
profane, obscene or loud and boisterous language upon the public sidewalks of
the city. (1985 Code, § 16-5)
11-104. Assault and battery. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit an assault, or assault and battery, or riot or any disorderly conduct.
(1985 Code, § 16-6)
11-105. Injuring, defacing, etc., buildings. No person shall wantonly
or carelessly injure, deface or disfigure any building, or fixture attached thereto,
or the enclosure thereof, or break, injure, destroy or carry away any of the hose,
engines, machinery or apparatus of any kind, or any part thereof, belonging to
the city. (1985 Code, § 16-7)
11-106. Injuring, defacing, etc., street signs, etc.. No person shall
injure, deface or destroy any street sign, guideboard, guidepost, lamppost or
lamp or lantern thereon, on any tree, building, fence, post or other thing set,
erected or made for the use or ornament of the city, or paint, or draw any word
or figure upon any curbstone or sidewalk; or deface any sign, or written or
printed notices or placards; and it shall be the duty of the city manager to take
cognizance of any violation of the provisions of this section, and report the same
immediately to the chief of police. (1985 Code, § 16-8)
11-107. Blasting operations. No person shall blow up stone or earth
without a sufficient covering to prevent the rocks, stones or other missles from
being thrown up or escaping abroad. (1985 Code, § 16-9)
11-108. Sale of explosive to minor. No person shall sell, offer for sale
or give away to any person, under the age of fifteen (15) years, any percussion
caps, fuse, powder, dynamite or other explosives. (1985 Code, § 16-10)
11-109. Trespass. No person shall knowingly or wilfully trespass on the
premises of another. (1985 Code, § 16-11)
11-110. Occupying private buildings. No person shall move into, or
occupy in any manner, any building belonging to any person, society or religious
assembly, without permission from the person in charge of such building. (1985
Code, § 16-12)
11-4
11-111. Loitering--generally. (1) No person shall loiter in or sit upon
any hallway, window ledge or steps leading into any public building, office
building, opera house, church or store.
(2) Nor shall any person habitually loiter about any hotel, restaurant,
lunch stand, poolroom or other business house, or place of amusement, unless
employed therein, or loiter about or upon or along the streets or other public
places. (1985 Code, § 16-13)
11-112. Loitering--obstructing streets. No person shall, in a street,
obstruct the free passage of foot travelers, by loitering or sauntering therein, nor
shall any person, in any street, loiter or saunter after being directed by a police
officer to move on. (1985 Code, § 16-14)
11-113. Loitering--between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m..
(1) No person shall loiter upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public ways of the city, or in or around public places or public service stations
between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. This prohibition shall apply to all
persons whether afoot, on horseback or in an automobile or other vehicle, and
any person found upon the streets or other public ways, public places or public
service stations shall be deemed guilty of loitering, unless their presence thereon
or thereat is for the purpose of carrying on some legitimate social, religious,
fraternal or professional engagement.
(2) No person shall prowl around the premises of any person at any
time. (1985 Code, § 16-15)
11-114. Removal, damage, etc., of personal property. No person
shall remove, damage, deface or otherwise interfere with the personal property
of another in the city without the consent of the owner of such property, or his
agent. (1985 Code, § 16-16)
11-115. Sale, etc., of tobacco to minors. It shall be unlawful for any
person, his employees, agents or servants or anyone for him knowingly to sell,
to give, to furnish or procure for any person, under the age of eighteen (18)
years, tobacco, smoking tobacco, leaf tobacco or tobacco manufactured in any
form. (1985 Code, § 16-19)
11-116. Pinball machines--near school. It shall be unlawful for any
person to display, operate or offer for use any pinball machines or similar coinoperated
machines at any place within the city, within one hundred (100) yards
of any public school, such distance to be measure in a straight line from the
closest point on the school ground. (1985 Code, § 16-20)
11-5
11-117. Pinball machines--nuisance. The operation of pinball
machines in violation of § 11-118 is declared to be a public nuisance. (1985
Code, § 16-21)
11-118. Pinball machines--operation by minors. It shall be unlawful
for any owner or operator of any pinball machine or similar coin-operated device
to allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to play or operate such
device during regular school hours or during any curfew imposed by law or
ordinance. (1985 Code, § 16-22)
11-119. Abandonment of airtight containers. It shall be unlawful
for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or
other structure, or within any warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or
abandoned dwelling, building or other structure, under such circumstances as
to be accessible to children, any icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semiairtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet
or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door
or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device capable of securing such
door or lid shut. (1985 Code, § 16-23)
11-120. Disturbing the peace. It shall be unlawful for any person to
disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous
conduct or carriage; or, by loud or unusual noises; or by unseemly, profane,
obscene or offensive language; or by language calculated to provoke a breach of
peace; or by assaulting, striking or fighting another; or for any person to permit
any such conduct in or upon any house or premises under his management or
control, so that others in the vicinity are disturbed thereby. (1985 Code, § 16-24)
11-121. Vagrancy. No person shall loiter about gambling houses, or
houses of ill fame, or stroll through the city without any visible means of
support. (1985 Code, § 16-25)
11-122. Begging. No person shall beg or solicit alms for himself or for
his family, or any member thereof, within the city. (1985 Code, § 16-26)
11-123. Discharge of firearms, etc.; fires. No person shall discharge
any gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm in the city except:
(1) In performance of some duty required by law.
(2) In self defense as necessary to prevent immediate serious bodily
injury or death to ones self or others as allowed by state law.
(3) In practice, training or demonstration at a firing range operated by
the city or at other ranges constructed, maintained and operated according to
nationally recognized standards provided that the firearms devices can be
discharged in a manner that will not permit the projectile fired by such devices
11-6
to transverse any area outside the range and provided said ranges are granted
or issued a permit by the city.
(4) Upon written permission from the board of commissioners.
(5) In use of a shotgun loaded with shells containing number two shot
or smaller as long as the point of discharge is not in or upon any street or public
place or within one hundred ten (110) yards thereof nor within on hundred ten
(110) yards of any building in the city.
No person shall fire any preparation when gunpowder is an ingredient,
or which consists wholly of the same, or make any bonfire in or upon any street
or public place within the city. (Ord. #3336, Oct. 1995)
11-124. Air guns, slingshots, etc. (1) Definitions. (a) "Air
gun/slingshot" means any gun, rifle, or pistol, by whatever name known,
which is designed to expel a paintball, dart, missile, projectile, pellet, or
BB shot by the action of compressed air or gas, or by the action of a spring
or elastic, and includes a sling shot, wrist rocket, and similar devices used
to throw BB shot, rocks, and other projectiles, but does not include any
firearm.
(b) "Dealer" means any person engaged in the business of
selling or renting air guns/slingshots.
(2) Restrictions on sale, rental, gift, or other transfer. (a) It is unlawful
for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise transfer an air
gun/slingshot to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. It is
unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise transfer an
air gun/slingshot to any person without first obtaining photographic
identification showing that person's date of birth.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend, rent, give, or
otherwise transfer an air gun/slingshot to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age, except when the relationship of parent and child, guardian
and ward, or adult instructor and pupil exists between such person and
the person under eighteen (18) years of age.
(3) Restrictions on use. (a) It is unlawful for any person under
eighteen (18) years of age to carry any air gun/slingshot on any streets,
alleys, public roads, or public lands unless accompanied by an adult;
provided, that said person under eighteen (18) years of age not so
accompanied may carry such air gun/slingshot unloaded or in a suitable
case or securely wrapped.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air
gun/slingshot from, across, onto, or into any street, sidewalk, alley, public
land, or any public place except on a properly constructed target range.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air
gun/slingshot on any private parcel of land or residence in such a manner
that the pellet, paintball, dart, slingshot, BB shot, rock, missile, or other
projectile may reasonably be expected to traverse any ground or space
11-7
outside the limits of such parcel of land or residence or in such a manner
that persons or property may be endangered.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air
gun/slingshot in such a manner or under such circumstances that persons
or property may be endangered.
(4) Exception. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary,
it shall be lawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to have in such
person's possession any air gun/slingshot if it is:
(a) Kept within such person's domicile;
(b) Used by a person under eighteen (18) years of age, who is a
duly enrolled member of any club, team, or society organized for
education or training purposes and maintaining as a part of its facilities
or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor target range,
when the air gun/slingshot is used at such target range under the
supervision, guidance, and instruction of a responsible adult; or
(c) Used in or on any private parcel of land or residence under
circumstances in which the air gun/slingshots can be fired, discharged or
operated in such manner as not to endanger persons or property and in
such manner as to prevent the pellet, paintball, dart, BB shot, rock,
missile, or other projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside
the limits of such parcel of land or residence.
(5) Violation. Anyone violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of § 1-104 of the Code of the City of
Johnson City, Tennessee. (1985 Code, § 16-28, as replaced by Ord. #4529-14,
March 2014)
11-125. Throwing balls, bows, etc.,into streets. No person shall play
at any game of ball or football, or throw any stone snowball or other missile,
within any street of the city, or have or use for sport, or other purpose, in the
streets or other public places, any bow, cross bow, rubber flippers or other
devices, by which shot or other projectile is cast, or to shoot from any premises
into the streets such devices, so as to endanger life or limb or do injury to person
or property. (1985 Code, § 16-29)
11-126. Disturbing lawful assembly or religious service. No person
shall molest or disturb any lawful assemblage, or any congregation assembled
for religious service, by making a noise, or by rude or indecent behavior or by
the use of profane language. (1985 Code, § 16-30)
11-127. Unlawful assembly. Two (2) or more persons shall not
assemble with an intent, or being assembled, shall not mutually agree to do any
unlawful act with force and violence against the property of the city, or the
person or property of another, or against the peace, or the terror of others, or
make any movement or preparation therefor. (1985 Code, § 16-31)
11-8
11-128. Cemeteries; marking, defacing, etc., monuments, etc..
No person shall throw down, mark, deface or otherwise injure any monument
or tombstone in any cemetery, or dig into or disturb any grave within any
cemetery, or in any way injure any of the buildings or fences that may be erected
for the benefit of any cemetery or burial ground. (1985 Code, § 16-32)
11-129. Drunkenness. No person shall be in an intoxicated condition
within the city in any public place, such as a street, square, avenue, alley, hotel,
depot, theatre, saloon, restaurant or any other place of public use or assembly.
(1985 Code, § 16-33)
11-130. Indecent exposure, language, pictures, etc.. No person shall
appear in a public place naked or in a lewd or indecent costume, make an
indecent exposure of his person, act in lewd manner or use language or sing
songs of a lewd or indecent nature, or exhibit, sell or offer for sale, or give away
or keep in stock, any picture, book or other thing, or exhibit or perform any play
or other representation of a lewd or indecent nature. (1985 Code, § 16-34)
11-131. Material harmful to minors. (1) As used in this section:
(a) “Harmful to minors” means that quality of any description
or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
(i) Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or
morbid interest of minors; and
(ii) Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the
adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors; and
(iii) Is utterly without redeeming social importance for
minors; that is, that the description or representation or work,
taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
(b) “Knowingly” means having general knowledge of , or reason
to know, or a belief or grounds for belief which warrant further inspection
or inquiry or both as to:
(i) The character and content of any material described
herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the
defendant; and
(ii) The age of the minor; provided, however, that an
honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder
if the defendant makes a reasonable, bona fide attempt to
ascertain the true age of such minor.
(c) “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
11-9
(d) “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of
covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
(e) “Sadomasochistic abuse” means flagellation or torture by or
upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on
the part of the one so clothed.
(f) “Sexual conduct” means acts of masturbation,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person’s
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a
female, the breasts.
(g) “Sexual excitement” means the condition of human male or
female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for
monetary consideration to a minor:
(a) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture
film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the
human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
(b) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording, which contains any matter enumerated
in paragraph (a) of subsection (2) hereof, or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct
or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to
minors.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for a
monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission
ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration to
premises wherein there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other
presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors.
(4) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an
offense for which there shall be, upon conviction thereof, a fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each violation. (1985 Code, § 16-35)
11-132. Fighting, quarreling, etc.. (1) It shall be unlawful for any two
(2) or more people to fight within the city, or to quarrel in a rude and boisterous
manner, in any public place of the city.
(2) No persons shall assemble upon the public sidewalks of the city and
engage thereon in boxing, wrestling or in any other forms of violent amusement
commonly called “horse play” to the inconvenience or disturbance of persons
using or entitled to use such sidewalks. (1985 Code, § 16-36)
11-10
11-133. Contamination of springs, etc.. No person shall contaminate
or render impure any spring, well or cistern within the city. (1985 Code,
§ 16-37)
11-134. Carrying concealed weapons. Except where permitted by
state or federal law, no person shall carry publicly or privately for the purpose
of going or being armed, any bowie knife, Arkansas toothpick, dirk, or razor
concealed about his person, or any sword cane, Spanish stiletto or pocket pistol,
revolver, or any kind of pistol, except the army or navy pistol, usually used in
warfare, which shall be carried openly in the hand; or any loaded cane, nun
chaku, shearkens, machete, slingshot, brass knuckles or other dangerous
weapon. (1985 Code, § 16-38)
11-135. Sale of poison--records. Any person who sells or delivers any
poisonous liquid or substance in addition to having the word “Poison” printed or
written on the label thereof, as required by law, shall note in a book kept by
such person for that purpose, the name of the person to whom such poison was
delivered, the date of delivery and the kind and amount of such poison so
delivered, and shall keep such book open for public inspection. (1985 Code,
§ 16-39)
11-136. Sale of poison--minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell any child under eighteen (18) years of age any poisonous liquid or drug
without an order in writing from the parent, guardian or other person having
the legal care of such child, designating such liquid or drug either by its name
or its effect. (1985 Code, § 16-40)
11-137. Railroad, etc., whistles. No railroad, or other company, or any
employees of same, shall blow or cause to be blown unnecessarily, any whistle
upon any engine and in no case shall any whistle be blown longer than five (5)
seconds, and each offense shall subject such company or employees to a separate
fine. (1985 Code, § 16-41)
11-138. Climbing, displacing, etc., utility poles. No person shall
climb upon, displace, break, deface or in any way impair or injure any electric
lighting poles, wires or lamps, or any of the poles, wires and similar equipment
belonging to any electric or other company. (1985 Code, § 16-42)
11-139. Fireworks. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or
offer for sale, or keep in stock, or give away, within the city, or one (1) mile
thereof, any firecracker, cannon cracker, torpedo, Roman candle, sky rocket, pin
wheel or any fireworks of any nature whatsoever, or any toy pistol or toy
cannon, discharged by percussion caps by percussion caps and gunpowder or
other means.
11-11
(2) No person shall sell, possess or use fireworks of any description
within the city; provided, that this section shall not apply to wholesale dealers
and jobbers who may possess fireworks for sale to merchants; provided, further,
that this section shall not apply to fairs, shows and exhibitors who desire to give
fireworks displays for the amusement of the public; provided, that such displays
shall be given under the joint supervision of the exhibitor and the city police
department so as to protect the health and welfare of the public, but no such
fireworks display shall be given without a permit from the city recorder. (1985
Code, § 16-43)
11-140. Smoking, eating, etc., on transit vehicles. Smoking, eating,
chewing of tobacco or drinking is hereby prohibited on city transit vehicles (i.e.,
buses of the city transit system), and each such offense shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). (1985 Code, § 16-44)
11-141. Spitting, etc., upon sidewalks, etc., prohibited. No person
shall spit or expectorate, discharge the nose or vomit upon the sidewalk, or upon
the floors, walls, doors, counters, furniture, stairways or supports of any opera
house, theatre, courthouse, office, auditorium, market house, schoolhouse, hotel
or other public building or store, or of any vehicle, conveyance or car, or upon
any railway platform or depot, within the city limits. (1985 Code, § 16-45)
11-142. Camping on public property. (1) "Camping" means the
erection or use of temporary structures such as tents, tarps, and other
temporary shelters for living accommodation activities such as sleeping, or
making preparations to sleep. “Camping” includes, but is not limited to, the
laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping, storing personal belongings,
making any fire, doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on cooking
activities, whether by fire or use of artificial means such as a propane stove or
other heat-producing portable cooking equipment.
(2) It is an offense for a person to engage in the activity of camping on
property owned, leased, or controlled by the city that is not specifically
designated for use as a camping area by the city, including but not limited to:
any public right-of-way (including public sidewalks), public walking trails,
public parks (except to the extent allowed in title 20 of the code of the City of
Johnson City), The Pavilion at Founders Park, Founders Park, and the
pedestrian areas containing flood control measures installed by the city bounded
by Roan Street, King Street, Boone/Commerce Streets and State of Franklin
Road. (as added by Ord. #4659-18, May 2018)
11-12
CHAPTER 2
ADVERTISING
SECTION
11-201. Distribution of circulars, handbills, samples of medicine, etc., generally.
11-202. Private premises--generally.
11-203. Private premises--when depositing, etc., prohibited.
11-204. Depositing, etc., handbills in or upon vehicles.
11-205. Depositing, etc., in or upon vacant, etc., premises.
11-206. Posting notices, etc., to poles, trees, etc.
11-207. Posing on buildings, fences, etc.
11-201. Distribution of circulars, handbills, samples of medicine,
etc., generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or circulate,
or cause to be distributed or circulated, any handbills, cards, posters or flyers or
samples of medicine, or tobacco in or upon the streets, alleys, ways or places of
the city or in or upon the premises or property of another within the city. Cards
or circulars may be placed under the doors of residences or offices or may be
handed to persons on the premises or placed inside of business houses, shops or
factories. (1985 Code, § 16-63)
11-202. Private premises--generally. (1) No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any
such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or
upon such private premises.
(2) In the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as
provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by any person upon such
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such
inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure
or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be
so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of
mail by the United States, nor to newspapers; except, that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property. (1985 Code, § 16-64)
11-203. Private premises--when depositing, etc., prohibited. No
person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon any private premises, if requested by any person thereon not to
11-13
do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or
Agents,” “No Advertising” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that
the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or have their right
of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
(1985 Code, § 16-65)
11-204. Depositing, etc., handbills in or upon vehicles. No person
shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
vehicle. (1985 Code, § 16-66)
11-205. Depositing, etc., in or upon vacant, etc., premises. No
person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant. (1985 Code, § 16-67)
11-206. Posting notices, etc., to poles, trees, etc. No person shall
post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the
attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon
any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by
law.
(1985 Code, § 16-68)
11-207. Posting on buildings, fences, etc. No person shall post upon
any building, fence, telephone, telegraph or other public service pole, or other
structure in the city, any sign, advertisement, picture or notice of any kind,
without first having obtained permission so to do from the owner or occupant of
such building or other structure. (1985 Code, § 16-69)
11-14
CHAPTER 3
PROSTITUTION; ASSIGNATION
SECTION
11-301. Definitions.
11-302. Prohibited acts.
11-303. Commercial sexual practices.
11-304. Bawdyhouse--abatement.
11-305. Being found in or inmate of bawdyhouse.
11-306. Solicitation.
11-301. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following definitions
apply to those acts proscribed herein:
(1) “Adamitism.” The practice of going naked, the state of being
unclothed.
(2) “Anilingus.” The erotic stimulation achieved by contact between
mouth or tongue and the anus.
(3) “Assignation.” The making of any appointment or engagement for
prostitution or for the purpose of fellatio or cunnilingus, or any act in
furtherance of such appointment or engagement.
(4) “Bestiality.” Sexual relations between a human being and a lower
animal.
(5) “Coprophilia.” The use of feces for sexual excitement.
(6) “Cunnilingus.” Stimulation of the vulva or clitoris with the lips or
tongue.
(7) “Fellatio.” The practice of obtaining sexual gratification by oral
stimulation of the penis.
(8) “Flagellation.” An act or instance of obtaining sexual gratification
by beating, flogging or scourging another or being the recipient of such action.
(9) “Frottage.” Masturbation by rubbing against another person.
(10) “Masturbation.” Erotic stimulation involving the genital organs
commonly resulting in orgasm and achieved by manual or other bodily contact
or manipulation.
(11) “Prostitution.” The giving or receiving of the body for sexual
intercourse for hire (or for licentious sexual intercourse without hire).
(12) “Sexual intercourse.” Carnal copulation, or coitus, between male
and female human beings.
(13) “Sodomy.” The penetration of the male organ into the anus of
another person.
(14) “Urolagnia.” Sexual excitement associated with the sight or
thought of urine or urination. (1985 Code, § 16-86)
11-302. Prohibited acts. No person shall:
11-15
(1) Engage in prostitution;
(2) Aid or abet prostitution;
(3) Procure or solicit for purpose of prostitution;
(4) Keep or set up a house of ill fame, brothel or bawdyhouse;
(5) Receive any person for purposes of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution into any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or building;
(6) Permit any person to remain for the purpose of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution in any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or
building;
(7) Lease or rent or contract to lease or rent any vehicle, conveyance,
place, structure or building, or part thereof, knowing or with good reason to
know that it is intended to be used for any of the purposes herein prohibited; or
(8) Attempt to do any of the acts prohibited by this section. (1985
Code, § 16-87)
11-303. Commercial sexual practices. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
person to procure, offer or to engage in any act of adamitism, anilingus,
bestiality, cunnilingus, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, frottage, masturbation,
sexual intercourse, sodomy or urolagnia for any financial consideration or
reward.
(2) The above referred to unlawful acts or conduct, and each and all of
the same, are declared to be a nuisance and as such, contrary to the public
health, welfare and safety of the citizens and residents of this city.
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, and
each day of violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate
violation. (1985 Code, § 16-88)
11-304. Bawdyhouse--abatement. Any person, upon being notified in
writing by the recorder, by a notice served by a policeman of the city, that any
house, tenement or building in his possession or under his control is being used
as a house of ill fame, and who shall fail within two (2) days after the service of
such notice, to institute proceedings to eject therefrom the tenant, so using such
house, tenement or building, if such tenant shall not sooner have vacated the
same, shall be deemed and held to be guilty of permitting such premises to be
used for the purposes prohibited in this chapter. It is further provided that the
words “house of ill fame” shall be taken to mean and include the terms
“bawdyhouse” and “assignation house.” (1985 Code, § 16-100)
11-305. Being found in or inmate of bawdyhouse. It shall be
unlawful for any person to be an inmate of a house of ill fame, or to be found in
such house for lewd purpose. (1985 Code, § 16-101)
11-16
11-306. Solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person notoriously
abandoned to lewdness to stand upon the sidewalk in front of the premises
occupied by such person, or at the alleyway, door or gate of such premises, or to
sit upon the steps thereof in an indecent posture, or accost, or stop any person
passing by, or to solicit any person on any street or public place to accompany
or to meet such person at any place for purposes of prostitution or other
violation of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 16-102)
11-17
CHAPTER 4
GAMBLING
SECTION
11-401. Possession of wagering stamp.
11-402. Possession of gambling devices--prohibited.
11-403. Possession of gambling devices--destruction by police.
11-401. Possession of wagering stamp. (1) It shall be unlawful for
any person within the city to possess a federal wagering stamp as provided by
the provisions of the Revenue Act of 1951, enacted by the Congress of the United
States.
(2) The possession of a federal wagering stamp by any person within
the city shall be prime facie evidence that such person is engaged in gambling
or wagering in violation of this code and the laws of the United States
prohibiting gambling and wagering, and that the filing of a tax return and
payment of the wagering tax required by the provisions of the Federal Revenue
Act of 1951 to the revenue collector by any person within the city shall be
conclusive evidence of the violation of this code and the laws of the state by such
person.
(3) If any person holding a federal wagering stamp is listed on the tax
return as an employee of a holder of a wagering stamp it shall be conclusive
evidence of the violation of this code and of the laws of the state by such
employee. (1985 Code, § 16-119)
11-402. Possession of gambling devices--prohibited. No person
shall have in his possession any gambling table, slot machine, punchboard or
other gambling device whatever for the enticement of any person to gamble;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to pay toilets, scales or
weighing machines, stamp machines and vending machines, which actually
deliver merchandise of a value equal to the amount of money deposited in such
machine. (1985 Code, § 16-120)
11-403. Possession of gambling devices--destruction by police.
The police department shall destroy all gambling tables, slot machines,
punchboards and gambling devices found in the city. (1985 Code, § 16-121)
11-18
CHAPTER 5
NOISE
SECTION
11-501. Definitions.
11-502. Standards.
11-503. Maximum permitted sound levels in residential zones.
11-504. Maximum permitted sound levels for motor vehicles.
11-505. Nuisance noises expressly prohibited.
11-506. Exceptions.
11-507. Enforcement and penalties.
11-501. Definitions. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined
below shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
(1) "A-weighted sound level (dBA)." The sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.
The unit of measurement is dB(A).
(2) "C-weighted sound level (dBC)." The sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on the sound level meter using the C-weighted network,
which is more sensitive to low-frequency content of a complex sound
environment. The unit of measurement is designated dBC.
(3) "Decibel (dB)." Logarithmic unit of measure used in describing the
relative level of sound. The unit of measurement is dB.
(4) "Low frequency ambient." The lowest sound level repeating itself
during a ten (10) minute measurement period utilizing the dBC slow response
weighting. "Low-frequency ambient" is ascertained with the sound turned off at
the source of a complaint. Measurement shall be made at the same complaint
location for a comparison of the ambient sound level and the sound emanating
from the source of a complaint. The ambient sound level shall not be less than
45 dBC for interior residential noise as measured five feet (5') above the floor in
the center of a room or 55 dBC for all exterior locations measured at a height of
five feet (5') above the ground at any point along or within the property lines as
set forth in § 11-503.
(5) "Motor vehicle." Any two (2) or more wheeled vehicle or machine,
propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used in the transportation of
passengers or property. This shall not include vehicles, locomotives or cars
operated exclusively on rail or rails.
(6) "Noise." Any sound which exceeds the maximum permissible sound
levels by land use categories as specified in this code and which annoys or
disturbs humans and causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on humans.
11-19
(7) "Residential zone." Any location where residential uses are
permitted in the Zoning Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(8) "Sound level." In decibels, the A-weighted or C-weighted sound
pressure level obtained by the use of a calibrated Type 1 or Type 2 sound level
meter as specified by the American National Standards Institute [ANSI S1.4-
1983 (R2006)/ANSI S1.4a-1985 (R2006)]).
(9) "Sound level meter." An instrument for measuring sound,
including a microphone, amplifier, output meter and weighting network which
is sensitive to pressure fluctuations and shall be at least Type II per ANSI
S1.4-1983 specifications. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994, as amended by Ord. #4508-13,
Oct. 2013)
11-502. Standards. (1) Sound level measurements shall be made with
a properly calibrated sound level meter which meets or exceeds the
requirements of this chapter and is operated by persons trained in sound level
measurement and the operation of sound level measurement equipment.
(2) Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter
using the A-weighting scale set on "slow" response for all measurements except
that when measuring motor vehicle sounds, "fast" response shall be used.
(3) For low frequency sound including but not limited to music
produced by amplification or for any live entertainment (whether amplified or
not) or any combination of the same, sound level measurements shall be made
using the C-weighting scale set on "slow" response for all measurements. (Ord.
#3251, Oct. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #4508-13, Oct. 2013)
11-503. Maximum permitted sound levels in residential zones.
(1) Except as exempted in § 11-506 below, no person, regardless of
location, shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a
manner as to create a sound level which, at its maximum, exceeds the limits set
forth in this section (noise) when measured at a height of five feet (5') above the
ground at any point on the property lines of a complaining residence or within
the property lines of a complaining residence. Physical features which are
commonly associated with property lines such as back of curb, telephone and
street light poles, edge of driveway or parking lot, hedges, perimeter landscape
strips, buffers, and fences are presumed to be at a point which is at or within the
property lines.
(2) Sound which originates from a dwelling unit in a duplex or other
multi-family housing unit or from a source outside the interior walls of a
dwelling unit in a duplex or other multi-family housing unit shall be measured
within the complaining dwelling unit at a point at five feet (5') above the floor
at the center of any room.
(3) The following standards shall govern the allowable sound levels in
any residential zoning district. Unless exempted per § 11-506, no noise shall
exceed the limits specified below:
11-20
(a) Nighttime -- 55 dBA between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
(b) Daytime -- 75 dBA between 7:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M.
(c) Any time -- 8 dBC above the low frequency ambient noise
level as defined in § 11-501. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994, as amended by Ord.
#3600, July 1998, and replaced by Ord. #4508-13, Oct. 2013)
11-504. Maximum permitted sound levels for motor vehicles.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be
operated a public or private motor vehicle, motorcycle or combination of vehicles
at any time in such a manner that the sound level of the vehicle exceeds the
levels set forth in Table 1 below:
TABLE 1
MAXIMUM MOTOR VEHICLE SOUND LEVEL (dBA)
Vehicle class Speed limit
35 mph or less
Speed limit
over 35 mph
Any motor vehicle with
a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of less
than 10,000 pounds
81 85
Any motor vehicle with
a GVWR of more than
10,000 pounds
89 94
Motorcycles 81 85
Any other motor
vehicle or any
combination of vehicles
towed by any motor
vehicle
76 80
(2) Sound levels are to be measured at a distance of at least fifty (50)
feet from the noise source and at a height of at least four (4) feet above the
surrounding surface. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994)
11-505. Nuisance noises expressly prohibited. To the extent that
they exceed the sound levels set forth in §§ 11-503 or 11-504, the following
specific acts are declared to be in violation of this chapter:
(1) Animals. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which makes
frequent or long, continued noise;
11-21
(2) Noise sensitive zone. The creation of any excessive noise heard
within any school, public building, church or any hospital, or the grounds
thereof, while in use, which interferes with the workings of such institution;
(3) Loudspeakers, etc. The use of any loudspeaker, drum, or other
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance or sale or
display of merchandise.
(4) Places of entertainment, etc. With respect to any place of
entertainment or any place where amplified sound is produced, or at any place
which is the source of a complaint of vibrations emanating from any location, in
addition to the dBA criteria above, a secondary low frequency dBC criteria shall
apply. No sound or music associated with a location that is the subject of a
complaint shall exceed the low frequency ambient sound level as defined in
§ 11-501 by more than 8 dBC. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994, as replaced by
Ord. #4508-13, Oct. 2013)
11-506. Exceptions. The following are exempt from the sound level
limits specified in §§ 11-503 and 11-504 of this code:
(1) Any vehicle or employee of the city, while engaged upon public
business;
(2) Construction operations between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00
P.M. for which building permits have been issued or construction operations for
which no permit is required, provided that all construction equipment is
operated according to manufacturer's specifications and mufflers are maintained
in proper working order;
(3) Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, highways, sidewalks,
utilities, or other public works by or on behalf of the city, county, state, or utility
company, during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impossible to perform such work during the day;
(4) Domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and agricultural equipment,
between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. provided it is properly operated
with all manufacturer's standard sound-reducing equipment in place and in
proper operating condition;
(5) Safety signals and alarm devices and the authorized testing of such
equipment;
(6) Sounds from nonamplified church bells and chimes;
(7) Sounds resulting from a parade, scheduled outdoor athletic event,
fireworks display, or any event which has been sanctioned by the city;
(8) Sounds resulting from a street fair or block party between the
hours of 7:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M.;
(9) Sounds from trains and other associated railroad rolling stock
when operated in proper repair and manner;
(10) Religious or political gatherings and other activities protected by
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994,
as replaced by Ord. #4508-13, Oct. 2013)
11-22
11-507. Enforcement and penalties. (1) For purposes of this chapter,
either the owner, occupant, or manager of the real property from which a noise
violation originates shall be responsible for remedying the violation and liable
for any costs or fines which result from the violation.
(2) Any person or organization found to be in violation of §§ 11-503,
11-504, or 11-505 of this code shall receive a citation charging him (it) with a
misdemeanor which may result in a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each separate violation. Upon issuance of a notice of violation, the
responsible party shall correct said violation immediately or be cited for an
additional violation. (Ord. #3251, Oct. 1994, as replaced by Ord. #4508-13, Oct.
2013)
11-23
CHAPTER 6
FALSE ALARMS
SECTION
11-601. Purpose.
11-602. Definitions.
11-603. Enforcement.
11-604. Violations and penalty.
11-605.--11-612. Repealed.
11-601. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm end
users to use and maintain alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of
alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms.
These regulations also establish penalties for violations for repeated
summoning of emergency personnel when and where an emergency did not
exist. (1985 Code, § 16-151, as replaced by Ord. #4559-14, Sept. 2014)
11-602. Definitions. (1) "Alarm company" means a person(s) in the
business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, replacing, or monitoring
alarm systems.
(2) "Alarm dispatch" means a notification to the Washington County
Emergency Communications District (911) for alarms within the city limits of
Johnson City, Tennessee (including those areas within Washington, Carter, and
Sullivan Counties), the police department, fire department, or emergency
medical services that an alarm is activated, and the appropriate emergency
responders are notified or dispatched. This definition includes hold-up alarms
as well as alarms commonly referred to as duress or panic alarms.
(3) "Alarm site" means the point of origin of the alarm at a street
address that appears in the alarm dispatch notification to the Washington
County Emergency Communications District (911) for alarms within the city
limits of Johnson City, Tennessee (including those areas within Washington,
Carter, and Sullivan Counties). For multi-family residential complexes that
contain two (2) or more individual units or apartments, an alarm site shall be
defined as the street address of the multi-family residential complex in its
entirety and not an individual unit or apartment within the complex, unless a
tenant of the complex installs or causes to be installed an alarm system or has
a contract for monitoring or maintenance of an alarm system, in which case that
tenant’s apartment/unit shall be the alarm site and that tenant shall be the
alarm user.
(4) "Alarm system" means a device or series of devices, including, but
not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio
frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or
transmit a remote or local audible, visual, or electronic signal indicating an
11-24
alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement or other emergency
responders, including local alarm systems that may be audible only. Alarm
system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person
unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
(5) "Alarm user" means any person, company, institution, or other
commercial, public, or private entity that has contracted for monitoring, repair,
installation, or maintenance service from an alarm company or monitoring
company for an alarm system, or any of the above-listed persons or entities that
own or operate an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained, or repaired
under contract.
(6) "Cancellation" means the process by which a response is
terminated when a monitoring company for the alarm site, designated by the
alarm user, or other qualified person, notifies the Emergency Communications
District or the responding emergency service that there is not an existing
situation at the alarm site requiring an emergency response after an alarm
dispatch request.
(7) "False alarm" means an alarm dispatch to an emergency service
provider, when the responding emergency service provider finds no evidence of
an emergency or criminal offense or attempted criminal offense or fire or
medical emergency, after having completed an investigation of the alarm site.
This definition includes, but is not limited to, mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation and maintenance, or the negligence of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system or his/her/its employees or agents, but does not include
alarm activation caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm user or alarm
company.
Each alarm site will be granted three (3) false alarm violations within a
rolling, twelve (12) month period before enforcement action is commenced,
except in the case of a malicious or intentional sounding or activation of an
alarm. The three (3) false alarm violations are counted separately for each
emergency responder - police, fire, and emergency medical services. Malicious
or otherwise intentional alarm sounding or activation that requires a response
is considered enforceable immediately without consideration of previous alarm
dispatches. Additionally, a malicious false alarm may be prosecuted under state
law. A false alarm also includes a hold-up alarm or robbery alarm, which
generally result from alarm signals generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress, or immediately after it has
occurred, when such an emergency did not exist. (1985 Code, § 16-152, as
replaced by Ord. #4559-14, Sept. 2014)
11-603. Enforcement. (1) Officers of the Johnson City Police
Department are authorized to enforce this chapter as it applies to alarms
necessitating a police department response.
11-25
(2) Fire Marshals of the Johnson City Fire Department are authorized
to enforce this chapter as it applies to alarms necessitating a fire department
response.
(3) Officers of the Johnson City Police Department are authorized to
enforce this chapter as it applies to alarms necessitating an emergency medical
response, at the request of the director of the Washington County/Johnson City
Emergency Medical Services.
(4) Persons responsible for compliance with the terms of this chapter
include alarm site property owners, alarm users, lessees, managers, employees,
or anyone who exercises control over the alarm system of a business or
residence, as the case may be. (1985 Code, § 16-153, as replaced by Ord.
#4559-14, Sept. 2014)
11-604. Violations and penalty. (1) Any instance where emergency
responders are dispatched to investigate an alarm, wherein the alarm is
determined to be false, is considered a violation of this chapter. A fine of up to
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such false alarm may be assessed by the Johnson
City Municipal Court.
(2) An alarm dispatch that is cancelled prior to the emergency services
arrival will not be considered a countable false alarm.
(3) It is a violation of this chapter for an alarm company to activate a
false alarm while installing, repairing or doing maintenance work on an alarm
system. If the fire or police department is notified to cancel the call prior to
arrival, it will not be considered a false alarm.
(4) In addition to the penalty in subsection (1), the municipal court
may assess and render a judgment for the actual costs of the response, including
but not limited to the costs of the equipment, fuel, personnel, and supplies.
(1985 Code, § 16-154, as replaced by Ord. #4559-14, Sept. 2014)
11-605. -- 11-612. [Repealed]. (as repealed by Ord. #4559-14, Sept.
2014)
11-26
CHAPTER 7
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
SECTION
11-701. Release of hazardous materials unlawful.
11-702. Definitions.
11-703. Liability for costs associated with cleanup, etc.
11-704. Effect of chapter on other obligations, etc.
11-705. Penalty.
11-701. Release of hazardous materials unlawful. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to release or cause to be released,
burn or cause to be burned, emit, spill, or leak any hazardous material, as
defined herein. (Ord. #3676, April 1999)
11-702. Definitions. (1) The term "hazardous material" shall be
defined as any substance or material leakage, release, seepage, or emission of
which, due to its form, concentration, quantity, location, or other characteristics,
as determined by the emergency management agency director or his/her duly
authorized representative, was likely to pose an unreasonable and inordinate
risk to the life, health, or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment. The term "hazardous material" shall include, but
not be limited to, explosives, reactive, flammable and combustible liquids,
compressed gasses, flammable and water reactive solids, oxidizers and
peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, biohazardous waste, or otherwise
regulated materials, or any other substance determined to be dangerous,
hazardous, or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
(2) The term "hazardous material incident" shall be defined as the
leakage, release, seepage, or emission of any substance or material defined as
"hazardous material hereinabove. (Ord. #3676, April 1999)
11-703. Liability for costs associated with cleanup, etc. (1) Any
persons, firms, corporations, or other entities owning, shipping, or in the
immediate control or possession of hazardous materials involved in any
hazardous materials incident shall bear full responsibility for and be jointly and
severally liable for any and all costs associated with the response to, abatement,
handling, and cleanup of said hazardous materials as well as the remediation
of any consequence associated with said incident. All such cost shall be
reimbursed to the City of Johnson City, and shall include, but not be limited to,
the costs and expenses incurred by the fire bureau, the hazardous material
response team, the labor cost of all personnel involved in the abatement or
cleanup of the aforementioned incident including workers compensation
benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead or any other expenses,
11-27
medical expenses, whether immediate or long-term, of personnel exposed to
hazardous material, costs of equipment operation, maintenance, repair or
replacement, equipment rental, all costs of material ordered by the City of
Johnson City involving hazardous materials abatement, the cost of any labor
and materials expended by retaining or requesting other parties or entities to
assist in the cleanup and abatement, as well as repair, mediation or remediation
of any nature whatsoever including cost incurred by other municipalities or
agents who respond to the hazardous materials incident through mutual aid or
automatic aid agreements. In addition, all such parties shall be responsible for
and shall promptly pay any and all such costs incurred by third parties by
reason of such hazardous material incidents, whether the same are billed to and
paid by the city or not.
(2) Reimbursement shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the
date of an invoice prepared by the Finance Department of the City of Johnson
City or the Johnson City Hazardous Materials Response Team. Accounts which
exceed the thirty (30) day limit shall bear interest charges at a rate to be
established by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City by
resolution. (Ord. #3676, April 1999)
11-704. Effect of chapter on other obligations, etc. Nothing in this
chapter should be deemed to relieve any party from any other obligation or
responsibility that it might otherwise have under law or equity. (Ord. #3676,
April 1999)
11-705. Penalty. In addition to the reimbursement of costs as set forth
hereinabove, any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who causes a
hazardous materials incident as defined hereinabove shall be subject to a
monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) for each such offense. (Ord.
#3676, April 1999)
12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. BOARD OF BUILDING CODES.
3. STANDARD CODES ADOPTED.
4. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
5. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BOARD OF APPEALS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
12-101. Applicability of title.
12-102. Business license and bond required.
12-103. Permits.
12-104. Inspections.
12-105. Right of entry.
12-106. Temporary/partial occupancy.
12-107. Unsafe buildings.
12-108. Chief building official to disconnect dangerous building systems.
12-109. Issuance to certain dealers, installers.
1Charter references
Publication of ordinances: § 34.
Public buildings: § 7.19.
Regulation and inspection of buildings: § 7.26.
Regulations of public utilities: § 7.15.
Sanitation charged against abutting property: § 7.18.
State law references
Building regulations: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-120-101, et seq.
Contractors Licensing Act of 1994, Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 62-6-101, et seq.
Local licensing of builders and contractors: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-62-101, et seq.
Ordinances incorporating by reference: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-501, et seq.
Public building authorities: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 12-10-101,
et seq.
12-2
12-110. Appeals.
12-111. Provisions.
12-112. Fire district.
12-101. Applicability of title. The provisions of this title shall apply
to any and all activities related to work being done in the construction,
installation, repair or alteration of structures and electrical, plumbing,
steamfitting, gas or mechanical systems, within the corporate limits of Johnson
City. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-102. Business license and bond required. Before any person shall
engage in the business of building, plumbing, steamfitting, electrical wiring, gas
installations or mechanical installations, he shall first obtain the proper
business license and deposit with the city a good and sufficient surety bond in
the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), to be approved by the board of
commissioners, conditioned that the person engaged in the said business will
faithfully observe all the laws pertaining to the craft, and further, that the city
shall be indemnified and saved harmless from any and all loss, harm, and injury
of any kind or nature whatsoever arising from any act or omission committed
by any person in connection with the said business. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-103. Permits. (1) Requirement. A person, firm or corporation shall
not erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish any sign, building or structure, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation install, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
replace any gas system, plumbing system, electrical system or mechanical
system of a building or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining a permit for such project from the chief building official. No plumbing
permit or inspection shall be required for the replacement of a plumbing fixture
(as defined in the 1997 Standard Plumbing Code), as long as no drainage pipe,
drainage vent, or water supply is being installed or rerouted. No electrical
permit shall be required for the installation or replacement of equipment such
as lamps and of electrical utilization equipment approved for connection to
suitable permanently installed receptacles, replacement of flush or snap
switches, fuses, lamp sockets, light fixtures and receptacles, and other minor
maintenance and repair work, such as replacing worn cords and tightening
connections on a wiring device, provided no additional increase in circuit
ampacity is required. No electrical permit shall be required for the process of
manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairing electrical equipment or
apparatus. The foregoing exceptions do not relieve any person, firm, or
corporation from the obligation to meet all applicable code requirements
regarding the work performed. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
the chief building official in his/her discretion may require permits on any of the
12-3
foregoing listed items, when he/she deems it necessary for the public's safety
and welfare.
(2) Drawings and specifications to be submitted for review. When
required by the chief building official, two (2) or more copies of specifications and
of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the
nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit.
Such drawings and specifications shall be in a form approved by the chief
building official such as traditional paper drawings or electronic graphic files
submitted on CD or other equivalent storage media.
(3) Permit fees and assessments. Permit fees and assessments under
this title shall be fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners and
posted in the office of the chief building official. (Ord. #3442, March 1997, as
replaced by Ord. #4113-05, July 2005)
12-104. Inspections. (1) Requirements. It shall be the duty of the chief
building official to inspect or cause to be inspected, and reject or approve, all
work for which permits are required and to issue, or cause to be issued, orders
for the modification, repair or improvement of any construction, installation,
equipment or appliances not in conformity with the requirements of this title.
(2) Inspection fees. An inspection fee as fixed from time to time by the
board of commissioners and posted in the office of the chief building official shall
be imposed on any contractor/owner for the third and each additional inspection
of the same type and location. Such fees are to be paid prior to such third or
subsequent inspection. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-105. Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection or
enforce any of the provisions of this title, or whenever the chief building official
or his or her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in any building, structure or upon any premises any condition or
code violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous, the chief building official or his or her authorized
representative may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the official by
this title, or as provided by law. If such building, structure or premises is
occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If
such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If such entry is
refused, or such person cannot be found, the chief building official or his or her
designee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law or equity to secure
entry. When the chief building official or his or her designee shall have first
obtained proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure
entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having or asserting charge,
care or control of any building, structure or premise shall fail or neglect to
12-4
promptly permit entry thereto by the chief building official or his or her
authorized representative. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-106. Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building
which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the project as deemed
necessary by the chief building official and provided:
(1) A monetary amount in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit or
a cashier's check made payable to the City of Johnson City to cover the cost of
completing said project is deposited with the city, or a performance bond may
be provided on commercial/industrial projects if the contractor is in good
standing with the board of building codes; and
(2) A contract is executed with the contractor, property owner, and the
city stipulating the date of final completion and remedial actions for
non-compliance. The amount of said deposit and completion date shall be
determined by the chief building official or his/her representative. Upon
completion of the project within the specified time limit, and approval by the
chief building official, said monetary amount in its entirety shall be returned to
the responsible agent or agency at the earliest possible date. If work is not
completed as specified by city codes and ordinances, the city shall use the
deposited amount to complete work as necessary to conform to code
requirements or seek appropriate remedy through the courts as permitted by
law. The party assigned the permit and the property owner shall be responsible
and pay for any city administrative or legal fees and court costs associated with
obtaining a proper final certificate of occupancy. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-107. Unsafe buildings. All buildings or structures which are unsafe,
unsanitary, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire
hazard and are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to
existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, neglect, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are hereby
declared unlawful. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-108. Chief building official to disconnect dangerous building
systems. The chief building official shall have the right to summarily
disconnect any dangerous, hazardous, defective or unsafe electrical wiring
systems, gas system or mechanical system, in or upon any building, structure
or premises from its source of supply, and the chief building official shall have
the right to summarily disconnect a potable water supply to any building when
the plumbing system becomes defective causing sewage to accumulate and
thereby presenting a health hazard to the occupants thereof. When such
disconnection has been made after following procedures, if any, prescribed by
law, the system shall not be reconnected to its source of supply until a certificate
12-5
of occupancy has been issued by the chief building official. (Ord. #3442, March
1997)
12-109. Issuance to certain dealers, installers. In order to protect
the public safety, no permit shall be issued for the installation of gas appliances
except to qualified licensed gas appliance dealers or to a qualified and licensed
installing agency. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-110. Appeals. Any person taking exception to any decision rendered
by the chief building official in construing the provisions of this chapter may
appeal to the Johnson City Board of Building Codes within (20) days from the
date of receipt of a certificate of occupancy by filing a written appeal with the
city recorder and paying a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Failure to file such
appeal within the prescribed twenty (20) day period shall constitute a waiver.
Should the appellant prevail in the appeal, the fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall be
returned. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-111. Provisions. The provisions of this title shall be strictly
construed, and in the event of any conflict between any of the provisions of this
title or of any code adopted by incorporation into the code of the City of Johnson
City, the most stringent of said provisions shall apply. (Ord. #3442, March
1997)
12-112. Fire district. The fire limit boundaries are hereby established
as being coextensive with the boundaries of the B-2 Central business district of
the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #4113-05, July 2005)
12-6
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF BUILDING CODES
SECTION
12-201. Creation and appointment.
12-202. Procedure.
12-203. Removal from office.
12-204. Powers.
12-205. Availability of printed copies.
12-206. Fees generally.
12-201. Creation and appointment. A board of building codes is
hereby established and shall supersede reference to any board in any code
adopted by reference in this chapter. The board shall consist of seven (7)
members as follows:
One (1) Professional Registered Engineer;
One (1) Electrical Contractor;
One (1) Plumbing Contractor;
One (1) Mechanical/Gas Contractor;
One (1) Residential Building Contractor;
One (1) Commercial Building Contractor;
One (1) Registered Architect.
Each board member, shall be a resident of the City of Johnson City and
shall have at least five (5) years experience engaged in such business in the city.
Each board member shall be licensed by appropriate governmental jurisdiction
in their respective trade or profession. Board members shall be appointed by
the board of commissioners for terms of three (3) years, initially appointed as
follows:
Two (2) members for a term of one (1) year;
Two (2) members for a term of (2) years;
Three (3) members for a term of three (3) years.
Vacancies shall be filled for any un-expired term by the board of
commissioners. Failure of any members to continue to reside in the city shall
cause that member's seat to be vacant. The term "resident" as such herein shall
mean "one who actually lives in the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, as
distinguished from his/her domicile or place of temporary sojourn." (Ord. #3442,
March 1997)
12-202. Procedure. Meetings of the board of building codes shall be
held on the first Tuesday of each month. Called meetings may be held upon the
call of the chairman, chief building official, or concurrence of any three (3)
12-7
members of the board. The board members shall elect by majority vote a
chairman and vice-chairman. The chairman or, in his absence the
vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall adopt
rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and action thereon as
well as minutes of all proceedings, which shall be public records. (Ord. #3442,
March 1997)
12-203. Removal from office. The board of commissioners shall have
the authority to remove any member of the board of building codes pursuant to
this chapter for non-feasance, misfeasance or malfeasance in office.
Furthermore, the board of commissioners may remove any member who misses
three (3) regularly scheduled meetings within one (1) calendar year. (Ord.
#3523, Nov. 1997)
12-204. Powers. The board of building codes shall have the following
powers:
(1) Administrative review. The board shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the chief
building official or other administrative official in the interpretation,
implementation or enforcement of any provision of this title. The board shall
consider variances as set forth in section 108.4.2 of the 1994 edition of the
Standard Building Code. Decisions shall be rendered by majority vote of the
board and shall be administratively final.
(2) Johnson City Tradesman Certification. It shall be unlawful for any
plumber, steamfitter, gas installer, mechanical installer, or electrician to receive
a business license or permit to practice his trade or profession in the city
without first having passed an examination to be given or authorized to be given
by an appropriate testing authority by the board of building codes and having
had issued to him a Johnson City Tradesman Certification and bond and
business license to practice and engage in such business or profession for which
he is licensed. If the contractor is Tennessee State Licensed within the
appropriate trade, he is exempt from certification testing as defined in this
subsection.
(3) Johnson City Tradesman Certification Card. The board shall issue
a Johnson City Tradesman Certification Card or work privilege card to persons
passing appropriate testing requirements as determined and administered by
the board to conduct business pursuant to this chapter within the corporate
limits of Johnson City. The board of building codes shall have the right to
prescribe the form of individual identification on job sites sufficient to evidence
trade qualifications and authorization to practice the same. The evidence shall
be presented upon request to representatives of the agency in authority. If the
12-8
contractor is Tennessee State Licensed within the appropriate trade, he shall
be exempt from certification identification as defined in this subsection.
(4) Revocation of certification. The board shall hold public hearings
for consideration of any cancellation, revocation or suspension of trade
certifications, in a process as specifically outlined in § 12-204(7) of this chapter.
(5) Certification--owner/occupant. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the owner of a single family residence who occupies such property as his
principal residence from performing work within his own property boundaries.
However, with the exception of installation of sewer and water lines connecting
to mobile homes, it shall be unlawful for any such owner/occupant of a single
family structure or accessory structure to perform work on plumbing (to include
installation of residential water and sewer lines), electrical, structural
construction or mechanical systems within his own property boundaries without
first having passed an examination (modified for single family structures) to be
given by the board, chief building official, or his/her designee, and having
received the necessary permits issued to said owner/occupant. If the
examination is failed, such owner/occupant must wait a period of ten (10) days
before retesting. Examinations and certification are not permitted hereunder
for gas systems.
(6) Exception--utility lines. Sanitary sewer and water service lines for
commercial and industrial sites may be installed from public water and sewer
connections at the property line to within three (3) feet of the building. These
lines may be installed by non-certified utility contractors. Such contractors,
however, must hold a current Tennessee State License as a utility contractor.
(7) Revocation. A city certification issued under this chapter shall be
subject to cancellation, revocation or suspension by the board of commissioners
after recommendation of the board of building codes for infraction or violation
of the requirements of any section of this code relating to the trade or practice
of the trade, profession or craft as mentioned in the license, or if, in the majority
judgment of the board of commissioners the licensee has shown himself
unqualified or has become disqualified to practice his trade, profession or craft
in the proper way and manner. Any certification may be cancelled, revoked, or
suspended only after a show cause hearing is held by the board of commissioners
upon issuance of a ten (10) day written notice to the certification holder advising
of such hearing.
(8) Terms. Any Johnson City Tradesman Certification, once issued
under § 12-204(2), shall continue in effect for a period of one (1) year unless and
until cancelled or revoked in the manner provided.
(9) Fees--generally. Individuals holding a Johnson City Tradesman
Certification shall pay an annual fee or a reinstatement fee if applicable in the
amount as established from time to time by the board of commissioners for the
privilege of conducting work within the boundaries of the city. A work permit
shall not be issued to conduct work within the city until this fee is satisfied and
a current certification card or work privilege card is issued by the board of
12-9
building codes. All fees charged by the city under this chapter shall be paid
directly to the city and deposited into the general fund. If the contractor is
Tennessee State Licensed within the appropriate trade, he shall be exempt from
fees assessed pursuant to this subsection, but shall register with the city and
pay an appropriate charge to be set by the board of commissioners for such
registration. (Ord. #3442, March 1997, as amended by Ord. #3463, March 1997)
12-205. Availability of printed copies. Ordinance No. 3442, being
title 12 of the Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, shall be copied in one
(1) volume and printed. Copies shall be on sale at the office of the city recorder
at a cost per copy fixed from time to time by resolution by the board of
commissioners. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-206. Fees--generally. Fees for hearing appeals, considering
regulatory changes, special called meetings and publication fees shall be
established from time to time by resolution by the board of commissioners.
(Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-10
CHAPTER 3
STANDARD CODES ADOPTED
SECTION
12-301. Codes adopted.
12-301. Codes adopted. The following codes are hereby adopted by
reference as though they were copied herein fully:
(1) International Building Code, 2012 edition, with Appendix D
Fire District attached thereto:
Section 903.2.3 Group E is amended by deleting the entire section therein
and replacing it with the following: "An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all Group E occupancies."
Section 907.2.1 Group A is amended by changing "300" to "100" for Group
A-2 occupancies as defined in section 903.2.1.2.
Section 1018.1 Corridors, Exceptions is amended by adding #6, "In lieu
of a fire rated corridor required in Group B, fire areas exceeding 3,000 square
feet but not exceeding 5,000 square feet may have a fire alarm system installed
per NFPA 72 with smoke detectors installed as required by the fire official. The
fire alarm signal shall be transmitted to an approved central station. Occupant
notification shall be by horn/strobes installed per NFPA 72."
Delete chapter 13 and replace it with the 2012 Energy Code as adopted
per section 12-301(9).
Section 3412.2 Applicability, is amended by adding the date "1960."
(2) International Residential Code, 2012 edition, with Appendix
G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs and Appendix J, Existing Buildings and
Structures attached thereto. Except for: Section R 105.2 #1 and #10.
Section R313.2, One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinkler
Systems, pursuant to T.C.A. & 68-102-101(A)(8).
Delete chapter 11 and replace it with the 2012 Energy Code as adopted
per section 12-301(9).
Delete Chapters 34-43, relating to electrical.
Section R2415.3 is amended by adding a sentence as follows: The gas line
must be installed in a ditch separate from other utility lines unless approved by
the authority having jurisdiction.
Section P2903.3.1 is amended by adding a sentence at the end of the
section as follows: "A listed water pressure regulator with strainer shall be
installed inside all buildings and structures."
(3) International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition.
No amendments.
(4) International Fire Code, 2012 edition.
12-11
Section 503.2.1 is amended by adding Exception #1: Existing public roads,
streets or lanes may be continued in use as a fire access road at their existing
dimensions, if approved by the City Manager in consultation with the Fire Chief.
Section 507.5.1 and Section 912.2 are amended by adding as follows: "Fire
department connections for each sprinkler or standpipe system shall be located
not more than 100 ft. (30 m) from the nearest fire hydrant connected to an
approved water supply."
Section 903.2.3 Group E is amended by deleting the entire section therein
and replacing it with the following: "An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all Group E occupancies."
Section 905.3.1 is amended by changing the language contained in
Exception #1 to read as follows: "Class 1 Standpipes (except manual wet or dry
standpipes) are allowed in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2."
Section 905.8 is amended by changing the exception thereunder to read
as follows: Where subject to freezing and in accordance with NFPA 14 and only
in areas classified as parking garages or other outside, non-heated, nonresidential,
low-rise occupancies, taking into consideration the added response
time and its effect on occupancy characteristics of the building.
Section 907.2.1 Group A is amended by changing "300" to "100" for Group
A-2 occupancies as defined in section 903.2.1.2.
(5) International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition.
No amendments.
(6) International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition.
Section 404.3 is amended by adding a sentence as follows: "The gas line
must be installed in a ditch separate from other utility lines unless approved by
the authority having jurisdiction."
(7) International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition.
Section 604.8 is amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section
as follows: "A listed water pressure regulator with strainer shall be installed
inside of all buildings and structures."
2010 ADA Edition Standards for Accessible Design.
No amendments.
(8) National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association.
Article 210.3 is amended by adding a sentence at the end of the section
as follows: "All interior wiring shall be at a minimum size number twelve (12)
AWG copper conductor sized for maximum of ten (10) outlets permitted on a 20
amperes branch circuit."
Amend Article 210.5 (C) add:
"Means of identification of ungrounded conductors shall be color coded as
follows:
120/208 Volt wiring systems
Phase 1 Black
12-12
Phase 2 Red
Phase 3 Blue
Neutral White
277/480 Volt wiring systems
Phase 1 Brown
Phase 2 Orange
Phase 3 Yellow
Neutral Gray
Ground Wire Green
All boxes and enclosures for emergency systems and fire alarm systems
shall be permanently marked. The color red shall be used for fire alarm systems
(NEC Article 760.30). The color orange shall be used for emergency systems."
Article 230.70 (A3) is amended by adding a sentence at the end of the
section as follows: "Service panels or switch gears shall have an interim service
disconnect device such as a main circuit breaker or fused disconnect. When such
device is located on the interior of a structure and in excess of 10 feet from an
exterior door, a shunt trip device shall be installed with a Knox key switch at a
location specified by the fire official. All conductors installed for operation of the
SHUNT TRIP BREAKER for main services or to shut down generators serving
emergency power shall be installed in a metallic conductor system. This conduit
system shall be continuous from end to end without junction boxes or splices and
shall be identified by the same color code as for emergency circuits."
Article 230.71 (A) is amended by adding a sentence at the end of the
section as follows: "Meter centers installed for multiple occupancy residential
structures with more than six meters shall require a main breaker or disconnect
be installed. Structures with multiple meter centers shall have shunt trip
breakers and Knox switches installed to disconnect all services from each
location."
Article 334.12 is amended by adding #11: "Cable NM, type NMC NMB
and type NMS as defined in Article 334 of the National Electrical Code shall not
be permitted for use in the following applications:
A. Group R1 Residential Hotels and Motels;
B. Buildings, other than Residential;
C. Other building types where prohibited by the National Electrical
Code;
D. All buildings over three stories; and
E. All buildings located in the fire district as defined by the City
Zoning Code.
Conduit, raceways and wire-ways shall be metallic for all non residential
buildings unless for special applications."
(9) International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition.
The following sections are to be exempted from adoption: C402.4.1.2.2
Assemblies, C402.4.1.2.3 Building Test, and Table C402.4.3 Maximum air
infiltration rate for fenestration assemblies, C403.2.7.1 Duct construction.
12-13
Section R402.4.1 Air leakage, shall be replaced with ’09 International
Energy Conservation Code section 402.4.2 Air Leakage.
The following tables are to be replaced by tables from the 2009 edition of
the International Energy Code as noted:
Replace 2012 Tables with 2009 Tables
C402.1.2 502.1.2
Opaque thermal envelope Building Envelope
Assembly requirements requirements Opaque
Element, max U-Factors
C402.2 502.2(1)
Opaque thermal envelope Building envelope requirements
Requirements opaque assemblies
C402.3 502.3
Building envelope requirements Building envelope requirements
Fenestrations Fenestrations
C403.2.3 (1)-(9) 503.2.3(1)-(7)
HVAC equip performance HVAC equip performance
R402.1.1 402.1.1
Insulation and fenestration Insulation and fenestration
Requirements by component Requirements by component
R402.1.3 402.1.3
Equivalent U-factors Equivalent U-factors
R402.4.1.1 402.4.2
Air barrier and insulation Air barrier and insulation
Installation inspection component criteria
R405.5.2 (1) 405.5.2(1)
Spec for standard reference Spec for standard reference
and proposed design and proposed design
(10) International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition.
(Ord. #3523, Nov. 1997, as amended by Ord. #3663, Feb. 1999, replaced by
Ord. #4113-05, July 2005, and Ord. #4295-07, Jan. 2008, amended by
Ord. #4300-08, April 2008, replaced by Ord. #4371-10, Feb. 2010, amended by
Ord. #4492-13, July 2013, replaced by Ord. #4509-13, Oct. 2013, and amended
by Ord. #4620-16, Nov. 2016)
12-14
CHAPTER 4
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION
12-401. Intent.
12-402. General responsibility.
12-403. Placement of numbers generally.
12-404. Approval of remodeling or construction.
12-401. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter that the respective
numbers provided for herein shall be placed on all buildings. (Ord. #3442,
March 1997)
12-402. General responsibility. The city's building inspection division
shall be responsible for determining the correct numbering of properties located
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-403. Placement of numbers generally. Property address numbers
shall be placed conspicuously above, or at the side of the proper door of each
building, or each unit of the building which has an outside entrance, so that the
number can be plainly seen from the street line. Numbers shall be a minimum
of four inches (4") in height for residential and six inches (6") in height for
commercial with the principal strokes of numbers not less than one-half (½") of
an inch wide. Numbers shall be a contrasting color to their background. Should
the distance from the street line to the door inhibit discernment of numbers
placed on the building, then the numbers should be placed upon a gate post,
fence, post, sign or other appropriate place easily seen from the street line in
addition to numbers placed on the building. In residential subdivisions that
have requirements for certain types of mailboxes mounted at the street with
address numbers affixed to them, such shall be considered as meeting the intent
of this code if approved by the fire official. (Ord. #3442, March 1997, as replaced
by Ord. #4295-07, Jan. 2008)
12-404. Approval of remodeling or construction. No final approval
for the remodeling or construction of buildings shall be granted by the city
building inspection division until conspicuous numbers are in place as specified
in § 12-403. (Ord. #3442, March 1997)
12-15
CHAPTER 5
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION
12-501. Creation and appointment.
12-502. Procedure.
12-503. Powers.
12-501. Creation and appointment. The property maintenance board
of appeals is hereby established and shall be filled by members of the board of
dwelling standards. (as added by Ord. #4521-13, Feb. 2014)
12-502. Procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held on the fourth
Thursday of each month at 7:00 P.M. as needed. The procedures for hearings
shall be the same as used for board of dwelling standards hearings. (as added
by Ord. #4521-13, Feb. 2014)
12-503. Powers. The property maintenance board of appeals shall hear
and decide appeals on interpretation of the International Property Maintenance
Code, the applicability of a provision of the International Property Maintenance
Code, and/or the satisfaction of the requirements of the International Property
Maintenance Code, by other means. For purposes of this chapter, International
Property Maintenance Code, shall mean the currently adopted International
Property Maintenance Code, or any subsequent property maintenance code
hereinafter adopted by the City of Johnson City. (as added by Ord. #4521-13,
Feb. 2014)
13-1
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. HOUSING--IN GENERAL.
3. HOUSING--PROCEDURES.
4. HOUSING--MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASE EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES.
5. HOUSING--ROOMING HOUSES.
6. TREE ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
13-101. Contagious or infectious diseases.
13-102. Overgrown and dirty lots.
13-103. Control of excessive vegetation.
13-104. Blighted areas and dilapidation defined.
13-101. Contagious or infectious diseases. When any contagious or
infectious disease is known or suspected to exist in any household of the city, it
shall be the duty of the head of same, and also of the attending physician, if any,
to immediately notify the city manager thereof, who shall in turn notify the city
physician, and if he has any doubt in the matter, to investigate and report back
to him without delay. It shall then be the duty of the city manager and city
physician to take immediate steps looking to the quarantining of such house and
in connection therewith notify the county public health director, for such
assistance as may be required, and under whose direction the matter shall be
taken. The city manager shall also notify the superintendent of schools that no
child from any house where such disease exists shall be permitted to attend the
public schools, until furnished with a clean health certificate from the county
public health director. (1985 Code, § 12-1)
13-102. Overgrown and dirty lots. (1) Prohibition. Pursuant to the
authority granted to municipalities under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create,
maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees,
vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, or
garbage or any combination of the preceding elements so as to endanger the
13-2
health, safety, or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the infestation of rats
and other harmful animals.
(2) Designation of public officer or department. The board of
commissioners designates the director of development services and his/her
subordinates in the department of development services to enforce the
provisions of this section.
(3) Notice to property owner. It shall be the duty of the director of
development services to enforce this section to serve notice upon the owner of
record in violation of subsection (1) above, a notice in plain language to remedy
the condition within ten (10) days (or twenty (20) days if the owner of record is
a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a utility transmitting
communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials),
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. The notice shall be sent by
registered or certified United States Mail, addressed to the last known address
of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the owner of the property is
entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the following
additional information:
(a) A brief statement that the owner is in violation of § 13-102
of the Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, which has been
enacted under the authority of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-113,
and that the property of such owner may be cleaned up at the expense of
the owner and a lien placed against the property to secure the cost of the
clean-up;
(b) The person, office, address, and telephone number of the
person giving the notice;
(c) A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which
shall be in conformity with the standards of cost in the city; and
(d) A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the
notice, indicating the desire for a hearing.
(4) Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of
record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten (10) days after
receiving the notice (twenty (20) days if the owner is a carrier engaged in the
transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications,
electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials), excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, the director of development services shall
immediately cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in
conformity with reasonable standards, and the costs thereof shall be assessed
against the owner of the property. The city may collect the costs assessed
against the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The city may bring one (1) action for debt against more than one (1)
or all of the owners of properties against whom such costs have been assessed,
and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one (1) action shall not be
considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. upon the filing of the notice
with the office of the register of deeds in Washington, Carter, or Sullivan
13-3
County, as the case may be, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of
the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county, and municipality for
taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien,
right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior
to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be placed on the tax rolls of the
municipality as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the
owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes.
(5) Clean-up of owner-occupied property. When the owner of an
owner-occupied residential property fails or refuses to remedy the condition
within ten (10) days after receiving the notice (excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays), the director of development services shall immediately cause
the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in accordance with reasonable
standards in the community, with these costs to be assessed against the owner
of the property. The provisions of subsection (4) shall apply to the collection of
costs against the owner of an owner-occupied residential property except that
the municipality must wait until cumulative charges for remediation equal or
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) before filing the notice with the register
of deeds and the charges becoming a lien on the property. After this threshold
has been met and the lien attaches, charges for costs for which the lien attached
are collectible as provided in subsection (4) for these charges.
(6) Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination
and order of the director of development services may appeal the determination
and order to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be filed with the city
recorder within ten (10) days following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant
to subsection (3) above. The failure to appeal within this time shall, without
exception, constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.
(7) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the
board of commissioners under subsection (6) above may seek judicial review of,
the order or act. The time period established in subsection (3) above shall be
stayed during the pendency of judicial review.
(8) Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision in the municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances or other
applicable law which permits theA city to proceed against an owner, tenant or
occupant of property who has created, maintained, or permitted to be
maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, weeds,
underbrush and/or the accumulation of the debris, trash, litter, or garbage or
any combination of the preceding elements, under its charter, any other
provisions of this municipal code of ordinances or any other applicable law.
(Ord. #3024, Oct. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #4282-07, Jan. 2008, and amended
by Ord. #4500-13, Aug. 2013)
13-4
13-103. Control of excessive vegetation. (1)(a) Except as otherwise
described in this section, it is unlawful for any person or other legal entity
owning, leasing, occupying or having control or management of any
developed land or premises within the city limits to allow grass, vines,
underbrush, or other vegetation (excluding cultivated flowers and
gardens, ornamental grasses, cultivated trees, or cultivated shrubs) to
exceed an overall height of twelve inches (12") above the ground,
including that area up to and along the traveled portion of the street or
public right-of-way adjacent to the respective parcel of land. Properties
found to be in said condition will henceforth be declared a public
nuisance, the public health, safety, and welfare requiring it. Each day's
continuance of the condition above prescribed after written notice to the
aforementioned person or legal entity from the city manager or his
designee to abate the same shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Except as otherwise described in this section, it is unlawful
for any person or other legal entity owning, leasing, occupying or having
control or management of any undeveloped land or premises within the
city limits to allow grass, vines, underbrush, or other vegetation
(excluding cultivated flowers and gardens, ornamental grasses, cultivated
trees, or cultivated shrubs) to exceed a height of twenty-four inches (24")
above the ground. Properties found to be in violation of this section will
henceforth be declared a public nuisance, the public health, safety, and
welfare requiring it. Each day's continuance of the condition above
prescribed after written notice to the aforementioned person or legal
entity from the city manager or his designee to abate the same shall
constitute a separate offense.
(c) The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section: undeveloped wooded areas where tree growth is in excess of ten
feet (10') in height; lands specifically zoned or otherwise legally and
actively used for agricultural purposes, including the cutting of hay,
gardening, or growing of field crops; stream beds or banks, as well as all
slopes covered with vegetation per the recommendation of the State of
Tennessee for the purpose of erosion control; heavily wooded parcels of
land where motorized equipment cannot safely maneuver; land that,
because of its steepness and/or a prevalence of rocky outcroppings or
wetlands, cannot be safely mowed using motorized equipment.
(2) As used in this section, the following phrases shall have the
following meanings:
(a) "Developed land" means any privately owned parcel or
portion thereof that contains (or has contained in the past) any building,
structure, dwelling, or house used either wholly or in part for human
occupation or habitation, either on a temporary or continuous basis, that
is currently inhabited, vacant, or that has been previously removed, or
that has located upon it (or has had located upon it in the past) any
13-5
parking area or driveway (whether paved or unpaved), or any other type
of improvement. Subdivisions where streets have been constructed and
a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the subdivision lots have homes
constructed or under construction shall also be classified as developed
land.
(b) "Undeveloped land" means any privately owned parcel or
portion thereof which does not contain, nor has in the past ever had
located upon it any building, structure, dwelling or house, or parking area
or driveway (whether paved or unpaved), or any other type of
improvement. Subdivisions where streets have been constructed and less
than fifty percent (50%) of the subdivision lots have homes constructed
or under construction shall also be classified as undeveloped land.
(3) Pursuant to the general penalty as found in title 1, § 1-104 of the
Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, a violation of § 13-103 shall be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate
violation. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. #3023, Oct. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #4370-09, Feb.
2010, and amended by Ord. #4520-13, Feb. 2014)
13-104. Blighted areas and dilapidation defined. (1) Blighted areas
are areas (including slum areas) with buildings or improvements which, by
reason of dilapidation, obsolescence, overcrowding, faulty arrangement or
design, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage,
deleterious land use, or obsolete layout, or any combination of these or other
factors, are detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of the
community.
(2) As used in this title, dilapidation means: extreme deterioration
and decay due to lack of repairs or the care of the area. (Ord. #3343, Dec. 1995)
13-6
CHAPTER 2
HOUSING--IN GENERAL
SECTION
13-201. Definitions.
13-202. Construction.
13-203. Findings.
13-204. Provisions remedial.
13-205. Scope.
13-206. Impairment of other powers.
13-201. Definitions. The following words or expressions, whenever used
in chapters 2-5 of this title, shall have for the purpose of those chapters the
following respective meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context. Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “rooming house,”
“rooming unit,” “premises” and “structure” are used in chapters 2-5 of this title,
they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part
thereof.”
(1) “Abandoned motor vehicle” is a motor vehicle that is in a state of
disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power.
(2) “Addition” is an extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
(3) “Alter” or “alteration” means any change or modification in
construction or occupancy.
(4) “Apartment” means a dwelling unit as defined in this section.
(5) “Apartment house” is any building or portion thereof used as a
multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three (3) or more separate
dwelling units which may share means of egress and other essential facilities.
(6) “Approved” means approved by the public authority or other
authority having jurisdiction.
(7) “Basement” means that portion of a building between floor and
ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the
vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance
from grade to ceiling, provided however, that the distance from grade to ceiling
shall be at least four (4) feet six (6) inches.
(8) “Board of dwelling standards” shall mean the public officer or
officers authorized by chapters 2-5 of this title to exercise the powers prescribed
hereunder and by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13, chapter 21, as it now
reads or as it may hereafter be amended.
(9) “Building” means any structure, including modular and mobile
homes, having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the
13-7
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. The
term “building” is construed as if followed by the words “or part thereof.” (For
the purpose of chapters 2-5 of this title, each portion of a building separated
from other portions by a fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.)
(10) “Cellar” means that portion of a building, the ceiling of which is
entirely below grade or less than four (4) feet six (6) inches above grade.
(11) “Dormitory” is a space in a unit where group sleeping
accommodations are provided with or without meals for persons not members
of the same family group, in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms
under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories,
fraternity houses, military barracks and ski lodges.
(12) “Dwelling” shall mean any building or structure or part thereof,
used and occupied for human occupation or use or intended to be so used, and
includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging hereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
(13) “Dwelling unit” is a single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
(14) “Extermination” means the control and extermination of insects,
rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods.
(15) “Family” means one (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling
unit, whether related by blood, marriage or adoption, and having common
housekeeping facilities.
(16) “Floor area” means the total area of all habitable space in a
building or structure.
(17) “Garbage” means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(18) “Habitable room” is a space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
(19) “Health officer” shall mean the person designated by the city to
perform the functions of a health officer under this code and other laws or
ordinances.
(20) “Hotel” is any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms
intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
(21) “Infestation” means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of
any insects, rodents or other pests.
13-8
(22) “Multiple dwelling” means any building, or portion thereof
designed, constructed or reconstructed to be used as more than two (2) dwelling
units, each independent of the other, including cooking facilities, and shall
include flats and apartments.
(23) “Nuisances” include:
(a) Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity
jurisprudence;
(b) Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to
children whether in building, on the premises of a building or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes unprotected (unscreened or unfenced)
swimming pools; any abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any
structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences,
debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
(c) Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to
health, as determined by the health officer;
(d) Overcrowding a room with occupants;
(e) Insufficient ventilation or illumination;
(f) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities;
(g) Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer; and
(h) Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the health
officer.
(24) “Openable area” or “window” shall mean that part of a window or
door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to
the outdoors.
(25) “Owner” means the holder of any freehold estate, every mortgagee
or trustee of record and every beneficiary of a trust deed.
(26) “Parties in interest” means all individuals, associations,
partnerships, corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling
and any who are in possession or occupancy thereof, but shall not include the
United States of America on account of a tax lien.
(27) “Place of public accommodation” means any building or structure
in which goods are supplied or services performed, or in which the trade of the
general public is solicited.
(28) “Plumbing” means the practice, material and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary
drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or
private water-supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or
conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation,
maintenance, extension or alteration of storm-water, liquid-waste or sewage,
13-9
and water-supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of
public disposal or other acceptable terminal.
(29) “Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the
buildings or structures thereon.
(30) “Public areas” means an unoccupied open space adjoining a
building and on the same property, that is permanently maintained accessible
to the fire department and free of all incumbrances that might interfere with its
use by the fire department.
(31) “Public authority” shall mean the chief building official of the city
or his designee.
(32) “Public board” shall mean the board of dwelling standards.
(33) “Repair” means the replacement of existing work with the same
kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that
would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or
change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas
piping, wiring or heating installations or that would be in violation of a
provision of law or ordinance. The term “repair” or “repairs” shall not apply to
any change of construction.
(34) “Required” means required by some provision of chapters 2-5 of this
title..
(35) “Residential buildings” or “residential occupancy” means buildings
in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are
provided, and all dormitories. Such buildings include, among others, the
following: dwellings, multiple dwellings and rooming houses.
(36) “Rooming house” means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to not more than five (5) persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operaotor.
(37) “Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking or eating purposes.
(38) “Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
(39) “Stairway” means one (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary
landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and
uninterrupted passage from one (1) story to another in a building or structure.
(40) “Story” is that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
13-10
(41) “Structure” shall mean any dwelling or place of public
accommodation.
(42) “Supplied” means paid for, furnished or provided by or under
control of, the owner or operator.
(43) “Temporary housing” means any tent, trailer or other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the
same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
(44) “Value” shall mean that value stated as the “appraised” value on
the tax assessment rolls of the City of Johnson City.
(45) “Ventilation” means the process of supplying and removing air by
natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
(46) “Yard” means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line.
(1985 Code, § 13-1)
13-202. Construction. Should any question arise in the construction
of chapters 2-5 of this title, it shall be determined in accordance with the state
law authorizing the enactment of chapters 2-5. (1985 Code, § 13-2)
13-203. Findings. The board of commissioners finds that there exist in
the city structures which are unfit for human occupation or use due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions
rendering such structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to
the health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents
of the city. (1985 Code, § 13-3)
13-204. Provisions remedial. Chapters 2-5 of this title are hereby
declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests
and purposes thereof--which are public safety, health and general welfare--
through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation
and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of
residential buildings. (1985 Code, § 13-4)
13-205. Scope. (1) The provisions of chapters 2-5 of this title shall apply
to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, for
human occupation or use, regardless of when such building may have been
constructed.
(2) Chapters 2-5 of this title establish minimum standards for
occupancy, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for
13-11
construction, replacement or repair of buildings except such as are contrary to
the provisions of chapters 2-5.
(3) Buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall
comply with the requirements in the city’s building code for new buildings.
(1985 Code, § 13-5)
13-206. Impairment of other powers. Nothing in chapters 2-5 of this
title shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any department of
this city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations,
nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-6)
13-12
CHAPTER 3
HOUSING--PROCEDURES
SECTION
13-301. Creation of public board.
13-302. Petition procedures.
13-303. Conditions of unsuitability for human occupation or use.
13-304. Powers of public board.
13-305. Findings of fact.
13-306. Repair of conforming structures.
13-307. Repair or removal--nonconforming structures.
13-308. Repair or removal--structures containing nonconforming residential
uses.
13-309. Letter of compliance.
13-310. Failure to comply--structure closed.
13-311. Failure to comply--board may effect remedy.
13-312. Remedy by board--lien.
13-313. Remedy by board--inspections.
13-314. Hardships; appeals.
13-315. Service of complaints or orders.
13-301. Creation of public board. A board of dwelling standards shall
be designated and appointed by the board of commissioners to exercise the
powers prescribed by this chapter. The board of dwelling standards shall consist
of five (5) members who shall be qualified voters of the city and who shall serve
at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. A majority of all its members
shall constitute a quorum, which quorum shall be authorized to exercise the
powers conferred on said public board by this chapter. (1985 Code, § 13-23)
13-302. Petition procedure. Whenever a petition is filed in writing
with the board of dwelling standards by the public authority or by at least five
(5) residents of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human
occupation or use, or whenever it appears to the board of dwelling standards or
any of its members on its or his own motion that any structure is unfit for
human occupation or use, the public board shall, if its preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner
and parties in interest of such structure a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the board of
dwelling standards, or its designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less
than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the
complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file
13-13
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person , or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint, and that the rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the public board. (1985 Code, § 13-24)
13-303. Conditions of unsuitability for human occupation or use.
The public board may determine that a structure is unfit for human occupation
or use if it finds that conditions exist in structures which are dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of neighboring
structures or other residents of the city; such conditions include defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects;
and uncleanliness. The public board also shall be guided by the minimum
standards for base equipment and facilities contained in chapter 4 herein, and
by titles 7 and 12 of this code. (1985 Code, § 13-25)
13-304. Powers of public board. The public board shall have and may
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of chapters 2-5 of this title, including the
following powers:
(1) To investigate conditions in the city in order to determine which
structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
allowed by law, provided that such entries shall be made in such a manner as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and
(4) To delegate any of its functions and powers under chapters 2-5 of
this title to such officers and agents as it may designate. (1985 Code, § 13-26)
13-305. Findings of fact. If, after such notice and hearing as described
hereinabove, the public board determines that the structure in consideration is
unfit for human occupation or use, the board shall state in writing findings of
fact in support of its determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner an order:
(1) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure requiring the
owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such
structure to render it fit for human occupation or use or to vacate and close the
structure as a place of human occupation or use; or
(2) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, requiring the
13-14
owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such
structure. (1985 Code, § 13-27)
13-306. Repair of conforming structures. (1) The provisions of
chapters 2-5 of this title shall apply to any structure conforming to the
provisions of the zoning code irrespective of when said structure was
constructed, altered, or repaired.
(2) If, within any period of twelve (12) months, alterations or repairs
costing in excess of fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the structure
prior to any alterations are made to any existing structure, such structure shall
be made to conform to the requirements of the building code of the city for new
structures.
(3) If an existing structure is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess
of fifty (50) per cent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall be
made to conform to the requirements of the building code of the city for new
structures.
(4) If the cost of such alterations or repairs within any twelve-month
period or the amount of such damage as referred to in subsection (3) is more
than fifty (50) per cent of the replacement cost of the structure, the portions to
be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of the
building code of the city for new structures to the extent that the public board
may determine.
(5) Repairs and alterations not covered by the preceding subsections,
and which will not extend or increase a hazard, may be made with the same
kind of materials as those of which the structure is constructed, to the extent
permitted by the public board.
(6) For the purpose of this section, the “value” of a structure shall be
as determined by the public board. (1985 Code, § 13-28)
13-307. Repair or removal--nonconforming structures. Structures
not conforming to the zoning code of the city may be repaired under the terms
of and to the extent permitted by provisions of that code; otherwise said
structures must be demolished and removed. (1985 Code, § 13-29)
13-308. Repair or removal--structures containing nonconforming
residential uses. Structures occupied by nonconforming residential uses may
be repaired for such uses under the terms of and only to the extent permitted by
the provisions of the zoning code of the city; otherwise, the repair of the
structure must be conducted to accommodate a use conforming to the zoning
code, or else the structure shall be demolished and removed. (1985 Code, § 13-
30)
13-15
13-309. Letter of compliance. A letter indicating compliance with the
provisions of chapters 2-5 of this title may be issued by the public board. (1985
Code, § 13-31)
13-310. Failure to comply--structure closed. If the owner or parties
in interest fail to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve, or an order
to vacate and close the structure, the public board may cause such structure to
be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, and may cause to
be posted on the main entrance of any structure so closed, a placard with the
following words: “This building is unfit for human occupation or use; the use or
occupation of this building for human occupation or use is prohibited and
unlawful.” The public board shall continue the closure of the structure until the
repairs, alterations, or improvements are made. (1985 Code, § 13-32)
13-311. Failure to comply--board may effect remedy. If the owner
or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to repair, remove, or demolish
the structure, the public board may cause such structure to be repaired,
removed, or demolished. (1985 Code, § 13-33)
13-312. Remedy by board--lien. The amount of the cost of such
repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition by the city shall be a lien against the real property upon which such
cost was incurred. If the structure is removed or demolished by the city, the city
shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such
sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the chancery court, shall be secured in such a manner as
may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the
person found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court;
provided, however, that the power of the city to define and declare nuisances
and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise,
shall not be impaired or limited by this section. (1985 Code, § 13-34)
13-313. Remedy by board--inspections. The public authority shall
make or cause to be made inspections to determine the conditions of structures
and premises in the interest of safeguarding the health, safety, and welfare of
the occupants of said structures and of the general public. For the purpose of
making such inspections, the public board and the public authority, or their
agents or designees, are authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all
reasonable times all structures and premises. The owner or occupant or person
in charge of every structure shall give the public board or public authority, or
their agents or designees, free access to such structures or premises at all
13-16
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, or survey.
(1985 Code, § 13-35)
13-314. Hardships; appeals. (1) Where the literal application of the
requirements of chapters 2-5 of this title may cause undue hardship on an owner
or tenant or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of chapters 2-5
or any of the regulations therein have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized
agent, may appeal the allegations contained within the petition in the answer
to the complaints at the time of the public hearing before the public board.
(2) All appeals from the decisions of the public board shall be to the
chancery court as prescribed by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-106. (1985
Code, § 13-36)
13-315. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued
by the public board under chapters 2-5 of this title shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of
such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public
officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public board or any of its
members or the public authority shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the
serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by
publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the city, or in the absence of such
newspaper, in one printed and published in Washington or Carter County and
being circulated in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy
of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the register’s office of
the county in which the structure is located, and such filing of the complaint or
order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices as
provided by law. (1985 Code, § 13-37)
13-17
CHAPTER 4
HOUSING--MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASE EQUIPMENT
AND FACILITIES
SECTION
13-401. General.
13-402. Sanitary facilities--required.
13-403. Sanitary facilities--location.
13-404. Water--generally.
13-405. Water--heating facilities.
13-406. Cooking; heating.
13-407. Garbage disposal facilities.
13-408. Fire protection.
13-409. Light and ventilation--size.
13-410. Light and ventilation--habitable rooms.
13-411. Light and ventilation--bathroom.
13-412. Electricity--lights and outlets required.
13-413. Electricity--public halls; stairways.
13-414. Electricity--minimum requirements.
13-415. Foundation.
13-416. Exterior walls.
13-417. Roofs.
13-418. Means of egress.
13-419. Stairs; porches.
13-420. Protective railings.
13-421. Windows; doors.
13-422. Windows--glazed.
13-423. Windows--sash.
13-424. Windows--openable.
13-425. Hardware generally.
13-426. Door frames.
13-427. Screens.
13-428. Protective treatment.
13-429. Accessory structures.
13-430. Interior floor, walls, ceilings.
13-431. Structural supports.
13-432. Protective railings for interior stairs.
13-433. Space--dwelling unit.
13-434. Space--sleeping rooms.
13-435. Ceiling height.
13-436. Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade.
13-18
13-437. Sanitation.
13-438. Cleanliness.
13-439. Refuse disposal.
13-440. Care of premises.
13-441. [Deleted.]
13-442. Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures.
13-401. General. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or
sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or
intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein,
nor shall any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapters 4 and 5 of this title. (1985 Code,
§ 13-53)
13-402. Sanitary facilities--required. Every dwelling unit shall
contain no less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower and a water closet
all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and
sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be
properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions. (1985 Code, § 13-54)
13-403. Sanitary facilities--location. (1) All required plumbing
fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the
occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located
in a room affording privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum
floor space of thirty (30) square feet, with no dimension less than four (4) feet.
(2) Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways,
corridors or other protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other
food preparation areas. (1985 Code, § 13-55)
13-404. Water--generally. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to
the kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved
distribution system connected to a potable water supply. (1985 Code, § 13-56)
13-405. Water--heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water
heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good
working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink,
lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred
twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit. The minimum storage capacity of the water
heater shall be thirty (30) gallons. Such water heating facilities shall be capable
13-19
of meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit
heating facilities required under the provisions of chapters 2-5 of this title are
not in operation. (1985 Code, § 13-57)
13-406. Cooking; heating. (1) Every dwelling unit shall have heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working
conditions and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms
and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three (3) feet above floor
level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions.
(2) Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited.
(3) All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be installed
in accordance with the building, mechanical, gas or electrical code and shall be
maintained in a safe and good working condition. Portable cooking equipment
employing flame is prohibited. (1985 Code, § 13-58)
13-407. Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have
adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, type and
location of which facilities or containers are approved by the city commission.
(1985 Code, § 13-59)
13-408. Fire protection. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant
or shall let to another for occupancy, any building or structure which does not
comply with the applicable provisions of the fire prevention code of the city.
(1985 Code, § 13-60)
13-409. Light and ventilation-size. Every habitable room shall have
at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room
shall be eight (8) per cent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or
other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such lightobstruction
structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not
be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of
such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen (15)
percent of the total floor area of such room. (1985 Code, § 13-61)
13-410. Light and ventilation--habitable rooms. (1) Every habitable
room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can be easily opened,
or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable
window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) per
13-20
cent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size,
as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation.
(2) Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may
be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used
for sleeping purposes. Window type air-conditioning units are not included in
this exception. (1985 Code, § 13-62)
13-411. Light and ventilation--bathroom. Every bathroom shall
comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except
that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms
equipped with an approved ventilating system. (1985 Code, § 13-63)
13-412. Electricity--lights and outlets required. Where there is
electric service available to the building structure, every habitable room or space
shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote convenience outlets, and
bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one (1) wall switch controlled ceiling
or wall type light fixture. In kitchens, three (3) separate and remote
convenience outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling type light fixture
controlled by a wall switch shall be required. Every hall, water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least
one (1) electric fixture. In bathrooms the electric light fixture shall be controlled
by a wall switch. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and
laundry room, there shall be provided at least one (1) convenience outlet. Every
such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good
and safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric power
in a safe manner. (1985 Code, § 13-64)
13-413. Electricity--public halls; stairways. Every common hall and
inside stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be
adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least one (1) foot
candle intensity at the floor in the darkest portion of the normally traveled
stairs and passageways. (1985 Code, § 13-65)
13-414. Electricity--minimum requirements. Every electrical outlet
and fixture required by this chapter shall be installed, maintained and
connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the
city’s electrical code. (1985 Code, § 13-66)
13-415. Foundation. The building foundation system shall be
maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal
use may cause to be place thereon. (1985 Code, § 13-67)
13-21
13-416. Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes,
breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied
spaces of the building. All siding material shall be kept in repair. (1985 Code,
§ 13-68)
13-417. Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a
safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in
the walls or interior portion of the building. (1985 Code, § 13-69)
13-418. Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet
leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Stairs shall have a minimum
head room of six (6) feet eight (8) inches. (1985 Code, § 13-70)
13-419. Stairs; porches. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use; shall be capable of supporting the load
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. (1985 Code, § 13-71)
13-420. Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on
any unenclosed structure over thirty (30) inches from the ground level or on any
steps containing four (4) risers or more. (1985 Code, § 13-72)
13-421. Windows; doors. Every window, exterior door and basement
or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and
rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
(1985 Code, § 13-73)
13-422. Windows-glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied
with glass window panes or an approved substitute which is without open cracks
or holes. (1985 Code, § 13-74)
13-423. Windows-sash. Window sash shall be properly fitted and
weathertight within the window frame. (1985 Code, § 13-75)
13-424. Windows--openable. Every window required for light and
ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened and
secured in position by window hardware. (1985 Code, § 13-76)
13-425. Hardware generally. Every exterior door shall be provided
with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. (1985 Code, § 13-77)
13-22
13-426. Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well
within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the
dwelling building. (1985 Code, § 13-78)
13-427. Screens. Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall have screen doors with a self-closing device; and every
window or other device opening to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
ventilation, shall likewise have screens. (1985 Code, § 13-79)
13-428. Protective treatment. All exterior wood surface, other than
decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. (1985 Code, § 13-80)
13-429. Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other
accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound
structural condition. (1985 Code, § 13-81)
13-430. Interior floor, walls, ceilings. (1) Every floor, interior wall
and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be place thereon.
(2) Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and
so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1985 Code, § 13-82)
13-431. Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling
shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration
which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause
to be placed thereon. (1985 Code, § 13-83)
13-432. Protective railings for interior stairs. Interior stairs and
stairwells more than four (4) risers high shall have handrails located in
accordance with the requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective
railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained
in good condition. (1985 Code, § 13-84)
13-433. Space--dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at
least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant
thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per
additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total
area of all habitable rooms. (1985 Code, § 13-85)
13-23
13-434. Space--sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two (2) or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall
contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty
(50) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-86)
13-435. Ceiling height. (1) Habitable (space) rooms other than
kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less
than seven (7) feet. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and
kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet measured to
the lowest projection from the ceiling.
(2) If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed
ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No
portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to
the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area
thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-87)
13-436. Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or
cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
(2) The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area size as required in § 13-409;
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
(4) The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 13-410 of this chapter except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation. (1985 Code, § 13-88)
13-437. Sanitation. Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-89)
13-438. Cleanliness. Every tenant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a
clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies or which is provided for his particular use.
(1985 Code, § 13-90)
13-439. Refuse disposal. Every tenant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide
food for rodents and all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
13-24
the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage containers.(1985
Code, § 13-91)
13-440. Care of premises. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of a residential building, structure or property to utilize the premises
of such residential property for the open storage of any abandoned motor
vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or
similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or
occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove
from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above, including but not
limited to weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the public
authority. (1985 Code, § 13-92)
13-441. [Deleted]. (1985 Code, § 13-93, as deleted by Ord. #4519-13,
Feb. 2014)
13-442. Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every
tenant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care
in the proper use and operation thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-94)
13-25
CHAPTER 5
HOUSING- ROOMING HOUSES
SECTION
13-501. General.
13-502. License required.
13-503. Water closet; lavatory; bath facilities.
13-504. Water heater.
13-505. Floor area for sleeping purposes.
13-506. Exits.
13-507. Sanitation.
13-501. General. No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall
occupy or let another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house,
except in compliance with the provisions of every section of chapters 2-5 of this
title except as these may be superseded by the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to rooming houses. (1985 Code, § 13-106)
13-502. License required. No person shall operate a rooming house
unless he holds a valid rooming house license. (1985 Code, § 13-107)
13-503. Water closet; lavatory; bath facilities. (1) At least one (1)
flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to
a water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four (4) rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are shared.
(2) All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the
dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to
all persons sharing such facilities. (1985 Code, § 13-108)
13-504. Water heater. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot water at all times. (1985 Code, § 13-109)
13-505. Floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square
feet of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof. (1985 Code, § 13-110)
13-506. Exits. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means
of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the
building code of the city. (1985 Code, § 13-111)
13-26
13-507. Sanitation. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house;
and he shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(1985 Code, § 13-112)
13-27
CHAPTER 6
TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION
13-601. Title.
13-602. Purpose.
13-603. Definitions.
13-604. Tree and appearance board.
13-605. City forester.
13-606. Interference with city forester.
13-607. Right to appeal decision of city forester.
13-608. Public tree care.
13-609. Obstructions.
13-610. Permits required.
13-611. Utility responsibility on private property.
13-612. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
13-613. Violations declared nuisance.
13-614. Notice requiring abatement of violations; abatement by city; lien for
costs.
13-615. Violation and penalty.
13-616. Duty.
13-601. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
Johnson City Tree Ordinance. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-602. Purpose. Street trees and plantings on public grounds
constitute an important public asset of the City of Johnson City enhancing the
attractiveness and environmental health of the city, thereby promoting the
general and economic well-being of the city. Urban trees are a fragile public
resource and may be damaged or destroyed through malicious , careless, or even
well-intentioned actions. This public resource may best be improved and
protected by a program of comprehensive management and regulation of
planting, maintenance, and removal, administered within the government of the
city. The goals for the tree program shall be to establish and maintain
maximum tree coverage standards; maintain trees in a healthy condition;
establish and maintain the optimum level of age and species diversity in the
urban forest; promote the conservation of tree resources; select, situate and
maintain, street trees appropriately so as to minimize hazard, nuisance,
landscape damage, and maintenance costs; maintain the management of the
urban forest under a city forester with the necessary expertise; promote the
efficient and cost effective management of the urban forest; and foster
13-28
community support for the local urban forest program and encourage good tree
management on privately owned properties. This program shall be known as
the "Urban Forestry Program," or alternatively as the "Tree Program." (Ord.
#3790, Dec. 2000)
13-603. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance the following
terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein. When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely
directory.
(1) "Aggrieved party." The owner of the underlying property or
interest in property inclusive of or immediately bordering the site, which
becomes the subject matter of a grievance, dispute, or controversy involving a
decision of the city forester. This definition also includes any person directly
receiving a permit, notice, order, directive, decision, or permit denial.
(2) "City." The City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(3) "City forester." The city forester or other similarly qualified official
designated by the city manager of the City of Johnson City, assigned to carry out
the enforcement of this ordinance.
(4) "City property." All real property that is owned, controlled, or
leased by the city or which is maintained by it, or any part of any public right
of way.
(5) "Diameter at breast height (DBH)." A standard of measure of tree
size, consisting of the diameter of the tree at a height of four and one-half (4.5)
feet above the ground.
(6) "Governing body of the city." The Board of Commissioners of the
City of Johnson City.
(7) "Highway or street." The entire width of every public way or right
of way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(8) "Park." Shall include all city public parks.
(9) "Person." Any person, firm, partnership, association, public utility,
private company, or organization of any kind.
(10) "Planting plan." A scaled drawing depicting all plant materials,
specifications, and any other information required by the city forester for the
evaluation of permit applications.
(11) "Property line." Shall mean the outer edge of the right of way of a
highway, street, or public property, as the case may be.
(12) "Property owner." Shall mean the property owner of record or any
person owning an interest in property.
13-29
(13) "Pruning standards." Generally accepted standards for pruning as
defined in the current edition of pruning standards by the accredited standards
committee, as may be from time to time amended.
(14) "Public trees." Shall include all shade and ornamental trees now
or hereafter growing on any street, right of way, highway, park, or any other
property owned or controlled by the city, including the term "street trees."
(15) "Right of way." That property located within and adjoining the
public streets, roads, highways, and public easements within the city, which are
owned, controlled, or otherwise maintained by the city.
(16) "Street trees." Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody
vegetation on land lying within the right of way on either side of any streets,
avenues, highways, or ways within the city.
(17) "Topping." The severe cutting back of limbs or trunks within the
canopy of a tree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
(18) "Treelawn." That part of a street or highway right of way not
covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the adjacent property line
and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
(19) "Urban forestry program." Program for management of trees
within the city as a public resource. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-604. Tree and appearance board. (1) The tree and appearance
board, with the advice and consultation of the city forester, shall study the
problems and the needs of the City of Johnson City in connection with its urban
forestry program and recommend from time to time to the governing body of the
city potentially desirable legislation concerning the tree program and related
activities for the city.
(2) The tree and appearance board and the city forester shall assist the
properly constituted officials of the city, as well as the governing body and
citizens of the city, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the
selection, planting, and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits,
whether they be on private or public property.
(3) The tree and appearance board shall provide regular and special
meetings at which the subject of trees, insofar as it relates to the city, may be
discussed by the members of the governing body, officers and personnel of the
city and its several divisions, and all others interested in the urban forestry
program. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-605. Establishment of the position of city forester.
(1) Appointment. The city manager, in his or her sole discretion, has
the sole authority to appoint a person to the position of the city forester, who
shall be supervised and directed by such person as the city manager may
designate.
13-30
(2) Authority. General. The city forester, under the supervision and
control of the city manager or his designee, shall have the authority and
jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees
on streets and other publicly owned property to promote safety and
preserve the aesthetics of such public sites. The city forester shall create
and implement with approval of the governing body the rules and
regulations which shall be referred to as the Arboricultural Specifications
and Standards of Practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal,
fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees on the streets, parks, school
grounds, and other public places in the city, and shall direct, regulate,
and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees growing
now or hereafter in any public area of the city. He or she shall cause the
provisions of this ordinance to be enforced. The city forester and the
traffic engineer shall seek each other's advice in matters concerning trees,
which may be a hazard to traffic safety. The city forester and the
manager of operations and construction of the Johnson City Power Board
shall seek each other's advice concerning trees that may be a hazard to
electrical service. The city forester shall assist in educating the
community, agencies, city boards, departments, and divisions of the city
by:
(a) Providing information and public relations to citizens and
groups in the city regarding trees;
(b) Maintaining a list of permitted and prohibited tree species;
(c) Gathering information and publishing reports as needed
about city tree resources;
(d) Working with city departments to improve the
understanding of trees and tree problems; and
(e) Meeting regularly with the tree and appearance board
(established by prior city commission resolution).
(3) Permit authority. The city forester shall have the authority to
issue or deny permits for planting, maintenance, trimming, or removal of trees
under his or her jurisdiction as authorized. It shall also be his or her duty to
supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the
terms of this ordinance.
(4) Master street tree plan. The city forester shall formulate a master
street tree plan with the advice of the tree and appearance board for submission
to the city's governing body for final approval. The master street tree plan shall
specify the species of trees to be planted on each of the streets or other public
sites of the city. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan,
or any amendment thereof by the governing body, all planting of public trees
shall conform thereto. The city forester, in consultation with the various city
departments, shall consider all existing and future traffic, utility and
13-31
environmental factors and urban design criteria when selecting a specific
species for each of the streets and other public sites of the city. (Ord. #3790,
Dec. 2000)
13-606. Interference with city forester. No person shall hinder,
prevent, delay, or interfere with the city forester or any of his or her assistants
while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this ordinance;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to
prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by an aggrieved party. Upon
approval of the governing body of the city, the city manager is authorized to
bring suit for injunctive relief in the event any person violates this section.
(Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-607. Right to appeal decision of city forester. Any aggrieved
party shall have the right to appeal any decision of the city forester. If a party
wishes to contest a decision he or she shall, within ten (10) business days from
the date of receipt of such decision, request in writing a hearing before the city
manager or his designee for a review of said decision. Any decision by the city
manager or his designee shall be final, subject to appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-608. Public tree care. (1) City authority on public grounds. The
city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants,
branches and shrubs and supervise the same within the property lines of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, boulevards, public schools, public grounds, and
parks, as it may deem necessary or desirable to promote public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
(2) Private planting on public grounds. The planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners is lawful, provided that the selection and location of
said trees is in accordance with §§ 13-605 and 13-610 of this ordinance. Any
trees planted pursuant to this paragraph shall become the absolute property of
the city.
(3) Damage. Unless specifically authorized by the city forester, no
person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any public tree; attach
any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree;
allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come
in contact with any public tree.
(4) Topping. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or utility, to top
any street tree, public tree, or other tree on public property. Trees on public
property, within city right of way, or on city controlled property, severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
13-32
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted
from this provision by the written authorization of the city forester.
(5) Stumps. All stumps of removed street and park trees shall be
removed to a depth of three inches (3") below existing grade.
(6) Construction protection. (a) All public trees on any street or other
publicly owned or city controlled property near any excavation or
construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded
with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four (4) feet
high and eight (8) feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal
to the diameter of the trunk in inches of diameter at breast height (DBH),
whichever is greater, and all equipment and building material, dirt, or
other debris shall be kept outside the barrier; provided, however that
upon good cause shown the city forester may alter or waive the foregoing
requirements in his or her discretion.
(b) No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or
lay any drive within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree without
first obtaining a written permit. Persons building a driveway within a
radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree shall obtain a written permit
from the city forester prior to obtaining required driveway permits from
the building department of the city.
(c) No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any
public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials
which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the
roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the city
forester. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-609. Obstructions. (1) Minimum clearances. Except where an
electrical hazard is involved, it shall be the duty of any person or persons
owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which private
property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will
not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection, or otherwise
endanger the public. Where an electrical hazard is involved, it shall be the duty
of the person or persons owning or occupying said property to contact the
Johnson City Power Board to request the pruning of any offending trees
involved with an electrical hazard. The minimum clearance of any overhanging
portion thereof shall be eight (8) vertical feet over sidewalks and twelve (12)
vertical feet over all streets and vehicular use areas except truck thoroughfares,
which shall have a minimum clearance of fourteen (14) vertical feet.
(2) Street trees-- planting near fire hydrants, utilities. No street trees
shall be planted closer than ten (10) linear feet to any fire hydrant. No street
trees shall be planted closer than twenty (20) feet in a radius to any overhead
13-33
electrical, telephone, or other utility wires as measured from the base of the
trunk to the vertical plane created by the nearest wire, unless specifically
approved by the city forester as a low growth variety suitable for such location.
(3) Removal of dead, diseased, dangerous trees/limbs on private
property. Owners and occupiers of property shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs on their property, which constitute
a menace to the safety of the public.
(4) Trees on private property; distance from overhead utility wires. No
person shall plant a tree on private property closer than twenty (20) feet in a
radius to any overhead electrical, telephone, or other utility wires that are
within the public right-of-way as measured from the base of the trunk to the
vertical plane created by the nearest wire, unless specifically approved by the
city forester as a low growth variety suitable for such location. (Ord. #3790, Dec.
2000)
13-610. Permits required. (1) General. (a) Except as provided
herein, no person shall plant, apply insecticide/pesticide, fertilize, paint,
prune, remove, cut above ground, or conduct ground-disturbing activities
within the drip line of, or otherwise disturb any public tree on any street
or on city-owned or city-controlled property without first filing an
application and procuring a written permit. For ground-disturbing
activities specifically described in § 13-608(6)(b), the restrictions and
distance requirements of said section shall control. The person receiving
the permit shall abide by the standards of practice adopted by the city
forester and by other reasonable conditions imposed by the city forester.
(b) Applications for permits must be made not less than
forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. A
permit fee is authorized and shall be set by resolution of the governing
body of the city.
(c) The permit provided for herein shall be issued, if the
proposed work and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any permit granted
shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be
completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein
described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
(d) Within five (5) days of completion the permittee shall notify
the city and the city will make a final inspection. Upon approval after
inspection, the city shall issue a notice of successful completion.
(e) General permits may be approved for governmental entities.
In addition, such permits may be approved for public and private utility
companies which install overhead or underground utilities (including
cable television installations, street, and water and sewer installations
13-34
or other projects by or at the direction of the city); provided that the
permit holder's written pruning and trenching specifications have been
annually approved by the city forester; provided, further, that removal of
any public tree shall have been specifically approved in advance by the
city forester. Such general permits may be revoked upon written notice
to the permit holder from the city forester in the event the permit holder
fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or with the conditions
of the permit.
(2) Planting. (a) Application data. The application required herein
shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species,
cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other
information as the city forester shall find reasonably necessary for a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued. A planting plan
shall be required and submitted to the city forester for his or her approval
if fifteen (15) or more trees or shrubs are to be planted.
(b) Improper planting. Any tree planted in a manner in conflict
with the provisions of this section shall be subject to removal at the sole
expense of the person performing the improper planting.
(3) Maintenance. Application data. The application for maintenance
required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed,
fertilized, pruned, or otherwise maintained; the kind of treatment to be
administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and
such other information as the city forester shall find reasonably necessary
for a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
(4) Removal, replanting and replacements. (a) Wherever it is
necessary for the city to remove a tree or trees from a treelawn in
connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the
portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the city may
replant such trees or replace them. If conditions prevent planting within
the treelawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent number
of trees of the same size and species as provided for in the master street
tree plan are planted in an attractive manner on city property near or
adjacent to the site of the removed tree.
(b) No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the
treelawn for any reason without first filing an application and procuring
a permit from the city forester. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-611. Utility responsibility on private property. All work
performed on private property by public and private utilities or by their
contractors, agents, or employees, which install and/or maintain overhead and
underground utilities (including but not limited to cable television installations,
telephone service, electric service, gas service, and water and sewer installations
13-35
by or at the direction of the city department of public works or water/sewer
department) shall be performed in accordance with pruning and trenching
specifications approved by the city forester. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-612. Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.
(1) The city shall have the right to order or cause the removal of any
trees on private property that are of such hazard to life or property as to
constitute a public nuisance or harbor insects or disease that constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The city forester shall determine
in his or her sole discretion, which tree or trees are to be removed.
(2) Unless such trees pose an immediate hazard to public safety, the
owner of such trees will be ordered, in writing, to remove said trees, stating the
reason for the removal and the location of said tree or trees to be removed. Said
owner at the owner's expense shall do removal within thirty (30) calendar days
after the date of service of the order to remove. In the event the owner fails to
comply with such order to remove, or if public safety considerations require
immediate removal, the city may elect to proceed to remove said tree or trees,
and to charge removal costs to the owner of the property as set forth hereafter.
(Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-613. Violations declared nuisances. The planting of any new tree
after the passage of this ordinance in violation of the provisions of this ordinance
by any person is declared to be a public nuisance dangerous to the public safety
and shall be abated as set forth herein. The city forester has the authority to
declare any tree that violates this ordinance to be a public nuisance dangerous
to the public safety and shall be abated as set forth herein. (Ord. #3790, Dec.
2000)
13-614. Notice requiring abatement of violations; abatement by
city; lien for costs. With the exception of trees posing immediate hazard to
public safety pursuant to § 13-612(2), upon ascertaining a violation of the
provisions of this ordinance, the city forester shall cause to be served upon the
offender personally or by certified mail a written notice to abate which shall:
(1) Describe the conditions constituting a nuisance under this
ordinance, and
(2) State that the nuisance may be abated by the city at the expense
of the offender at the expiration of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of
service of such notice if the condition is not corrected by the offender. If the
whereabouts of the offender are unknown and unascertainable by the city
forester in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the city forester shall:
(a) Make an affidavit to that effect, and the service of the
written notice to abate may be made by publishing the same once each
13-36
week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county of the offender's residence;
(b) Post a copy of the written notice to abate in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the notice;
(c) A copy of the written notice to abate may also be filed for
record in the register's office of the county in which the offender's
residence is located, and such filing shall have the same force and effect
as other lis pendens notices as provided by law. If, at the expiration of
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of service of said notice to abate,
the condition constituting a nuisance has not been corrected, then the city
may abate or cause such condition to be abated at the expense of the
offender under the directions of the city forester. The city shall have a
lien on the property upon which such nuisance is located to secure the
amount expended for the abatement of such nuisance. (Ord. #3790, Dec.
2000)
13-615. Violation and penalty. Any person found to have violated any
provision of this ordinance, or any person found to have failed or refused to
comply with any notice to abate or other notice issued by the city forester within
the time allowed by such notice or found to have interfered with the abatement
of a nuisance referred to in § 13-612 herein, shall be upon conviction in
municipal court guilty of violating this ordinance; each day of such violation or
failure or refusal to comply shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable
accordingly. In addition to other remedies for violations of this ordinance, each
violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
13-616. Duty. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed
as creating or imposing a duty on the City of Johnson City, its board of
commissioners, or its employees to do any act or refrain from doing any act
authorized herein. (Ord. #3790, Dec. 2000)
14-1
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
3. STORMWATER ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-101. Definition.
14-102. Established; composition; appointment; terms; vacancies;
compensation.
14-103. Chairperson; operating procedure; expenditures.
14-104. Powers and duties
14-101. Definition. The words "appointive member," as used in this
chapter, shall mean the eight (8) members of the regional planning commission
other than both the mayor (or mayor's designee) and the member of the board
of commissioners serving on the planning commission. (1985 Code, § 2-150, as
replaced by Ord. #4544-14, Aug. 2014)
14-102. Established; composition; appointment; terms; vacancies;
compensation. (1) Generally. In order to guide and accomplish a co-ordinated
and harmonious development of the city and region which will, in accordance
with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals,
order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and
economy in the process of development, a regional planning commission is
hereby established, organized, and empowered as provided in this chapter and
as provided in state law.
(2) Membership. The regional planning commission shall consist of ten
(10) members. One (1) of the members shall be the mayor (or the mayor's
designee), one (1) shall be a member of the board of commissioners selected by
the board of commissioners, and the remaining members shall be appointed
pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-4-101 and 13-3-102. The terms of
the eight (8) appointive members, last referred to, that is the eight (8) members
other than the mayor (or mayor's designee) and the member of the board of
commissioners, shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. Any vacancies in
the membership of the regional planning commission shall be filled for the
14-2
unexpired term pursuant to state law. The term of the mayor (or the mayor's
designee) and the member selected from the board of commissioners shall run
concurrently with his or her membership on the board of commissioners or his
or her term of office as mayor as the case may be. All members shall serve
without compensation. In selecting a member from the board of commissioners,
the board of commissioners shall act by resolution passed by a majority vote of
its membership. (1985 Code, § 2-151, as replaced by Ord. #4544-14, Aug. 2014)
14-103. Chairperson; operating procedure; expenditures. The
regional planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its
members. The term of the chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for
re-election. The regional planning commission shall adopt by-laws and rules for
the transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public
record. The Planning Division of the Development Services Department of the
City of Johnson City shall provide the staff for services to the Johnson City
Regional Planning Commission. (1985 Code, § 2-152, as replaced by
Ord. #4544-14, Aug. 2014)
14-104. Powers and duties. The regional planning commission shall
have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 13, chapters 3 and 4, or other acts relating to the duties and
powers of the regional planning commission adopted subsequent thereto. (1985
Code, § 2-153, as replaced by Ord. #4544-14, Aug. 2014)
14-3
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use
within the City of Johnson City shall be governed by Ordinance #1925, titled
"Zoning Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee," and any amendments
thereto.1
1Ordinance #1925, and any amendments thereto, may be found at
http://www.johnsoncitytn.com/documents/?doc=zoningcodes.
Amendments to the zoning map are of record in the office of the city
engineer.
14-4
CHAPTER 3
STORMWATER ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-301. General provisions.
14-302. Definitions.
14-303. Authority.
14-304. Water quality management.
14-305. NPDES permits.
14-306. Record drawings/design certification.
14-307. Inspections and maintenance.
14-308. Permit controls and stormwater system integrity.
14-309. Severability.
14-310. Responsibility.
14-311. Variances.
14-312. Penalties and appeals.
14-301. General provisions. (1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this
ordinance to:
(a) Apply to all areas located within the jurisdiction of the City
of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(b) Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City
of Johnson City, Tennessee, and the public health, safety and the general
welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants
to the public stormwater system, with the intent of maintaining and
improving the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater
outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds,
wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
(c) Enable the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, to comply with
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES)
and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges.
(d) Allow the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, to exercise
powers granted in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-221-1105, which
provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to
water quality management facilities, is the power by ordinance or
resolution to:
(i) Exercise general regulation over the planning,
location, construction, and operation and maintenance of water
quality management facilities in the municipality, whether or not
owned and operated by the municipality;
(ii) Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this statute;
14-5
(iii) Establish standards to regulate stormwater
contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality;
(iv) Review and approve plans and plats for water quality
management in proposed subdivisions or commercial
developments;
(v) Issue permits for stormwater discharges or for the
construction, alteration, extension, or repair of water quality
management facilities;
(vi) Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that
the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or
condition of the permit;
(vii) Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the
detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of
stormwater contamination, whether public or private.
(2) Administration. The city manager and the staff under the city
manager's supervision shall administer provisions of this ordinance. (as added
by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-302. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, words used in the
singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular;
words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not
defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common
and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Best Management Practices (BMP or BMPs)." Schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, water quality
management facilities, structural controls and other management practices
designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. Water
quality BMPs may include structural devices, such as water quality
management facilities, or non-structural practices such as buffers or natural
open spaces.
(2) "CFR." Code of Federal Regulations.
(3) "Channel." A natural or man-made watercourse of perceptible
extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or
periodically flowing water.
(4) "City." City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(5) "City manager." The City Manager of the City of Johnson City,
Tennessee, or his/her designee.
(6) "Construction." Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such
facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used,
including preparation work at such premises.
14-6
(7) "Covenants for permanent maintenance of water quality facilities
and best management practices." A legal document executed by the property
owner, or a homeowners' association as owner of record, and recorded with the
Register of Deeds in Sullivan, Carter, and Washington County, Tennessee which
guarantees perpetual and proper maintenance of water quality management
facilities and best management practices.
(8) "Development." Any land change that alters the hydrologic or
hydraulic conditions of any property. Often referred to as "site development."
Development includes, but is not limited to, providing access to a site, clearing
of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing utilities, roads and other
services such as parking facilities, water quality management facilities and
erosion control systems, potable water and wastewater systems, altering land
forms, or construction or demolition of a structure on the land.
(9) "Development plan." Detailed engineered/architectural drawing(s)
of a commercial, industrial, institutional or residential development project,
showing existing site conditions and proposed improvements with sufficient
detail (e.g., technical reports, specifications, survey) for city review, approval,
and then subsequent construction. The contents of a development plan are
further defined by the city zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, building
code and other city departmental standards for constructing developments and
public works projects.
(10) "Existing stormwater facility." Any existing structural feature that
slows, filters, or infiltrates runoff after a rainfall event.
(11) "Hotspot." An area where the land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
(12) "Lake." An inland body of standing water, usually of considerable
size.
(13) "NPDES." National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NPDES is the program administered by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to the waters of
the United States.
(14) "Owner or property owner." The legal owner of the property as
recorded in the register of deeds office for Sullivan, Carter, and Washington
County, Tennessee.
(15) "Person." Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, organization or entity, including governmental entities, or any
combination thereof.
(16) "Pond." An inland body of standing water that is usually smaller
than a lake.
(17) "Redevelopment." The improvement of a lot or lots that have been
previously developed.
14-7
(18) "Sediment." Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
(19) "Stormwater." Also "stormwater runoff" or "runoff." Surface water
resulting from rain, snow or other form of precipitation, which is not absorbed
into the soil and results in surface water flow and drainage.
(20) "Stream." For the specific purpose of vegetated buffers, a stream
is defined as a linear surface water conveyance that can be characterized with
either perennial or ephemeral base flow and:
(a) Is regulated by the city as a Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA); or
(b) Is or has been identified by the city, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, or the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation as a stream.
(21) "Structure." Anything constructed or erected such that the use of
it requires a more or less permanent location on or in the ground. Such
construction includes, but is not limited to, objects such as buildings, towers,
smokestacks, overhead transmission lines, carports and walls.
(22) "TMDL." Total Maximum Daily Load. A TMDL is a calculation of
the maximum amount of a pollutant that a waterbody can receive and still meet
water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the source(s) of the
pollutant.
(23) "Transporting." Any moving of earth materials from one place to
another, other than such movement incidental to grading, as authorized on an
approved plan.
(24) "Vegetated buffer." A use-restricted vegetated area that is located
along the perimeter of streams, ponds, lakes or wetlands, containing natural
vegetation and grasses, or enhanced or restored vegetation.
(25) "Water quality BMP manual." A document prepared and
maintained by the city, which contains policies, design standards and criteria,
technical specifications and guidelines, maintenance guidelines, and other
supporting documentation to be used as the policies and technical guidance for
implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
(26) "Water quality management facilities." Structures and constructed
features designed to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollution in stormwater
runoff from a development or redevelopment. Water quality management
facilities can often be referred to as BMPs.
(27) "Water quality management plan." An engineering plan for the
design of water quality management facilities and best management practices
within a proposed development or redevelopment. The water quality
management plan includes a map showing the extent of the land development
activity and location of water quality management facilities and BMPs, design
calculations for water quality management facilities and BMPs, and may
14-8
contain record drawings/certifications and covenants for permanent
maintenance of water quality facilites and best management practices.
(28) "Water quality volume reduction." A decrease in the water quality
volume for one or more areas of a proposed development which is obtained only
for specific site development features or approaches that can reduce or eliminate
the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. Water quality volume
reductions can only be obtained when specific guidelines presented in the water
quality BMP manual are met.
(29) "Water quality volume reduction areas." Areas with the proposed
development or redevelopment for which a water quality volume reduction can
be obtained.
(30) "Wetland." An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determination
shall be made by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, and/or the Natural
Resources Conservation Service. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-303. Authority. (1) The city manager is authorized to adopt
additional policies, criteria, specifications and standards for the proper
implementation of the requirements of this ordinance in a water quality BMP
manual. The policies, criteria and requirements of the water quality BMP
manual shall be enforceable, consistent with other provisions of this ordinance.
(2) The city manager shall have the authority to prepare, or have
prepared, master plans for drainage basins and to establish regulations or direct
capital improvements to carry out said master plans.
(3) In the event that the city manager determines that a violation of
any provision of this ordinance has occurred, or that work does not have a
required plan or permit, or that work does not comply with an approved plan or
permit, the city manager may issue a notice of violation to the permittee or
property owner and/or any other person or entity having responsibility for
construction work performed at a site development. (as added by Ord. #4293-07,
Feb. 2008)
14-304. Water quality management. (1) General requirements.
(a) Owners of land development activities not exempted under
subsection (3) must submit a water quality management plan. The water
quality management plan shall be submitted as part of the Development
plan, as required by the city zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations,
building code and other standards for development plans.
(b) The water quality management plan shall include the
specific required elements that are listed and/or described in the water
14-9
quality BMP manual. The city manager may require submittal of
additional information in the water quality management plan as
necessary to allow an adequate review of the existing or proposed site
conditions.
(c) The water quality management plan shall be subject to any
additional requirements set forth in the minimum subdivision
regulations, zoning ordinance, or other city ordinances and regulations.
(d) Water quality management plans shall be prepared and
stamped by an engineer, landscape architect, or architect competent in
civil and site design and licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee.
Portions of the plan that require hydraulic or hydrologic calculations and
design shall be prepared and stamped by a design professional competent
in civil and site design and licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee.
(e) The approved water quality management plan shall be
adhered to during grading and construction activities. Under no
circumstance is the owner or operator of land development activities
allowed to deviate from the approved water quality management plan
without prior approval of a plan amendment by the city manager.
(f) The approved water quality management plan shall be
amended if the proposed site conditions change after plan approval is
obtained, or if it is determined by the city manager during the course of
grading or construction that the approved plan is inadequate.
(g) The water quality management plan shall include a listing
of any legally protected state or federally listed threatened or endangered
species and/or critical habitat (if applicable) located in the area of land
disturbing activities, and a description of the measures that will be used
to protect them during and after grading and construction.
(h) Water quality management facilities, BMPs, vegetated
buffers and water quality volume reduction areas shown in water quality
management plans shall be maintained through the declaration of a
protective covenant, entitled Covenants for Permanent Maintenance of
Water Quality Facilities and Best Management Practices (Covenant). The
covenants must be approved and shall be enforceable by the city. The
covenant shall be recorded with the deed and shall run with the land and
continue in perpetuity.
(i) Water quality management facilities, BMPs, vegetated
buffers and water quality volume reduction areas shall be placed into a
permanent water quality easement that is recorded with the deed to the
parcel and held by the city.
(j) A maintenance right-of-way or easement, having a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') shall be provided to all water quality
management facilities, BMPs, vegetated buffers and water quality
volume reduction areas from a driveway, public road or private road.
14-10
(k) Owners of land development activities not exempted from
submitting a water quality management plan may be subject to
additional watershed or site-specific requirements than those stated in
subsection (2) of this section in order to satisfy local or state NPDES,
TMDL or other regulatory water quality requirements. Areas subject to
additional requirements may also include developments, redevelopments
or land uses that are considered pollutant hotspots or areas where the
city manager has determined that additional restrictions are needed to
limit adverse impacts of the proposed development on water quality or
channel protection.
(l) The city manager may waive or modify any of the
requirements of § 14-304 of ordinance if adequate water quality
treatment and channel protection are suitably provided by a downstream
or shared off-site water quality management facility, or if engineering
studies determine that installing the required water quality management
facilities or BMPs would actually cause adverse impact to water quality
or cause increased channel erosion or downstream flooding.
(m) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or existing
ordinances and regulations. However, where the provisions of this
ordinance and another regulation conflict or overlap, that provision which
is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall
prevail. It is required that the city manager be advised of any such
regulatory conflicts by the owners required to submit the water quality
management plan.
(2) Design criteria. (a) All owners of developments or redevelopments
who must submit a water quality management plan shall provide
treatment of stormwater runoff in accordance with the following
requirements:
(i) The stormwater runoff site must be treated for water
quality prior to discharge from the development or redevelopment
site in accordance with the stormwater treatment standards and
criteria provided in the water quality BMP manual.
(ii) The treatment of stormwater runoff shall be achieved
through the use of one or more water quality management
facilities and/or BMPs that are designed and constructed in
accordance with the design criteria, guidance, and specifications
provided in the water quality BMP Manual.
(iii) Methods, designs or technologies for water quality
management facilities or BMPs that are not provided in the water
quality BMP manual may be submitted for approval by the city
manager if it is proven that such methods, designs or technologies
will meet or exceed the stormwater treatment standards set forth
14-11
in the water quality BMP manual and this ordinance. Proof of such
methods, designs, or technologies must meet the minimum testing
criteria set forth in the water quality BMP manual.
(iv) BMPs shall not be installed in public rights-of way or
on property without prior approval of the city
manager.
(b) All owners of developments or redevelopments who are
required to submit a water quality management plan shall provide
downstream channel erosion protection in accordance with design criteria
stated in the water quality BMP manual. Downstream channel erosion
protection can be provided by an alternative approach in lieu of
controlling the channel protection volume subject to prior approval by the
city manager. Sufficient hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that shows
that the alternative approach will offer adequate channel protection from
erosion must be presented in the water quality management plan.
(c) All owners of developments or redevelopments who must
submit a water quality management plan shall establish, protect and
maintain a vegetated buffer in accordance with the policies, criteria and
guidance set forth in the water quality BMP manual along all streams,
ponds, lakes and wetlands. Exemptions from this requirement are as
follows:
(i) Vegetated buffers are not required around the
perimeter of ponds that have no known connection to streams,
other ponds, lakes or wetlands.
(ii) Vegetated buffers are not required around water
quality management facilities or BMPs that are designed,
constructed and maintained for the purposes of water quality
and/or quantity (i.e., stormwater drainage) control, unless
expressly required by the design standards and criteria for the
facility that are provided in the water quality BMP manual.
(d) In addition to the above requirements, all owners of
developments or redevelopments who must submit a water quality
management plan shall:
(i) Provide erosion prevention and sediment control in
accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the city;
(ii) Control stormwater drainage and provide peak
discharge/volume control in accordance with the ordinances and
regulations of the city; and
(iii) Adhere to all local floodplain development
requirements in accordance with ordinances and regulations of the
city.
(3) Exemptions. (a) Owners of developments and redevelopments who
conform to the criteria in § 14-304(3)(c) are exempt from the requirements
14-12
of this chapter, unless the city manager has determined that treatment
of stormwater runoff for water quality is needed to order to satisfy local
or state NPDES, TMDL or other regulatory water quality requirements,
or the proposed development will be a pollutant hotspot, or to limit
adverse water quality or channel protection impacts of the proposed
development.
(b) The exemptions listed in § 14-304(3)(c) shall not be
construed as exempting these owners of developments and
redevelopments from compliance with stormwater requirements stated
in the minimum subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, or other city
ordinances and regulations.
(c) The following developments and redevelopments are exempt
from the requirements for a water quality management plan:
(i) Developments or redevelopments that disturb less
than one (1) acre of land. No exemption is granted if the
development or redevelopment is part of a larger common plan of
development or sale that would disturb one (1) acre or more and
the stormwater runoff is not treated for water quality via a
downstream or regional water quality management facility or BMP
that meets the requirements of this ordinance;
(ii) Minor land disturbing activities such as residential
gardens and residential or non-residential repairs, landscaping, or
maintenance work;
(iii) Individual utility service connections, unless such
activity is carried out in conjunction with the clearing, grading,
excavating, transporting, or filling of a lot or lots for which a water
quality management plan would otherwise be required;
(iv) Installation, maintenance or repair of individual
septic tank lines or drainage fields, unless such activity is carried
out in conjunction with the clearing, grading, excavating,
transporting, or filling of a lot or lots for which a water quality
management plan would otherwise be required;
(v) Installation of posts or poles;
(vi) Farming activities;
(vii) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and
emergency repairs.
(4) Performance bonds. (a) A performance bond that guarantees
satisfactory completion of construction work related to water quality
management facilities, channel protection, and/or the establishment of
vegetated buffers may be required.
(b) Performance bonds shall name the City of Johnson City,
Tennessee, as beneficiary and shall be guaranteed in the form of a surety
bond, cashier's check, or letter of credit from an approved financial
14-13
institution or insurance carrier. The surety bond, cashier's check, or letter
of credit shall be provided in a form and in an amount to be determined
by the city manager. The actual amount shall be based on submission of
plans and estimated construction, installation or potential maintenance
and/or remediation expenses.
(c) The city manager may refuse brokers or financial
institutions the right to provide a surety bond, letter of credit, or cashier's
check based on past performance, ratings of the financial institution, or
other appropriate sources of reference information.
(5) Special pollution abatement requirements. (a) A special pollution
abatement plan shall be required for the following land uses, which are
considered pollutant hotspots:
(i) Vehicle, truck or equipment maintenance, fueling,
washing or storage areas including but not limited to: automotive
dealerships, automotive repair shops, and car wash facilities;
(ii) Recycling and/or salvage yard facilities;
(iii) Restaurants, grocery stores, and other food service
facilities;
(iv) Commercial facilities with outside animal housing
areas including animal shelters, fish hatcheries, kennels, livestock
stables, veterinary clinics, or zoos;
(v) Other producers of pollutants identified by the city
manager as a pollutant hotspot using information provided to or
collected by him/her or his/her representatives, or reasonably
deduced or estimated by him/her or his/her representatives from
engineering or scientific study.
(b) A special pollution abatement plan may be required for land
uses or activities that are not identified by this ordinance as hotspot land
uses, but are deemed by the city manager to have the potential to
generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants
in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
(c) The special pollution abatement plan shall be submitted as
part of the water quality management plan, and the BMPs submitted on
the plan shall be subject to all other provisions of this ordinance.
Technical requirements for the plan shall be based on the provisions and
guidelines set forth in the water quality BMP manual.
(d) Best management practices specified in the special pollution
abatement plan must be appropriate for the pollutants targeted at the
site and must be approved with the water quality management plan.
(e) A special pollution abatement plan will be valid for a period
of five (5) years, at which point it must be renewed. At the time of
renewal, any deficiency in the pollutant management method must be
corrected. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-14
14-305. NPDES permits. Persons or entities who hold NPDES general,
individual and/or multi-sector permits shall provide either a copy of such permit
or the permit number assigned to them by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation to the city manager no later than sixty (60)
calendar days after issuance of the permit. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb.
2008)
14-306. Record drawings/design certification. (1) Prior to the
release of a bond, record drawings shall be provided to the city manager,
certifying that all water quality management facilities and BMPs comply with
the design shown on the approved water quality management plan(s). Features
such as the boundaries of vegetated buffers and water quality volume reduction
areas shall be provided to verify approved plans. Other contents of the record
drawings must be provided in accordance with guidance provided in the water
quality BMP manual.
(2) Record drawings shall include sufficient design information to show
that water quality management facilities required by this ordinance will operate
as approved. This shall include all necessary computations used to determine
percent pollutant removal and the flow rates and treatment volumes required
to size water quality management facilities and BMPs.
(3) The record drawings shall be stamped by the appropriate design
professional required to stamp the water quality management plan, as stated
in § 14-304(1) of this chapter and/or a registered land surveyor licensed to
practice in the State of Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-307. Inspections and maintenance. (1) Right of entry.
(a) During and after construction, the city manager may enter
upon any property which has a water quality management facility, BMP,
vegetated buffer or water quality volume reduction area during all
reasonable hours to inspect for compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance, or to request or perform corrective actions.
(b) Failure of a property owner to allow such entry onto a
property for the purposes set forth in section 10.1(a) shall be cause for the
issuance of a stop work order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy,
and/or civil penalties and/or damage assessments in accordance with
§ 14-312 of this chapter.
(2) Requirements. (a) The owner(s) of existing stormwater facilities,
water quality management facilities, BMPs, vegetated buffers and water
quality volume reduction areas shall at all times inspect and properly
operate and maintain all facilities and systems of water quality treatment
and drainage control (and related appurtenances), and all vegetated
buffers and water quality volume reduction areas in such a manner as to
maintain the full function of the facilities or best management practices
14-15
which are installed or used by the property owner(s) to achieve
compliance with this ordinance.
(b) Inspection and maintenance of privately-owned existing
stormwater facilities, water quality management facilities, best
management practices, vegetated buffers and water quality volume
reduction areas shall be performed at the sole cost and expense of the
owner(s) of such facilities/areas.
(c) Inspections and maintenance shall be performed in
accordance with specific requirements and guidance provided in the
water quality BMP manual. Inspection and maintenance activities shall
be documented by the property owner (or his/her designee), and such
documentation shall be maintained by the property owner for a minimum
of three (3) years, and shall be made available for review by the city
manager upon request.
(d) The city manager has the authority to impose more stringent
inspection requirements as necessary for purposes of water quality
protection and public safety.
(e) Prior to release of the performance bond, the property owner
shall provide the city with an accurate record drawing of the property and
an executed protective covenant for all BMPs, vegetated buffers, and
areas that receive water quality volume reductions. The property owner
shall record these items in the office of the register of deeds where the
property is situated for Washington, Sullivan, or Carter Counties,
Tennessee, as the case may be. The location of the best management
practices, water quality management facilities, vegetated buffers and
water quality volume reduction areas, and the water quality easements
associated with these facilities/areas, shall be shown on a plat that is also
recorded where the property is situated in the office of the Register of
Deeds for Washington, Sullivan, or Carter Counties, Tennessee, as the
case may be.
(f) The removal of sediment and/or other debris from existing
stormwater facilities, water quality management facilities and best
management practices shall be performed in accordance with all city,
state, and federal laws. Guidelines for sediment removal and disposal are
referenced in the water quality BMP manual. The city manager may
stipulate additional guidelines if deemed necessary for public safety.
(g) The city manager may order corrective actions to best
management practices, existing stormwater facilities, water quality
management facilities, vegetated bugger areas and/or water quality
volume reduction areas as are necessary to properly maintain the
facilities/areas within the city for the purposes of water quality
treatment, channel erosion protection, adherence to local performance
standards, and/or public safety. If the property owner(s) fails to perform
14-16
corrective action(s), the city manager shall have the authority to order the
corrective action(s) to be performed by the city or others. In such cases
where a performance bond exists, the city shall utilize the bond to
perform the corrective actions. In such cases where a performance bond
does not exist, the property owner shall reimburse the city for double its
direct and related expenses. If the property owner fails to reimburse the
city, it is authorized to file a lien for said costs against the property and
to enforce the lien by judicial foreclosure proceedings.
(h) This ordinance does not authorize access to adjoining private
property by the property owner or site operator. Arrangements
concerning removal of sediment or pollutants on adjoining property must
be settled by the owner or operator with the adjoining landowner. (as
added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-308. Permit controls and stormwater system. (1) Any alteration,
improvement, or disturbance to water quality management facilities, vegetated
buffers or water quality volume reduction areas shown in certified record
drawings shall be prohibited without authorization from the city manager. This
does not include alterations that must be made in order to maintain the
intended performance of the water quality management facilities or BMPs.
(2) Other state and/or federal permits that may be necessary for
construction in and around streams and/or wetlands shall be approved through
the appropriate lead regulatory agency prior to approval of a water quality
management plan by the city. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-309. Severability. (1) Each separate provision of this ordinance is
deemed independent of all other provisions herein so that if any provision or
provisions of this ordinance shall be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof
shall remain enforceable.
(2) If any provisions of this ordinance and any other provisions of law
impose overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contain any restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive
or imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern. (as added by
Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-310. Responsibility. This ordinance does not imply a warranty or
the assumption of responsibility on the part of the city for the suitability, fitness
or safety of any structure with respect to flooding, water quality, or structural
integrity. This ordinance is a regulatory instrument only, and is not to be
interpreted as an undertaking by the city to design any structure or facility. (as
added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-17
14-311. Variances. (1) Variances to the requirements of this ordinance
shall be handled by the city manager as defined under § 14-302.
(2) The city manager shall not approve variances that cause the city
to be in violation of any state or federal NPDES permit, TMDL, or other
applicable water quality regulation. (as added by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
14-312. Penalties and appeals. (1) Violations of this ordinance shall
be cause for the requirement for corrective action(s), the issuance of a stop work
order, withholding of a permit, withholding of permit inspections, withholding
of a certificate of occupancy, and/or civil penalties and/or damage assessments
as set forth below.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of each violation. Each day of
violation may constitute a separate violation. The city shall give the alleged
violator reasonable notice of the assessment of any civil penalty. The city may
also recover all damages proximately caused to the city by such violations.
(3) In assessing a civil penalty, the following factors may be
considered:
(a) The harm done to the public health or the environment;
(b) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial
economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(c) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(d) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
(e) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by
the city;
(f) The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories of violations; and
(g) Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of
imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(4) In addition to the civil penalty in subsection (2) above, the city may
also assess damages proximately caused by the violator to the city which may
include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing
violations of this part, or any other actual damages caused by the violation.
(5) Notice of damage assessment and civil penalty shall be served upon
the alleged violator by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt
requested. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing. If the alleged
violator is dissatisfied, the alleged violator may appeal said civil penalty or
damage assessment to the board of commissioners of the City of Johnson City.
Said appeal must be received by the city manager's office within thirty (30) days
after service of the notice of damage assessment and civil penalty. The appeal
shall be heard by Board of commissioners of the City of Johnson City within
14-18
thirty (30) days following receipt of the appeal. The board of commissioners may
continue the hearing and allow continuances to either the city or the alleged
violator for good cause shown. If a timely appeal of the damage assessment or
civil penalty is not filed with the city manager's office, the violator shall be
deemed to have consented to the damage assessment or civil penalty and it shall
become final. If the alleged violator files a timely appeal with the city manager's
office and the violator is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of
commissioners of the City of Johnson City, the alleged violator may appeal the
decision of the board of commissioners of the City of Johnson City pursuant to
the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter 8.
(6) Whenever any damage assessment or penalty has become final
because person's failure to appeal the assessment or civil penalty, the city may
apply to the appropriate chancery court for a judgment and seek execution of
such judgment. The court, in such proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal
such damage assessment or civil penalty as a confession of judgment. (as added
by Ord. #4293-07, Feb. 2008)
15-1
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. ADMINISTRATION.
3. TRAFFIC DIVISION.
4. TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
5. CITATIONS FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
6. TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
7. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
8. SPEED.
9. TURNING, ETC., MOVEMENTS.
10. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
11. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING.
12. SPECIAL STOPS.
13. PARKING METERS.
14. ABANDONED, JUNKED OR WRECKED VEHICLES.
15. BICYCLES.
16. PEDESTRIANS.
17. ACCIDENTS.
18. AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT.
1Charter references
Insurance coverage: § 7.35
Traffic regulation by city manager: § 45.10.
Municipal code references
Ambulance services: title 9, chapter 21.
Fire protection: title 7.
Law enforcement: title 6.
Streets and sidewalks, etc.: title 16.
State law references
Motor and other vehicles: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55.
Adoption of statutes and regulations by municipalities: Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-10-307.
Enforcement within municipalities: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-308.
Traffic citations: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq.
15-2
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
15-101. Definitions.
15-102. Enforcement.
15-103. Obedience to police and fire officials.
15-104. Obedience to traffic regulations--persons propelling pushcarts or riding
animals.
15-105. Obedience to traffic regulations--public employees.
15-106. Use of coasters, roller skates, etc.
15-107. Authorized emergency vehicles--operation generally.
15-108. Authorized emergency vehicles--operation of other vehicles upon
approach.
15-109. Following fire apparatus.
15-110. Crossing fire hose.
15-111. Processions generally--driving in.
15-112. Processions generally--permit.
15-113. Funeral processions--driving other vehicles through.
15-114. Funeral processions--identification.
15-115. Driving vehicles on sidewalks.
15-116. Backing.
15-117. Opening and closing vehicle doors.
15-118. Operation of motorcycles.
15-119. Clinging to vehicles.
15-120. Entering or leaving controlled-access roadways.
15-121. Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
15-122. Manner of riding in vehicles generally.
15-123. Driving through safety zone.
15-124. Automobile races.
15-125. Manner of loading tires.
15-126. Use of sidewalk.
15-127. Transporting children in back of pickup truck--exceptions.
15-101. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this
chapter shall for the purposes of such chapter have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this
chapter are not defined in this section but are defined in the state laws
regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition in such state law shall
be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter.
(1) “Authorized emergency vehicle.” Fire department vehicles, police
vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of the city departments
15-3
or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police.
(2) “Bicycle.” A vehicle propelled by human power, having wheels of
which any two are not less than fourteen (14) inches in diameter.
(3) "Bicycle lane." A portion of a roadway which has been designated
for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(4) “Business district.” The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along such highway there are
buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited
to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which
occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or three
hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
(5) “Central business district.” All streets and portions of streets
within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Millard Street
from Division Street to Boone Street and Lamont from Boone Street to Sevier
on the north; by Sevier Street from Walnut to Lamont Street and by Boone
Street to Millard Street on the east; by Walnut Street from Sevier Street to
Division Street on the south; and Division Street from Walnut Street to Millard
Street on the east. This includes both sides of the streets bounding the areas.
(6) “Commercial vehicle.” Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.
(7) “Controlled-access highway.” Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in
such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.
(8) “Crosswalk.” (a) That part of a roadway at an intersection
included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence
of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway.
(b) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface.
(9) “Curb loading zone.” A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
(10) “Driver.” Every person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
(11) “Freight curb loading zone.” A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
(12) “Highway.” The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
15-4
(13) “Intersection.” (a) The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the areas within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
(b) Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet
or more feet apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided
highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2)
roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2)
roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
(14) “Laned roadway.” A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(15) “Motor vehicle.” Every vehicle which is self-propelled, excluding
motorized bicycles as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-101, and
every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.
(16) “Motorcycle.” Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the
use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or motorized bicycle, as defined
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-101.
(17) "Multi-use trail." Any path or trail, or portion thereof physically
separated from a roadway designated for use by pedestrians or bicycles.
(18) “Official traffic-control devices.” All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning
or guiding traffic.
(19) “Park, parking.” The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(20) “Passenger curb loading zone.” A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
(21) “Pedestrian.” Any person afoot.
(22) “Police officer.” Every officer of the city police department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations
of traffic regulations.
(23) “Private road or driveway.” Every way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express
or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(24) “Railroad.” A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
(25) “Railroad train.” A steam engine, electric or other motor vehicle,
with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
15-5
(26) “Residence district.” The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway
for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main improved with
residences.
(27) “Right-of-way.” The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
(28) “Roadway.” That portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the
event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term “roadway”
as used in this section shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
(29) “Safety zone.” The area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.
(30) “Stand or standing.” The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
(31) “Stop.” When required, complete cessation from movement.
(32) “Stop or stopping.” When prohibited, any halting even
momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with the other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police office or traffic-control sign or signal.
(33) “Street.” The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
the purposes of vehicular travel.
(34) “Streetcar.” A car other than a railroad train for transporting
persons or property and operated upon rails principally within a municipality.
(35) “Through highway.” Every highway or portion thereof at the
entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by
law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected
as provided in this chapter.
(36) “Traffic.” Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any
highway for purposes of travel.
(37) “Traffic-control signal.” Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
(38) “Traffic division.” The traffic division of the police department of
this city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then such term
whenever used in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the police department
of this city.
(39) “Vehicle.” Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices
15-6
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1985 Code, § 15-1, as amended by Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-102. Enforcement. (1) It shall be the duty of the officers of the
police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce
all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this city.
(2) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws.
(3) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1985 Code, § 15-2)
15-103. Obedience to police and fire officials. No person shall
wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police
officer or fire department official. (1985 Code, § 15-3)
15-104. Obedience to traffic regulations--persons propelling push
carts or riding animals. Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an
animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no
application. (1985 Code, § 15-4)
15-105. Obedience to traffic regulations--public employees. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or
used in the service of the United States government, any state or any political
subdivision thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state statute. (1985 Code, § 15-5)
15-106. Use of coasters, roller skates, etc. No person upon roller
skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device,
shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and
when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1985 Code, § 15-6)
15-107. Authorized emergency vehicles--operation generally.
(1) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
15-7
of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions
herein stated.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(a) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(c) Exceed the speed limits so long as he does not endanger life
or property; and
(d) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
(3) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals
meeting the requirements of the applicable laws of this state, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped
with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1985 Code,
§ 15-7)
15-108. Authorize emergency vehicles--operation of other vehicles
upon approach. (1) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the
requirements of the applicable laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly
and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to , and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the
roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position
until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(2) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway. (1985 Code, § 15-8)
15-109. Following fire apparatus. The driver of any vehicle other
than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park
such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm. (1985 Code, § 15-9)
15-110. Crossing fire hose. No vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private
15-8
driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command. (1985 Code, § 15-10)
15-111. Processions generally--driving in. Each driver in a funeral
or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as
practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(1985 Code, § 15-11)
15-112. Processions generally--permit. No funeral procession or
parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more
vehicles, except the military forces of the United States, or of this state and the
forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along
any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and
such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. (1985
Code, § 15-12)
15-113. Funeral processions--driving other vehicles through. No
driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or
police officers. (1985 Code, § 15-13)
15-114. Funeral processions--identification. A funeral composed of
a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such
other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division.
(1985 Code, § 15-14)
15-115. Driving vehicles on sidewalks. The driver of a vehicle shall
not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway. (1985 Code, § 15-15)
15-116. Backing. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless
such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering
with other traffic. (1985 Code, § 15-16)
15-117. Opening and closing vehicle doors. No person shall open the
door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until
it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side
of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers. (1985 Code, § 15-17)
15-9
15-118. Operation of motorcycles. A person operating a motorcycle
shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such
operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a
motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person,
in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or
side of the operator. (1985 Code, § 15-18)
15-119. Clinging to vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle or upon a roadway. (1985 Code, § 15-19)
15-120. Entering or leaving controlled-access roadways. No person
shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such
entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (1985 Code, § 15-20)
15-121. Boarding or alighting from vehicles. No person shall board
or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1985 Code, § 15-21)
15-122. Manner of riding in vehicles generally. No person shall ride
on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space
intended for merchandise. (1985 Code, § 15-22)
15-123. Driving through safety zone. No vehicle shall at any time be
driven through or within a safety zone. (1985 Code, § 15-23)
15-124. Automobile races.1 It shall be unlawful for any person to
promote, sponsor or participate in any motorcycle, “hot rod” or automobile race
of any kind or character within the city. This section shall not apply to what is
known as “stock car” races conducted between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 10:30
P.M., Sundays excluded, and which are conducted on a track which affords
proper protection for spectators. (1985 Code, § 15-24)
15-125. Manner of loading tires. No person shall drive or move any
truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move
1State law reference
Automobile race tracks and drag strips: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-22-101, et seq.
15-10
any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances,
litter or foreign matter of any kind. (1985 Code, § 15-25)
15-126. Use of sidewalk. No person shall drive, wheel or draw any
vehicle, except a child’s carriage drawn by hand, or use roller skates, or permit
any horse, or any cattle, swine or sheep under his care, to go upon any sidewalk,
except for the purpose of crossing the same when necessary to do so, or
otherwise obstruct or injure any sidewalk. (1985 Code, § 15-26)
15-127. Transporting children in back of pickup truck--
exceptions. (1) Any person commits an offense who, on any City of Johnson
City, Tennessee highway, street, road, alley or public right-of-way, transports
a child between six (6) years of age and under twelve (12) years of age in the bed
of a truck with a manufacturer's ton rating not exceeding three-quarters (3/4)
ton and have a pickup body style except that:
(a) The provisions of this section do not apply to a person
transporting such child in the bed of such vehicle when such vehicle is
being used as part of an organized parade, procession, or other ceremonial
event and when such vehicle is not exceeding the speed of twenty (20)
miles per hour, and
(b) The provisions of this section do not apply when the child
being transported is involved in agricultural activities.
(c) The provisions of this section do not apply when the child
being transported is being transported for ambulance or similar
emergency purposes.
(2) The mayor is hereby authorized to execute all necessary or proper
documents to complete the transactions herein authorized, upon the terms and
for the purposes stated herein, and which documents shall in form and content
be satisfactory to the city manager and the city attorney. (Ord. #3711, Sept.
1999)
15-11
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
15-201. Records of violations.
15-202. Files on drivers.
15-203. Impoundment of vehicles generally.
15-201. Records of violations. (1) The police department or the traffic
division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of this city
or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with
a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall
be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such
record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year
period.
(2) All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
(3) All such records and reports shall be public records. (1985 Code,
§ 15-43)
15-202. Files on drivers. (1) The police department or the traffic
division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents,
warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which
shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
(2) Such division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with
frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic
accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons
therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the
same or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked.
(3) Such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most
recent five (5) year period. (1985 Code, § 15-44)
15-203. Impoundment of vehicles generally. (1) Members of the
police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or
highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated
or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city
under the following circumstances:
(a) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge,
viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
(b) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle
15-12
is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such extent as to be
unable to provide for its custody or removal; or
(c) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(2) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized
in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration
records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer
shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the
fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such
vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public
garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
(3) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this
section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner,
or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in
this section, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a
period of three (3) days, then the officer shall immediately send or cause to be
sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department of
revenue, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public
garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the
reasons for such removal and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle
is stored. (1985 Code, § 15-45)
15-13
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC DIVISION
SECTION
15-301. Established.
15-302. Duties generally.
15-303. Investigation of accidents.
15-304. Accident studies.
15-305. Traffic accident files to be maintained.
15-306. Annual traffic safety report.
15-307. Records of cases--complaints; citations.
15-308. Records of cases--records of convictions.
15-301. Established. There may be established within the city a traffic
division to be under the control of the city manager or such person as may be
designated by him. (1985 Code, § 15-57)
15-302. Duties generally. It shall be the duty of the traffic division,
with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department,
to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle
laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations,
to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other
officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties
specially imposed upon such division by this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-58)
15-303. Investigation of accidents. It shall be the duty of the traffic
division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic
accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged
with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. (1985 Code,
§ 15-59)
15-304. Accident studies. Whenever the accidents at any particular
location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city
traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining
remedial measures. (1985 Code, § 15-60)
15-305. Traffic accident files to be maintained. The traffic division
shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident
reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such
reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer.
(1985 Code, § 15-61)
15-14
15-306. Annual traffic safety report. The traffic division shall
annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager.
Such report shall contain information on the traffic matters in this city as
follows:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed; the
number of persons injured; and the other pertinent traffic accident data;
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police; and
(3) The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic
safety activities. (1985 Code, § 15-62)
15-307. Records of cases--complaints; citations. The city recorder
shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, traffic citation
or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to the city court
or its traffic violations bureau, and shall keep a record of every official action by
such court or its traffic violations bureau in reference thereto, including but not
limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment or acquittal
and the amount of fine or forfeiture resulting from every such traffic complaint
or citation deposited with or presented to such court or traffic violations bureau.
(1985 Code, § 15-63)
15-308. Records of cases--records of convictions. (1) Within ten
(10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of
violating any provision of this code or other law regulating the operation of
vehicles on highways, the city judge shall prepare and immediately forward to
the state department of safety an abstract of the record of the court covering the
case in which such person was so convicted or forfeited bail, which abstract must
be certified by the city judge to be true and correct. No report need be made of
any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
(2) Such abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state
department of safety and shall include the name and address of the person
charged; the number, if any, of his operator’s or chauffeur’s license; the
registration number of the vehicle involved; the nature of the offense; the date
of hearing; the plea, the judgment or whether bail was forfeited; and the amount
of the fine or forfeiture as the case may be.
(3) Every court of record shall also forward a like report to the state
department of safety upon the conviction of any person of manslaughter or other
felony in the commission of which a vehicle was used.
(4) The failure, refusal or neglect of any such judicial officer to comply
with any of the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office
and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. (1985 Code, § 15-64)
15-15
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
SECTION
15-401. Established.
15-402. Schedule of fines.
15-403. Optional trial.
15-404. Procedure generally.
15-405. Duties.
15-406. Records.
15-401. Established. A traffic violations bureau is established to assist
the city court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The city recorder’s office
shall be in charge of the bureau. (1985 Code, § 15-76)
15-402. Schedule of fines. The city judge shall designate the specified
offenses under this chapter or the state traffic laws in respect to which
payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in
satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such
fines for first, second and subsequent offenses; provided, that such fines are
within the limits declared by law, this code or other ordinance, and shall further
specify the number of such offenses which shall require appearance before the
court. (1985 Code, § 15-77)
15-403. Optional trial. (1) Any person charged with an offense for
which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have
the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at
the traffic violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving
appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing the required lawful
bail, and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by
law.
(2) The payment of a fine to the bureau shall be deemed an
acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon
accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging
payment thereof. (1985 Code, § 15-78)
15-404. Procedure generally. The traffic violations bureau shall follow
each procedure as may be prescribed by the traffic laws of this city or as may be
required by any laws of this state. (1985 Code, § 15-79)
15-405. Duties. The following duties are hereby imposed upon the
traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses:
15-16
(1) It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in
court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court
appearance and give power of attorney.
(2) It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who shall or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the
court docket and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present.
(3) It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which
each person has been guilty during the preceding twelve (12) months, whether
such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau. (1985
Code, § 15-80)
15-406. Records. The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and
submit summarized monthly reports to the city judge and the city manager of
all notices issued and arrests made for violations of this chapter and other
related ordinances in this city and of all the fines collected by the traffic
violations bureau of the court, and of the final disposition or present status of
every case of violation of the provisions of such chapter and ordinances. Such
records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each. Such records shall be public records. (1985 Code, § 15-81)
15-17
CHAPTER 5
CITATIONS FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
SECTION
15-501. Forms; records.
15-502. Issuance by police.
15-503. Disposition; records.
15-504. Illegal cancellation of citations.
15-505. Audit of records and reports.
15-506. Failure to obey citations.
15-507. Placing of citations on illegally parked vehicles.
15-508. Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
15-509. Warrants.
15-510. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.
15-501. Forms; records. (1) The city police department records section
shall provide traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear and
answer to charges of violating this chapter and related ordinances in the city
court. Such citations shall include serially numbered sets of citations in
quadruplicate in the form prescribed and approved jointly by the city manager
and the chief of police. Generated electronic citations shall be regulated by the
department's records management system (RMS).
(2) The chief of police or his or her designee shall maintain a record of
every citation book issued and shall require a written receipt for each book.
(1985 Code, § 15-93, as replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-502. Issuance by police. Except when authorized or directed under
state law to immediately take a person before a judge or magistrate for the
violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation
other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does
not take such person into custody under arrest, shall take the name, address
and operator’s license number of such person, the registered number of the
motor vehicle involved, and such other pertinent information as may be
necessary, and shall issue to the violator in writing on a form provided by the
police department a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
in the city court at a time at least five (5) days after such alleged violation to be
specified in such citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise or
electronic signature of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. (1985 Code, § 15-94, as replaced by
Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-503. Disposition; records. (1) Every police officer upon issuing a
traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws
15-18
of this state or of any laws of this city shall deposit the original and a duplicate
copy of the citation with the police records section of the city court. Electronic
citations generated are automatically posted and regulated by the department's
records management system (RMS).
(2) Upon the filing of such original citation in the city court, such
citation may be disposed of only by trial in such court or by other official action
of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a fine to the traffic
violations bureau of such court.
(3) The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the police
department a record of the disposition by a member of the police department
and a record of the disposition of the charge by the city court or its violations
bureau.
(4) The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the city court or by any other court on such
traffic violation charges and which are delivered to the police department for
service, and of the final disposition of all such warrants.
(5) It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the
police department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter or
deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or
disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant, in a manner other than
as required in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-95, as replaced by Ord. #4169-06,
May 2006)
15-504. Illegal cancellation of citations. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner
other than as provided by this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-96, as replaced by
Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-505. Audit of records and reports. (1) Every record of traffic
citations, complaints thereon, and warrants issued therefor required in this
chapter shall be audited annually or as required by the city manager. Such
reports shall be public records.
(2) For the purpose or this chapter, the city recorder or his or her
designee shall have access at all times to all necessary records, files and papers
of the city court, its traffic violations bureau and the police department. (1985
Code, § 15-97, as replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-506. Failure to obey citations. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his or her written promise to appear in court after giving such promise
to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition
of the charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1985 Code, § 15-98,
as replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-19
15-507. Placing of citations on illegally parked vehicles. Whenever
any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any
of the restrictions imposed by this code or other ordinance of this city or by state
law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may
take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user,
and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided
by the department for the driver to answer to the charge by paying the citation
fee or appearing in city court at a time at least five (5) days after such alleged
violation. (1985 Code, § 15-99, as replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-508. Presumption in reference to illegal parking. (1) In any
prosecution charging a violation of this chapter or any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time
of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence
a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, such violation occurred.
(2) The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the
procedure as prescribed in § 15-506 has been followed. (1985 Code, § 15-100, as
replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-509. Warrants. (1) In the event any person fails to comply with the
traffic citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make
appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the city court or
traffic violations bureau, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as
required and within the time permitted by law, the city judge may issue a
summons for their appearance in court. A violator who fails to appear on an
issued summons will be subject to a warrant arrest. (1985 Code, § 15-101, as
replaced by Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-510. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. All fines or
forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person
charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid
into the general fund of the city. (1985 Code, § 15-102, as replaced by
Ord. #4169-06, May 2006)
15-20
CHAPTER 6
TRAFFIC ENGINEER
SECTION
15-601. Office established.
15-602. Qualifications; appointment.
15-603. Duties generally.
15-604. Emergency and experimental regulations.
15-601. Office established. The office of city traffic engineer is hereby
established. (1985 Code, § 15-114)
15-602. Qualifications; appointment. The city manager, or a person
designated by him, shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other
functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as are
provided in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-115)
15-603. Duties generally. It shall be the general duty of the city traffic
engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and
to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic
conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this
city, to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means
to improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by this code or other ordinances of this city. (1985 Code, § 15-116)
15-604. Emergency and experimental regulations. (1) The chief of
police, by and with the approval of the city traffic engineer, is hereby empowered
to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic laws
of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental
regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
(2) The city traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under
actual conditions of traffic. (1985 Code, § 15-117)
15-21
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION
15-701. Traffic engineer to place and maintain signs, etc.
15-702. Specifications.
15-703. Obedience.
15-704. Signs required.
15-705. Traffic-control signals.
15-706. Pedestrian--control signals.
15-707. Flashing signals.
15-708. Display of unauthorized signs, signals, etc.
15-709. Interference with official devices, railroad signs, etc.
15-710. Traffic lanes.
15-711. Loads on vehicles.
15-712. Commercial vehicles on certain streets.
15-713. Restrictions on certain streets as to certain vehicles.
15-714. Gross weight limits.
15-701. Traffic engineer to place and maintain signs, etc. The city
traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and
devices when and as required under the traffic laws of this city to make effective
the provisions of such laws, and may place and maintain such additional trafficcontrol
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
laws of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. (1985 Code,
§ 15-134)
15-702. Specifications. All traffic-control signs, signals and devices
shall conform to the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways,” latest edition and revisions, published by the public roads
administration (bureau of public roads) of the federal government. (1985 Code,
§ 15-135)
15-703. Obedience. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions
of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-136)
15-704. Signs required. No provision of this chapter for which signs
are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
15-22
section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective
even though no signs are erected or in place. (1985 Code, § 15-137)
15-705. Traffic-control signals. Whenever traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals exhibiting the word “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the
following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and
apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone or “Go.” (a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at
the time such signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone. (a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is
thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited
immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or cross
the intersection when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross the road way, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
(3) Steady red alone, or “Stop.” (a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall
remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone. Provided, however,
that a right turn on a red signal shall be permitted, provided that the
prospective turning car comes to a full and complete stop before turning
and that the turning car yields the right-of-way to pedestrians and cross
traffic traveling in accordance with their traffic signal. However, said
turn will not endanger other traffic lawfully using said intersection. A
right turn on red shall be permitted at all intersections except that
clearly marked by a “No Turns On Red” sign, which may be erected by the
city at intersections which require no right turns on red in the interest of
traffic safety.
(b) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.
(c) A left turn on a red stop signal may be permitted by the city
at intersections where a one-way street intersects with another one-way
street moving in the same direction into which the left turn would be
made from the original one-way street. Before making such a turn, the
prospective turning car shall come to a full and complete stop and shall
15-23
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and cross traffic traveling in
accordance with the traffic signal so as not to endanger traffic lawfully
using the intersection. The city may erect signs permitting such turns at
any applicable intersection where such turns would be safe. Unless such
signs are erected, left turns on red are prohibited.
(4) Red with green arrow. (a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway
unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. (1985 Code, § 15-138)
15-706. Pedestrian-control signals. Whenever special pedestriancontrol
signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or “Wait” or “Don’t Walk” are in
place such signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Walk. Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Wait or don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while
the “Wait” or “Don’t Walk” signal is showing. (1985 Code, § 15-139)
15-707. Flashing signals. (1) Whenever an illuminated flashing red
or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, and said light is clearly visible for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such stopping, drivers of vehicles shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit
line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may
proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
15-24
(c) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall
be governed by the rules as set forth in § 15-1201. (1985 Code, § 15-140)
15-708. Display of unauthorized signs, signals, etc. (1) No person
shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is in an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or
any railroad sign or signal.
(2) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
(3) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(4) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and the city traffic engineer is hereby empowered to
remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1985 Code, § 15-141)
15-709. Interference with official devices, railroad signs, etc. No
person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure,
knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(1985 Code, § 15-142)
15-710. Traffic lanes. (1) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized
to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular
alignment of traffic is necessary.
(2) Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicles within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1985 Code, § 15-143)
15-711. Loads on vehicles. When signs are erected on certain streets
giving notice hereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of the posted gross weight limit at any time upon such streets. (1985
Code, § 15-144)
15-712. Commercial vehicles on certain streets. When signs are
erected on certain streets giving notice hereof, no person shall operate any
commercial vehicle exceeding the posted gross weight limit at any time upon
such streets; except, that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose
15-25
of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering
such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and
proceeding therefrom no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. (1985
Code, § 15-145)
15-713. Restrictions on certain streets as to certain vehicles.
(1) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily
traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motordriven
cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic and
shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(2) When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (1985 Code, § 15-146)
15-714. Gross weight limits. The city traffic engineer is authorized to
determine and designate where necessary the gross weight limit allowed upon
any street or parts of streets. (1985 Code, § 15-147)
15-26
CHAPTER 8
SPEED
SECTION
15-801. Miscellaneous.
15-802. Intersections.
15-803. In school zones and near playgrounds.
15-804. Congested areas.
15-805. Traffic signals.
15-801. Miscellaneous. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street of this city in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour; provided, however, that the city manager may in his
discretion authorize a greater maximum speed upon certain streets, and when
so authorized and properly designated by signs giving notice of such greater
lawful speed limits, such greater speed limit shall apply on such streets. (1985
Code, § 15-164)
15-802. Intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a through street or
on one regulated by traffic-control signals or signs which stop or require traffic
to yield on the intersecting streets. (1985 Code, § 15-165)
15-803. In school zones and near playgrounds. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any school zone or
near any playground in this city in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour when
official signs indicating such speed limits have been posted by the traffic
engineer. The provisions of this section are applicable to school zones where
there are no playgrounds only when the children are out for recess or when the
children are going to or leaving school during its opening or closing hours. (1985
Code, § 15-166)
15-804. Congested areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed in excess
of fifteen (15) miles per hour when official signs indicating such speed limit have
been posted by the traffic engineer. (1985 Code, § 15-167)
15-805. Traffic signals. The city traffic engineer is authorized to
regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in
an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds
otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (1985 Code, § 15-168)
15-27
CHAPTER 9
TURNING, ETC., MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-901. Required position and method of turning at intersection.
15-902. Turning markers, signs, etc., indicating course of travel.
15-903. Restricted turn signs.
15-904. U-turns.
15-901. Required position and method of turning at intersection.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(1) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right hand
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
(2) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic
is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the
right of such centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center
of the intersection.
(3) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. (1985 Code,
§ 15-185)
15-902. Turning markers, signs, etc., indicating course of travel.
(1) The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or this code or
other ordinance.
(2) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
(1985 Code, § 15-186)
15-28
15-903. Restricted turn signs. (1) The city traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right or left turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The
making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
(2) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign. (1985 Code, § 15-187)
15-904. U-turns. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle
so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district
and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can
be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1985 Code,
§ 15-188)
15-29
CHAPTER 10
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION
15-1001. Signs; placement; maintenance.
15-1002. Restriction of direction of movement.
15-1001. Signs; placement; maintenance. Whenever this code or any
ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic
engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such
regulation shall be effective unless signs are in place. Signs indicating the
direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where
movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1985 Code, § 15-205)
15-1002. Restriction of direction of movement. (1) The city traffic
engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of
streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one
direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of
the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or
other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in
accordance with this section. (1985 Code, § 15-206)
15-30
CHAPTER 11
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION
15-1101. Applicability.
15-1102. Location of standing and parking places, etc.
15-1103. Angle parking generally.
15-1104. Prohibited in specific places.
15-1105. Standing or parking close to curb.
15-1106. Obstructing traffic.
15-1107. Parking in alleys.
15-1108. Parking vehicles for sale, repair, etc.
15-1109. Parking adjacent to schools.
15-1110. Parking prohibited on certain streets generally.
15-1111. One-way roadways.
15-1112. Hazardous or congested places.
15-1113. Curb loading zones--designation.
15-1114. Curb loading zones--standing.
15-1115. Standing vehicles in freight curb loading zone.
15-1116. Designation of public carrier stops and stands.
15-1117. Buses.
15-1118. Taxicabs.
15-1119. Parking vehicles other than buses and taxicabs.
15-1120. Signs--required.
15-1121. Signs--duty to obey.
15-1122. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-1123. Parking vehicles on city streets; restrictions.
15-1124. Immobilization and removal of vehicles with three or more
adjudicated, due, and unsatisfied parking tickets.
15-1101. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated in official signs except when it is necessary to stop a
vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or official traffic control device. (1985 Code, § 15-223)
15-1102. Location of standing and parking places, etc. The city
manager may locate standing and parking places for vehicles, and the manner
of parking in such places as will not interfere with traffic, and any violation of
such rules and regulations of the city manager shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-224)
15-1103. Angle parking generally. (1) The city traffic engineer shall
determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark
15-31
or sign such streets but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any
federal aid or state highway within this city unless the state department of
transportation has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
(2) Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left
side of the street.
(3) On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city
traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings. (1985 Code, § 15-225)
15-1104. Prohibited in specific places. (1) No person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with the other
traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or trafficcontrol
device, in any of the following places:
(a) On a sidewalk;
(b) In front of a public or private driveway;
(c) Within an intersection;
(d) Within eight (8) feet of a fire hydrant;
(e) On a crosswalk;
(f) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(g) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(h) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless the city traffic engineer indicates a different length by signs
or markings;
(i) Within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;
(j) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(k) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
end or curb of a street;
(l) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway
or within a highway tunnel;
(m) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(n) Upon any median strip or dividing strip between curbs and
sidewalks (commonly known as parkways);
(o) In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as
being reserved for the physically handicapped, unless, however, the
person driving the vehicle is a physically handicapped person. A vehicle
parking in such a space shall display a certificate of identification issued
as set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-160(e) or a disabled
15-32
veteran’s license plate issued under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-4-209. A person who parks a vehicle in violation of this subsection
shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
a first offense and shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each subsequent offense.
(p) On a bicycle lane;
(q) On a bikeway or multi-use trail.
(2) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled
portion of a road, street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it
is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such vehicle in such
position. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1105. Standing or parking close to curb. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where
there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the
right-hand curb. (1985 Code, § 15-227)
15-1106. Obstructing traffic. No person shall park any vehicle upon
a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic. (1985 Code, § 15-228)
15-1107. Parking in alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1985 Code,
§ 15-229)
15-1108. Parking vehicles for sale, repair, etc. No person shall park
a vehicle upon a street for the principal purpose of :
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except in the case of
repairs necessitated by an emergency. (1985 Code, § 15-230)
15-1109. Parking adjacent to schools. (1) The city traffic engineer
is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both
sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in
his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
15-33
(2) When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either
side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1985 Code, § 15-231)
15-1110. Parking prohibited on certain streets generally.
(1) The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon any street when deemed necessary to expedite
the movement of traffic.
(2) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow
streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign. (1985 Code, § 15-232)
15-1111. One-way roadways. In the event a highway includes two (2)
or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any
such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side
of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or
parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or
parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway
and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (1985 Code, § 15-233)
15-1112. Hazardous or congested places. (1) The city traffic
engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs,
places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(2) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated
place. (1985 Code, § 15-234)
15-1113. Curb loading zones--designation. The city traffic engineer
is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable. (1985 Code, § 15-235)
15-1114. Curb loading zones--standing. No person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a
passenger curb loading zone, during the hours when the regulations applicable
to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three (3) minutes. (1985 Code, § 15-236)
15-34
15-1115. Standing vehicles in freight curb loading zone.
(1) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during the hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In
no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
(2) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (1985 Code, § 15-237)
15-1116. Designation of public carrier stops and stands. The city
traffic engineer shall establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands
for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such
places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit
and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1985 Code, § 15-238)
15-1117. Buses. (1) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as
provided in this chapter.
(2) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street
at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated in
as provided in this section, except in the case of emergency.
(3) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front
wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and
the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic. (1985 Code, § 15-239)
15-1118. Taxicabs. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park
such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated as provided in this section. The provision shall not prevent the
operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. (1985
Code, § 15-240)
15-1119. Parking vehicles other than buses and taxicabs. No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other
15-35
than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(1985 Code, § 15-241)
15-1120. Signs--required. Whenever by this code or any other
ordinance of this city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited
on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective
unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
(1985 Code, § 15-242)
15-1121. Signs--duty to obey. (1) No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle in violation of any official sign lawfully placed or erected.
(2) The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking
shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
in specified places or at specified times. (1985 Code, § 15-243)
15-1122. Impoundment of vehicles. Any vehicle of any kind which
shall be parked in any zone designated as a no-parking zone, and marked as
required by this chapter, shall be towed to the city garage and there held until
the owner thereof shall present satisfactory evidence that he has paid the
required fine and the cost of towing such vehicle from the no-parking zone to the
city garage. (1985 Code, § 15-244)
15-1123. Parking vehicles on city streets; restrictions.
(1) Parking of motorized equipment or vehicles on city streets. (a) No
truck or bus or recreational vehicle having a declared maximum gross
weight, including vehicle and load, of more than eight thousand (8,000)
pounds, or vehicles that exceed eight feet (8') in height at any point, or
vehicles that exceed twenty feet (20') in length (attached trailers being
considered part of the length of the vehicle), shall be parked or left
unattended on any public street for a period of time longer than two (2)
hours consecutively, except while being actively loaded or unloaded, or
while such a vehicle is being used in connection with any work or service
being performed within the immediate area.
(b) No vehicle of any type being used for the purpose of
transporting any volatile, toxic, gaseous, explosive or flammable material
shall be parked or left unattended on any public street or public right-ofway
for any period of time, except while being actively loaded or
15-36
unloaded, or while such vehicle is being used in connection with any work
or service being performed within the immediate area.
(c) Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(2) Parking of nonmotorized equipment or vehicles on city streets.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or knowingly
permit to be parked, any nonmotorized vehicle or equipment such as, but
limited to, campers, trailers, boats, or other recreational type equipment
on any public street in the city for a period of time longer than eight (8)
hours consecutively.
(b) Each nonmotorized vehicle or equipment may be removed by
the police department.
(c) Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(3) Storage of property on public streets and rights-of-way. (a) It shall
be unlawful for any person to use a public street right-of-way along the
street, for the purpose of storing any item, except where otherwise
lawfully provided.
(b) Storage is defined for the purposes of this section as the
placing of any property in the public street right-of-way in such a manner
as to preclude the use of the street or right-of-way by the general public
or the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(c) Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(4) Pursuant to the general penalty as found in § 1-104 of the Code of
the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, a violation of the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
separate violation. Each day any violation of the provisions of this section shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (as added by Ord. #4497-13, Aug.
2013)
15-1124. Immobilization and removal of vehicles with three or
more adjudicated, due, and unsatisfied parking tickets. (1) The city is
authorized to cause any motor vehicle on the public highways, public streets,
public parking lots, or other public grounds against which there are three (3) or
more adjudicated, due and unsatisfied parking tickets to be either immobilized
or removed from the place it is found at the expense of the owner, driver, or
operator. The removal or immobilization of the vehicle shall be by or under the
direction of an officer or employee of the city's police department. The city may
also remove an immobilized vehicle after three (3) calendar days, unless exigent
circumstances exist such as parking in a loading zone, fire lane, handicap
parking space, blocking a driveway or access to property, or interfering with
traffic, in which case the city may remove an immobilized vehicle immediately.
15-37
(2) The owner, driver, or operator shall be obligated to pay any
immobilization fee or removal charges for removing/immobilizing the vehicle
and any storage charges, before the person immobilizing, removing, or storing
such vehicle shall be required to surrender possession of the vehicle to the
owner, driver, or operator. Additionally, the person seeking return of the vehicle
shall be required to pay all outstanding parking tickets on the vehicle before the
vehicle is released.
(3) No person, firm, or other legal entity that immobilizes, removes,
or stores any vehicle pursuant to this section shall release the vehicle prior to
verification that all adjudicated, due, and unsatisfied parking tickets have been
paid.
(4) When a vehicle is immobilized pursuant to this section, there shall
be placed on the vehicle in a conspicuous manner a notice warning that the
vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle might
damage it.
(5) Any person who believes that his or her vehicle was immobilized
or removed improperly may request and shall promptly receive a hearing
regarding the immobilization/removal of the vehicle before the city judge;
immobilization/removal hearings shall be held within four (4) business days of
the request. The request for hearing shall be made with the municipal court
clerk within five (5) calendar days of the immobilization or removal of the
vehicle or shall thereafter be barred. At the immobilization/removal hearing,
after consideration of the evidence, the judge shall determine whether the
immobilization and/or removal was valid. Where it has been established that the
immobilization and/or removal was valid, the judge shall uphold and affirm the
immobilization/removal and order the payment of all unsatisfied parking
tickets, expenses, fees, immobilization and/or removal costs, and court costs
(including the costs of the immobilization/removal hearing). Where it has been
established that the immobilization and/or removal was invalid, the judge shall
order the release of an immobilized/removed vehicle and the refund of the
immobilization/removal fees. Any person who fails to appear at the time and
place set for the immobilization/removal hearing shall be deemed to have
conceded the validity of the immobilization and/or removal of the vehicle.
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any section of this
title, it shall be conclusively presumed for each adjudicated, due, and unsatisfied
parking ticket that the person or persons to whom a vehicle registration plate
was issued was or were the individual or individuals responsible for incurring
the parking violations and resulting liability or fine, unless the person
requesting the immobilization/removal hearing proves that the vehicle was used
without express or implied authority during each parking violation for which
there is an adjudicated, due, and unsatisfied parking ticket. (as added by Ord.
#4589-15, Oct. 2015)
15-38
CHAPTER 12
SPECIAL STOPS
SECTION
15-1201. Signals indicating approach of train.
15-1202. Stop or yield signs--authorized maintenance.
15-1203. Stop or yield signs--description; placement.
15-1204. Vehicles entering stop or yield intersections.
15-1205. Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
15-1206. Blocking intersections or crosswalks.
15-1207. Permit for special stops for loading, etc.
15-1208. Lights on parked vehicles.
15-1201. Signals indicating approach of train. (1) Whenever any
person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within
fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such
railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
(a) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
(b) A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives
or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
(c) A railroad train approaching within approximately one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal
audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed
or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or
(d) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
(2) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed
or is being opened or closed. (1985 Code, § 15-256)
15-1202. Stop or yield signs--authorized; maintenance. The city
traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections
where particular hazards exist and to determine:
(1) Whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any
such intersections, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every such place where a stop is required; or
(2) Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection as prescribed in § 15-1204 in which event
15-39
he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto
is required. (1985 Code, § 15-257)
15-1203. Stop or yield signs--description; placement. (1) Every
stop sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than eight (8) inches in
height. Every yield sign shall bear the word “Yield” in letters not less than
seven (7) inches in height.
(2) Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway. (1985 Code, § 15-258)
15-1204. Vehicles entering stop or yield intersections.
(1) Stop intersection. Except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. Such driver after having
stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such
highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded
may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle proceeding.
(2) Yield intersection. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign
shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver having so yielded may proceed,
and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to
the vehicle so proceeding; provided, however, that a driver who enters a yield
intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian in
a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered not
to have yielded as required by this section. The foregoing shall not relieve the
drivers of other vehicles approaching the intersection at such distance as not to
constitute an immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a
collision. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety
to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk at a clearly marked stop line,
but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driveway has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (1985
Code, § 15-259)
15-40
15-1205. Emerging from alley, driveway or building. The driver of
a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley,
driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto
a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway,
and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid
collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on such roadway. (1985 Code, § 15-260)
15-1206. Blocking intersections or crosswalks. No driver shall enter
an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1985 Code,
§ 15-261)
15-1207. Permit for special stops for loading, etc. (1) The city
traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of
a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may
be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the
vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and
authorized.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any permitted or other person to violate any
of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (1985 Code, § 15-262)
15-1208. Lights on parked vehicles. (1) Whenever a vehicle is
lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between a half hour
after sunset and a half hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient
light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet
upon such street or highway no lights need to be displayed upon such parked
vehicle.
(2) Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise and there is not
sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred
(500) feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be
equipped with one (1) or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At
least one (1) lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle, and the same lamp or at
least one (1) other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamp shall
always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps meeting the
requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the
15-41
vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The foregoing provisions shall not
apply to a motor-driven cycle.
(3) Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed
or dimmed. (1985 Code, § 15-263)
15-42
CHAPTER 13
PARKING METERS
SECTION
15-1301. Applicability.
15-1302. General authority of city manager.
15-1303. Designation of parking spaces.
15-1304. Installation, regulation, etc., of meters; specifications generally.
15-1305. Operation of meters.
15-1306. Prohibited acts.
15-1307. Placing coins in meters while loading or unloading.
15-1308. Use of funds.
15-1309. Reports of violations.
15-1310. Designation of loading zones, etc.
15-1301. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter as to the placing
of coins in parking meters shall not apply on Sundays nor on the following
holidays: January first, July fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day. (1985 Code, § 15-275)
15-1302. General authority of city manager. The city manager shall
be authorized to provide for the installation, regulation, maintenance, control,
operation and use of parking meters on any street or part of a street where
parking is limited as to time by this chapter or any other chapter of this code
now or hereafter in force and where, in his opinion, the use of such parking
meters would tend to reduce overparking in violation of this code. (1985 Code,
§ 15-276)
15-1303. Designation of parking spaces. The city manager shall
cause lines or marks to be painted on the streets or curbs about or along side of
the parking meters to designate the parking space for which such meter is to be
used. Every vehicle parking along side of or next to any parking meter shall
park within the lines so marked or established. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in such a way that the same shall not be within the area so designated
by such lines or markings, unless such vehicle is too long to be confined in one
(1) such space. (1985 Code, § 15-277)
15-1304. Installation, regulation, etc., of meters; specifications
generally. The parking meters shall be installed upon the curb next to
individual parking spaces and shall be at all times maintained so that such
meters shall display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of a
proper coin of the United States in conformity with the requirements of this
chapter, such signal to remain in evidence until expiration of such parking
15-43
period at which time it will indicate by automatic operation of a visible signal
that the lawful period has expired. (1985 Code, § 15-278)
15-1305. Operation of meters. Whenever any vehicle shall be parked
next to a parking meter on any day, Monday through Saturday, except on the
holidays enumerated in § 15-1301, between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00
P.M., the owner or operator of such vehicle shall park within the area
designated by the curb and street marking lines as indicated for parallel or
diagonal parking, and upon entering such parking space shall immediately
deposit in such parking meter one (1) or more five-cent ($.05) coins, ten-cent
($.10) coins or twenty-five-cent ($.25) coins of the United States, depending upon
the length of time such vehicle shall be parked and shall put the meter into
operation; provided, that such owner or operator may use any unexpired time
remaining on the meter from its previous use without depositing a coin therein;
and provided further, that no vehicle shall be parked for longer than the period
prescribed by this chapter. Each five-cent ($.05) coin will permit the vehicle to
be parked for a period of twelve (12) minutes, each ten-cent ($.10) coin for a
period of twenty-four (24) minutes and each twenty-five-cent ($.25) coin for a
period of one (1) hour. (1985 Code, § 15-279)
15-1306. Prohibited acts. (1) It shall be unlawful during the hours
from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., Mondays through Saturdays, except the holidays
enumerated in § 15-1301, to permit a vehicle to remain parked in a designated
parking space while the parking meter for such space indicates that such vehicle
is illegally parked, whether such indication is the result of the failure to deposit
a coin and operate lever or other actuating device of the meter, or the result of
the automatic operation of the meter following the expiration of the authorized
parking time subsequent to depositing a coin therein at the time such vehicle
was parked. The fact that a vehicle is parking in a metered parking space
during the hours of limited parking without the meter time signal showing
permitted parking, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been
parked at such space longer than the lawful permitted parking period. It shall
be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name
to be unlawfully parked as set out in this section.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of obtaining an
extension of indicated parking time beyond the maximum limit prescribed by
this chapter for parking of vehicles by such meter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter any slug, device or other substitutes for a coin of the United
States.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with,
open, break or destroy any parking meter or otherwise to wilfully impair its
usefulness.
15-44
(5) Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of
subsections (3) or (4) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined fifty
dollars ($50.00) and also in the discretion of the city judge sitting as a
magistrate, may be bound over to the grand jury of the county for such violation
of state laws as may be involved. (1985 Code, § 15-280)
15-1307. Placing coins in meters while loading or unloading. The
placing of coins in meters shall not be required of the owner or operator of any
vehicle while actually engaged in loading or unloading of persons therefrom;
provided, that the parking for such purpose is restricted to such length of time
as is absolutely necessary therefor. (1985 Code, § 15-281)
15-1308. Use of funds. The coins required to be deposited in parking
meters are hereby levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover the
costs of providing parking spaces, parking meters and installation and
maintenance thereof; the cost of regulation, inspection, operation, control and
use of the parking meter spaces and zones created therein; for the regulation
and control of traffic moving in and out of parking spaces and zones so created;
and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration expense. (1985 Code,
§ 15-282)
15-1309. Reports of violations. It shall be the duty of the police
officers of the city acting in accordance with instructions issued by the city
manager, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) The state license number and city identification tag number, if any,
of such vehicle;
(3) The time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter; and
(4) Any other fact, a knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
Each police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner
or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision
of this chapter and instructing such owner or operator to report to the police
headquarters of the city, in regard to such violation. Each such owner or
operator may, within twenty-four (24) hours of the time when such notice was
attached to such vehicle, pay to the police desk sergeant on duty at police
headquarters, or to the city recorder at his office in the municipal building as a
penalty for and in full satisfaction of each violation, the sum of one dollar
($1.00). The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within
twenty-four (24) hours shall render such owner or operator subject to the
15-45
penalties provided for violation of the lawful parking provisions of this code.
(1985 Code, § 15-283)
15-1310. Designation of loading zones, etc. This chapter shall in no
wise be construed or considered as in any way limiting or affecting the right of
the city manager to designate proper loading and unloading zones in the city.
(1985 Code, § 15-284)
15-46
CHAPTER 14
ABANDONED, JUNKED OR WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION
15-1401. Definitions.
15-1402. Nuisance.
15-1403. Storage on public or private property.
15-1404. Notice to remove.
15-1405. Failure to remove.
15-1406. Abatement and removal by city.
15-1407. Tow-in ticket.
15-1408. Removal and storage.
15-1409. Title search.
15-1410. Sale at public auction.
15-1411. Return of vehicle to owner.
15-1412. Storage and sale of property found in vehicles.
15-1413. Disposition of funds from sale of vehicle.
15-1401. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and terms shall have the designated meaning unless it is clear from the
text that a different meaning is intended:
(1) “Abandoned vehicle.” Any motor vehicle whose last registered
owner of record has relinquished all further dominion and control, or any vehicle
which is wrecked or partially dismantled or inoperable for a period of ten (10)
days. There shall be a presumption that the last registered owner thereof has
abandoned such vehicle, regardless of whether the physical possession of such
vehicle remains in the technical custody or control of such owner, if it has
remained inoperable or partially dismantled, or if the owner has relinquished
dominion or control of such vehicle, for ten (10) days.
(2) “Manager.” The city manager or his duly authorized
representative.
(3) “Property.” Any real property within the city which is not an
improved street or highway.
(4) “Vehicle.” A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads or slides and
transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and
wagons. (1985 Code, § 15-296)
15-1402. Nuisance. The accumulation and storage of abandoned,
wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles on public
and private property is hereby found to create an unsightly condition upon such
property tending to reduce the value thereof, to invite plundering, to create fire
15-47
hazards and to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health
and safety of minors. Such accumulation and storage of vehicles is further found
to promote urban blight and deterioration in the community; to violate the
zoning regulations of the city in many instances, particularly where such
vehicles are maintained in the required yard areas of residential property; and
that such wrecked, junked, abandoned or partially dismantled or inoperable
motor vehicles are in the nature of rubbish, litter and unsightly debris in
violation of health and sanitation laws. Therefore, the accumulation and
storage of such vehicles on public and private property, except as expressly
permitted in this chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance
which may be abated as such, which remedy shall be in addition to any other
remedy provided in this code. (1985 Code, § 15-297)
15-1403. Storage on public or private property. No person shall
park, store or leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor
vehicle which is in a rusted, wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperable
or abandoned condition upon any property within the city for a period in excess
of ten (10) days unless such vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or
unless such vehicle is so stored or parked on said property in connection with a
duly licensed business or commercial enterprise operated and conducted
pursuant to law when such parking or storing of vehicles is necessary to the
operation of the business or commercial enterprise. (1985 Code, § 15-298)
15-1404. Notice to remove. Whenever it shall appear that a violation
of the provisions of this chapter exists, the manager shall give, or cause to be
given, notice to the registered owner of any motor vehicle which is in violation
of this chapter, and he shall give such notice to the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property upon which such motor vehicle is located,
advising that such motor vehicle violates the provisions of this chapter and
directing that such motor vehicle be moved to a place of lawful storage within
ten (10) days. Such notice shall be served upon the owner of the vehicle by
leaving a copy of such notice on or within the vehicle. Notice to the owner or
person in lawful possession or control of the property upon which such motor
vehicle is located may be served by conspicuously posting such notice upon the
premises. In the case of publicly-owned property, notice to the owner of the
property where the vehicle is found is hereby dispensed with. (1985 Code,
§ 15-299)
15-1405. Failure to remove. The owner of any abandoned vehicle who
fails, neglects or refuses to remove such vehicle or to house such vehicle and
abate such nuisance in accordance with the notice given pursuant to the
provisions of § 15-1404 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985 Code, § 15-300)
15-48
15-1406. Abatement and removal by city. If the vehicle is not
disposed of after the time provided for in the notice, the manager shall report
the location of such vehicle to the police department. The police department or
a wrecker company designated by it shall then remove such vehicle or cause it
to be removed to the wrecker company storage lot. At the time that the vehicle
is removed by the police department or the wrecker company, a tow-in ticket
shall be completed by the person towing such vehicle to such garage. In the case
of a vehicle parked on private property, the manager or his designee shall cause
to be served a citation and summons issued by the municipal court upon the
owner of the vehicle and the owner of the real property where the vehicle is
located. If the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the real property cannot be
located or identified in the course of due diligence, an affidavit by the manager
or his designee stating the efforts to locate and identify the owner of the vehicle
or the owner of the real property, as the case may be, shall be submitted to the
municipal court to show the efforts to provide notice. The municipal judge shall
be authorized pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-5-122 to order the
police department to remove a vehicle from private property when the manager
or his designee shows that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that
notice has been given or that due diligence to provide notice has been
satisfactorily shown. (1985 Code, § 15-301, as amended by Ord. #4522-13, Jan.
2016)
15-1407. Tow-in ticket. The tow-in ticket as provided for in this section
shall be in the following form:
“VEHICLE REMOVED TO CITY GARAGE
Ticket No. _______
Make of Car ________ Type ________ Motor No. _______
Serial No. ________ License No. ________ State ________
Where found __________________ Date _____________
Time ________ Parts of Car Damaged or Missing ___________
____________________________________________________________
Keys in car ___ Switch Locked ____ Switch Unlocked ___
Trunk locked ___ Doors Locked ___ Radio in Car ___
Spare Tire and Wheel ___ Jack___ Was Car Driven In ___
By: _____________ Personal Property in Car ______________
____________________________________________________________
Remarks ___________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Owner _____________________________________________________
Address __________________________ City or State _____________
Signature of Tow-Man ______________________________________
15-49
Signature of City Manager or his representative _______________
____________________________________________________________.”
(1985 Code, § 15-302)
15-1408. Removal and storage. (1) Abandoned vehicles shall be
transported from the property where they are found to the city garage only
during the daylight hours.
(2) The abandoned vehicle shall not be double decked on the city
garage lot until the title search provided for in § 15-1409 has been completed by
the police department. (1985 Code, § 15-303)
15-1409. Title search. At the time that an abandoned vehicle is moved
to the city garage, the city police department shall be notified immediately of
such fact, and the department shall procure the serial number on the vehicle.
The police department shall make or cause to be made a title search on the
abandoned vehicle, and after the title search has been completed by the
department, the results thereof shall be transmitted to the manager. (1985
Code, § 15-304)
15-1410. Sale at public auction. (1) After a title search of the
abandoned vehicle has been made by the police department, the manager shall
give notice by registered mail to the owner of such vehicle that the vehicle will
be sold at public auction by the city. The notice shall specify the date, hour and
location of the sale. The manager shall determine the date of the sale of the
abandoned vehicle, and at the time of the sale, the vehicle shall be sold by the
city, and he may sell such vehicles individually or as a group. Each car at the
sale shall be subject to the tow-in charges and storage charges, which charges
shall be determined by the manager, and the city shall be permitted to bid at
the sale. Title to the abandoned vehicles sold at the aforesaid public auction
shall pass to the purchaser at the time of the sale. The proceeds derived from
the sale of the vehicles shall be retained by the city. The police department
shall report to the manager the vehicles sold at the sale and the amount
received for the vehicles.
(2) Notice of the sale shall be posted at the municipal and safety
building, the Ash Street courthouse and such other places as the manager may
determine, ten (10) days in advance of the sale. (1985 Code, § 15-305)
15-1411. Return of vehicle to owner. If during the time that a vehicle
is being held by the city under this chapter, the owner of the vehicle demands
the return of such vehicle, then the city shall turn the vehicle over to the owner
upon the payment of the storage and tow-in fees by the owner. The police
department shall notify the manager of such redemption by such owner. (1985
Code, § 15-306)
15-50
15-1412. Storage and sale of property found in vehicle. Any
valuable property found in any abandoned vehicle subject to this chapter shall
be stored by the police department and sold at public auction as determined by
the manager. (1985 Code, § 15-307)
15-1413. Disposition of funds from sale of vehicle. All funds coming
into the hands of the city from the sale of vehicles or property under this chapter
shall be applied first to the expenses incurred in the removal and sale of the
vehicles and property, and the remainder shall be deposited in the general fund
of the city. (1985 Code, § 15-308 )
15-51
CHAPTER 15
BICYCLES
SECTION
15-1501. Applicability.
15-1502. Responsibility of parents for children's violations.
15-1503. Bicycle riders subject to vehicle regulations.
15-1504. Obedience to traffic-control devices.
15-1505. Operating a bicycle on a roadway.
15-1506. Operating a bicycle on a bikeway.
15-1507. Operating a bicycle on a sidewalk.
15-1508. Emerging from an alley, driveway, or building.
15-1509. Driver and passengers.
15-1510. Warning device.
15-1511. Hitching prohibited.
15-1512. Speed.
15-1513. Carrying articles.
15-1514. Lights and reflectors.
15-1515. Brakes.
15-1516. Bicycle parking.
15-1501. Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all multi-use trails,
sidewalks, and roadways; and to all persons using the aforementioned multi-use
trails, sidewalks, and roadways. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1502. Responsibility of parents for children's violations. The
parent of any minor child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1503. Bicycle riders subject to vehicle regulations. Every
person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the
laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or the traffic
laws of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those
provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application
to bicycles. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1504. Obedience to traffic-control devices. (1) Any person
operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals,
signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a public safety officer.
15-52
(2) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or
left turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction
of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make
any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1505. Operating a bicycle on a roadway. (1) When a bicycle lane
is not available, all persons operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride on the
right side of the road, moving in the same direction as motor vehicle traffic. All
persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2)
abreast when in traffic.
(2) When a bicycle lane is available, all persons operating a bicycle
shall ride in the bicycle lane in the same direction as vehicular traffic; providing
however, that the operator may move out of the bicycle lane to make a left or
right turn, or to avoid a hazardous condition. All persons entering a bicycle lane
shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles already in the bicycle lane.
(Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1506. Operating a bicycle on a bikeway. All persons operating
a bicycle on a bikeway shall ride on the right side of the bikeway; providing
however, that the operator may move left to make a left turn, to avoid a
hazardous condition, or to pass a pedestrian or slower moving bicycle. Due care
shall be taken and an audible signal given when passing a pedestrian or slower
moving bicycle. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1507. Operating a bicycle on a sidewalk. (1) No person over the
age of sixteen (16) shall operate a bicycle on a sidewalk located on a local street
unless that person is supervising a child while riding. All persons may operate
a bicycle on an arterial or collector street.
(2) All persons operating a bicycle on a sidewalk shall yield the rightof-
way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before passing said
pedestrian. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1508. Emerging from an alley, driveway, or building. All
persons operating a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
upon approaching a sidewalk or roadway yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians and automobiles. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1509. Driver and passengers. All persons riding on a bicycle shall
be on a regular seat. Extra riders shall not be permitted to ride on a bicycle in
a manner other than the bicycle or its equipment was designed. (Ord. #3443,
Jan. 1997)
15-53
15-1510. Warning device. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it
is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a
distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be
equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1511. Hitching prohibited. No person operating a bicycle shall
attach oneself to a vehicle or hold onto another vehicle while it is moving.
(Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1512. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions, and in no case
greater than the applicable posted speed limit. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1513. Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry
any package, bundle, or article which prevents the operator from keeping at
least one (1) hand upon the handlebars. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1514. Lights and reflectors. No person shall operate a bicycle at
nighttime unless the bicycle or operator is equipped with a white light visible
from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front of the bicycle and
red or amber light, flashing light, or reflector, visible from a distance of at least
five hundred (500) feet to the rear of the bicycle. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1515. Brakes. All bicycles shall be equipped with mechanical brakes
suitable of bringing the bicycle to a quick stop. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-1516. Bicycle parking. No person shall park a bicycle on a multiuse
trail, sidewalk, or roadway, in such a fashion that it obstructs other
automobiles, bicycles, or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. #3443, Jan. 1997)
15-54
CHAPTER 16
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION
15-1601. Designation of crosswalks, safety zones.
15-1602. Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations.
15-1603. Right-of-way in crosswalks.
15-1604. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks.
15-1605. Crossing roadways at right angles.
15-1606. Yielding right-of-way.
15-1607. Crossing streets at other than crosswalks.
15-1608. Obedience to railroad signals.
15-1609. Walking on roadways.
15-1610. Solicitation of rides or business.
15-1611. Drivers to exercise due care.
15-1601. Designation of crosswalks, safety zone. The city traffic
engineer is hereby authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he may deem necessary; and
(2) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1985 Code,
§ 15-356)
15-1602. Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations. Pedestrians
shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in § 15-706, but at all other
places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the
restrictions stated in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 15-357)
15-1603. Right-of-way in crosswalks. (1) When traffic-control signals
are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-ofway,
slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(2) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
(3) Subsection (1) shall not apply under the conditions stated in
paragraph (2) of § 15-1606.
15-55
(4) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (1985 Code, § 15-358)
15-1604. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks. Pedestrians
shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1985 Code,
§ 15-359)
15-1605. Crossing roadways at right angles. No pedestrian shall
cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb
or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. However,
at intersections where traffic-control signals have traffic stopped in all
directions, these provisions shall not apply to pedestrians crossing within the
area common to both intersecting roadways. (1985 Code, § 15-360)
15-1606. Yielding right-of-way. (1) Every pedestrian crossing a
roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
(2) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(3) The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the
conditions stated in § 15-1607 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at
certain designated places. (1985 Code, § 15-361)
15-1607. Crossing streets at other than crosswalks. (1) Between
adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation,
pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
(2) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in
any business district. (1985 Code, § 15-362)
15-1608. Obedience to railroad signals. No pedestrian shall pass
through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or
closed. (1985 Code, § 15-363)
15-1609. Walking on roadways. (1) Where sidewalks are provided, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
(2) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
15-56
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction. (1985 Code, § 15-364)
15-1610. Solicitation of rides or business. (1) No person shall stand
in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from
the occupant of any vehicle.
(2) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway. (1985 Code, § 15-365)
15-1611. Drivers to exercise due care. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning
by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon
observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(1985 Code, § 15-366)
15-57
CHAPTER 17
ACCIDENTS
SECTION
15-1701. Immediate notice of accident.
15-1702. Report required.
15-1703. When driver unable to report.
15-1704. Reports confidential.
15-1705. Reports by operators of garages and repair shops.
15-1701. Immediate notice of accident. The driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of a person, or property
damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, shall
immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such
accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. (1985
Code, § 15-383)
15-1702. Report required. The driver of a vehicle which is in any
manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or total property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00)
or more shall, within ten (10) days after such accident, forward a written report
of such accident to the police department, or a copy of any report he is required
to forward to the state. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable
when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while
such driver was present thereat. (1985 Code, § 15-384)
15-1703. When driver unable to report. (1) Whenever the driver of
a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as
required in § 15-1701 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time
of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be
given, the notice not given by the driver.
(2) Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written
report of an accident as required in § 15-1702 and such driver is not the owner
of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall
within ten (10) days after learning of the accident make such report not made
by the driver. (1985 Code, § 15-385)
15-1704. Reports confidential. (1) All accident reports made by
persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the
individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police
department or other governmental agencies having use for the records for
accident prevention purposes, or for the administration of the laws of this state
relating to the deposit of security and proof of financial responsibility by persons
15-58
driving or the owners of motor vehicles, except that the identity of a person
involved in an accident may be disclosed when such identity is not otherwise
known or when such person denies his presence at such accident.
(2) All accident reports and supplemental information filed in
connection with the administration of the laws of this state relating to the
deposit of security or proof of financial responsibility shall be confidential and
not open to general public inspection, nor shall copying of lists of such reports
be permitted; except, however, that such reports and supplemental information
may be examined by any person named therein or by his representative
designated in writing.
(3) No reports or information mentioned in this section shall be used
as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that
the police department shall furnish upon demand of any party to such trial, or
upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report
has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law. (1985
Code, § 15-386)
15-1705. Reports by operators of garages and repair shops. The
person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor
vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident of which
a written report must be made to the state, or which has been struck by a bullet
or otherwise apparently involved in violence, shall report to the police
department within twenty-four (24) hours after such motor vehicle is received,
giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the
owner or operator of such vehicle if known. (1985 Code, § 15-387)
15-59
CHAPTER 18
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-1801. Automated enforcement.
15-1801. Automated enforcement. (1) Definitions. The following
words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
(a) "Citations and warnings" shall include:
(i) The name and address of the registered owner of the
vehicles;
(ii) The registration plate number of the motor vehicle
involved in the violation;
(iii) The violation charged;
(iv) The location of the violation;
(v) The date and time of the violation;
(vi) A copy of the recorded image;
(vii) The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date
by which the civil penalty should be paid or by which a hearing
must be requested, pursuant to subsection (3)(b)(ii) of this section,
which dates shall be not less than thirty (30) days from the date of
mailing of the citation;
(viii) A personally or electronically signed statement by a
member of the police department that, based on inspection of
recorded images, the vehicle was being operated in violation of
subsection (3) of this section; and
(ix) Information advising the person alleged to be liable
under this section:
(A) Of the manner and time in which liability
alleged in the citation occurred and that the citation may be
contested in the municipal court; and
(B) Warning that failure to contest in the manner
and time provided shall be deemed an admission of liability
and that a default judgment may be entered thereon.
(b) "In operation" means operating in good working condition.
(c) "Recorded images" means images recorded by a traffic
control photographic system
(i) On:
(A) A photograph;
(B) A microphotograph;
(C) An electronic image;
15-60
(D) Videotape; or
(E) Any other medium; and
(ii) At least one (1) image or portion of tape, clearly
identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
(d) "System location" is the approach to an intersection toward
which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in
operation.
(e) "Traffic control photographic system" is an electronic system
consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle
sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control sign,
signal or device, and to automatically produce photographs, video or
digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control sign,
signal, or device.
(f) "Vehicle owner" is the person identified by the state
department of safety as the registered owner of a vehicle.
(2) General. (a) The city police department or an agent of the police
department shall administer the traffic control photographic systems and
shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control
photographic systems are installed.
(b) A citation or warning alleging that the violation of
subsection (3) of this section occurred, sworn to (or affirmed) and by
statement signed personally or electronically by a member of the police
department or an employee of the City of Johnson City assigned to the
police bureau, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a
traffic control photographic system, shall be evidence of the facts
contained therein and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation under this section. The citation or warning shall be forwarded
by first-class mail to the owner's address as given on the motor vehicle
registration. Personal service of process on the owner shall not be
required.
(c) In addition to the signage requirements of subsection (7)
below, signs to indicate the use of traffic control photographic systems in
Johnson City shall be posted and visible at various other locations in the
city.
(3) Offense. (a) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic control signal, every driver shall stop when facing a red signal
light at the stop bar, and it shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the
stop bar at a system location when facing a red signal light as set out in
§ 15-705(3)(a), or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation
specified in this chapter.
(b) A person who receives a citation under subsection (2) may:
(i) Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with instructions
on the citation, directly to the municipal court or to the contracted
collection agency; or
15-61
(ii) Elect to contest the citation for the alleged violation.
An election to contest such citation shall not result in civil
penalties or court costs in addition to those assessed pursuant to
section (4)(a) below, if the responsible party is then found by the
court to have violated subsection (3).
(c) The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation
under this section, except when he can provide evidence that the vehicle
was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time of the
violation, as described in subsection (3)(d) of this section, in which
circumstance the person who had the care, custody or control of the
vehicle at the time of the violation shall be responsible.
(d) Notwithstanding subsection (3)(c) of this section, the owner
of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, on or before the
designated court date, he or she furnishes the city court:
(i) An affidavit stating the name and address of the
person or entity who leased, rented, or otherwise had the care,
custody or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or
(ii) An affidavit by him stating that, at the time of the
violation, the vehicle involved or its license plate was stolen, along
with a certified copy of the police report reflecting such theft, or
that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of some person
who did not have his or her permission to use the vehicle, and
stating the name and address of said person. An affidavit alleging
theft of a motor vehicle or its plates must be provided by the
registered owner of a vehicle receiving a notice of violation within
thirty (30) days of the mailing date of the notice of violation.
If an individual identified pursuant to subsection (3)(d)(i)
placed the vehicle in the care, custody or control of another at the
time of the violation, said individual may likewise submit an
affidavit pursuant to subsection (3)(d)(i). If an individual identified
pursuant to subsection (3)(d)(i) demonstrates to the city court that
he or she did not lease or rent the vehicle or otherwise was not
given care, custody or control of the vehicle, the owner of the
vehicle shall remain responsible for the violation, and a citation as
set forth above shall be reissued to the owner of the vehicle.
(4) Penalty. (a) Any violation of subsection (3) of this section shall
subject the responsible person or entity to a civil penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) and the assessment of court costs for each violation. Failure to
appear in court on the designated date shall subject the responsible
person or entity to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the
assessment of court costs. Being found by the court as having violated
subsection (3) of this section shall likewise subject the responsible person
or entity to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the assessment of
court costs. No additional penalty or other costs shall be assessed for
15-62
non-payment of a traffic violation or citation that is based solely on
evidence obtained from a surveillance camera installed to enforce or
monitor traffic violations, unless a second notice is sent by first class mail
to the registered owner of the motor vehicle and such second notice
provides for an additional thirty (30) days for payment of such violation
or citation. The city may enforce the civil penalties by a civil action in the
nature of a debt.
(b) A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this
section shall not be considered a moving violation and may not be
recorded by the police department or the state department of safety on
the driving record of the owner or driver of the vehicle and may not be
considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage.
(5) Exemptions. The owners of the following vehicles are exempt from
receiving a notice of violation:
(a) Emergency vehicles with active emergency lights;
(b) Vehicles moving through the intersection to avoid or clear
the way for a marked emergency vehicle;
(c) Vehicles under police escort; and
(d) Vehicles in a funeral procession.
(6) Yellow light time exposure. The City of Johnson City shall not
reduce or cause the reduction of the time exposure of the yellow light at any
intersection where it installs, owns, operates, or maintains a traffic-control
signal light that employs a surveillance camera for the enforcement or
monitoring of traffic violations with the intended purpose of increasing the
number of traffic violations.
(7) Signage and stop bars. At all system locations where traffic control
photographic systems operate at intersections within the City of Johnson City,
there shall be installed stop bars and signage stating that a traffic control
photographic system is in operation. Such signage shall be placed near such
system and/or on the roadside, not less than two hundred feet (200') from such
system. (as added by Ord. #4297-07, Dec. 2008)
16-1
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, SIDEWALKS, ETC.
3. DRIVEWAYS.
4. RAILROADS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Definition.
16-102. Supervision.
16-103. Throwing glass, tacks, etc., into streets.
16-104. Placing or throwing dirt, ashes, etc.
16-105. Sidewalk vending.
16-106. Street carnivals, fairs, etc.
16-107. Streamers, etc., on or over streets, sidewalks.
16-108. Condemnation proceedings.
16-109. Grades--establishment generally.
16-110. Grades--when required; building permit.
16-111. Utility poles, pipes, etc.--permit.
16-112. Utility poles--specifications generally; use; removal.
16-113. Draining, discharging, etc., water across sidewalks.
16-114. Removal of snow, ice or dirt.
16-115. Cutting, breaking, etc., fastening animals to trees.
16-116. Closing streets, alleys, sidewalks--generally.
16-117. Closing streets, alleys, sidewalks--procedure.
16-118. Entering closed streets, etc.
16-119. Permit to obstruct or excavate street--required.
16-120. Permit to obstruct or excavate street--prerequisites; duties of permittee.
16-121. Contract for concrete walk, curbing, etc.; bond.
16-122. Washing vehicles, etc.
16-123. Catch basins--when required.
16-124. Catch basins--specifications generally.
1Municipal code reference
Related motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
16-2
16-101. Definition. As used in this chapter, where consistent with the
context, the word “grade” as applied to any street shall mean the elevation above
sea level of the sidewalk at the building or curbline. (1985 Code, § 21-1)
16-102. Supervision. The city manager shall have general care and
charge of all highways, streets, sidewalks, bridges, parks, public buildings and
grounds; shall cause same to be kept in good repair; shall make all necessary
arrangements for cleaning the same; and shall see that all nuisances and
obstructions are speedily removed, or give notice of same to the chief of police.
(1985 Code, § 21-2)
16-103. Throwing glass, tacks, etc., into streets. No person shall
throw, scatter, drop or place, or shall cause or procure to be thrown, scattered,
dropped or placed in or upon any street, highway, avenue or other public place
within the city, any glass, tacks, nails, pieces of metal or any other substance
likely to injure or damage any horse or mule or bicycle or other wheeled vehicle
having tires of rubber. (1985 Code, § 21-3)
16-104. Placing or throwing dirt, ashes, etc.. No person shall put,
place or throw in or upon any street or other place in this city any house dirt,
ashes, soot, shavings, paper, rags, suds, weeds or refuse matter or rubbish or
obstruction of any kind, and no person shall place or deposit in any street or
other public place, any stone or mason’s or bricklayer’s rubbish, or allow his fuel
to remain on any street or sidewalk overnight, without the consent of the city
manager, prescribing the time and manner of such deposit. (1985 Code, § 21-4)
16-105. Sidewalk vending. (1) The sale of any food, beverages,
merchandise, or any items of any kind on any public sidewalk, street, or other
public area shall be prohibited except as provided in § 16-105(2) following.
(2) (a) Definitions. (i) "Sidewalk vending" shall mean to sell or
offer to sell from a cart any authorized product on the public
sidewalks, as identified in this section.
(ii) "Sidewalk vendor" shall mean any person who vends
under the provisions of this section and shall include any employee
or agent of another.
(b) Products sold. Products sold by sidewalk vendors shall be
limited to food and non-alcoholic beverages.
(c) Locations. Sidewalk vending shall be permitted only upon
public sidewalks within that portion of downtown Johnson City bounded
by Colonial Way, State of Franklin Road, Buffalo Street, and East Market
Street. Sidewalk vending shall also be permitted upon public sidewalks
within that portion of downtown Johnson City bounded by North Roan
Street, West Millard Street, North Boone Street, and West King Street.
No vending cart shall be located as to interfere with pedestrian
16-3
movement or be located within thirty feet (30') of the center of the front
door of a retail establishment selling food and beverages or be located
within ten feet (10') of any marked pedestrian crosswalk or any transit
stop. Only one (1) self-contained cart shall be allowed for one (1) vendor
at one (1) location at any time.
(d) Permit required. Each sidewalk vendor shall operate
pursuant to a permit issued by the city's finance department. The
application for a sidewalk vendor's permit shall include the following:
(i) The full name, address, telephone number and e-mail
address (if available) of the applicant and the owner (if other than
the applicant) and proof of applicant's identity;
(ii) A description of the types of food and beverages to be
sold;
(iii) An accurate depiction or description of the proposed
sidewalk location where the applicant plans to vend;
(iv) Proof of compliance with all city and state health and
sanitation regulations and requirements for vending carts and for
selling food and/or non-alcoholic beverages and copies of all
required permits;
(v) A valid business license issued by the City of Johnson
City;
(vi) A valid business license issued by Washington
County;
(vii) Proof of and continued maintenance of insurance by
a company licensed to do business in Tennessee, insuring the
vendor against all claims for damages which may arise from the
operation pursuant to the permit; a certificate of insurance in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the city as
an additional insured with thirty (30) days' notice to the city of
cancellation; and
(viii) A two hundred dollar ($200.00) non-refundable
application fee.
Not later than thirty (30) days after the filing of a completed
application, the applicant shall be notified by the finance department of
the issuance or denial of the permit. A permit issued pursuant to this
section shall be valid for one (1) year from the issuance date. Each
sidewalk vending location shall require a separate permit.
(e) Denial, revocation, suspension of permit. Any application
may be denied and, following a hearing before the finance director, any
sidewalk vendor permit may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following causes:
(i) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application;
(ii) Fraud or misrepresentation in the operation of the
vending business;
16-4
(iii) Conduct of the vending business in a manner that
creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public
health, safety or welfare;
(iv) Incomplete application;
(v) Failure of the applicant or sidewalk vendor to satisfy
the requirements of this section;
(vi) Conduct in violation of the provisions of this section;
or
(vii) Failure to comply with any other applicable laws,
including but not limited to federal, state, and local laws
pertaining to the collection of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties.
The applicant or the sidewalk vendor may appeal the decision of
the finance director by application to a court of competent jurisdiction in
accordance with Tennessee law.
(f) Prohibited acts. No sidewalk vendor shall:
(i) Leave any cart unattended.
(ii) Store, park or leave any cart overnight on any street,
sidewalk or other public area;
(iii) Allow any items relating to the operation of the
vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, on, or under
the cart from which the business is operated;
(iv) Set up, maintain, or use any separate table or other
device to increase the selling or display capacity of the cart;
(v) Solicit or sell to persons in the public roadway;
(vi) Solicit or sell to persons in motor vehicles;
(vii) Sell anything other than that which is specified in the
permit;
(viii) Locate a cart on the sidewalk so as to block the
sidewalk or the entranceway to any building or to block any
driveway, crosswalk or transit stop;
(ix) Allow the cart or any other item relating to the
operation of the vending business to touch or connect to any
building or other structure, without the owner's permission; or
(x) Operate or park in the streets or alleys.
(g) Display of permits and licenses. Each sidewalk vendor shall
display the following in a conspicuous manner:
(i) The vending permit issued by the city;
(ii) The business license issued by the city;
(iii) The business license issued by Washington County;
(iv) All state and local health and sanitation permits; and
(v) All other permits required by law to be displayed.
(h) General cleanliness. Each sidewalk vendor shall maintain
the area around the vending cart in a neat and clean manner at all times
and shall provide a litter receptacle for public use at the cart.
16-5
(i) Special events. The city may suspend the provisions of this
section for special events and/or street festivals, which have street
closures approved by the city commission.
(j) Enforcement. The police bureau of the city shall enforce the
provisions of this section.
(k) Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of
an offense and upon conviction shall pay a penalty of not more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (1985 Code, § 21-5, as replaced by Ord. #4351-09, June
2009)
16-106. Street carnivals, fairs, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to produce or offer to produce, set up or exhibit within the city any street
carnival, street fair or other similar show; provided, that this section shall not
be construed to apply to circuses and menageries. (1985 Code, § 21-6)
16-107. Streamers, etc., on or over streets, sidewalks. No person
shall place or erect on or over any street, sidewalk, park or parkway any
streamer or advertising matter of any kind. (1985 Code, § 21-7)
16-108. Condemnation proceedings. (1) Whenever the board of
commissioners, by resolution, determines that the public interest demands that
any new street should be opened within the city or any old street should be
extended, widened or straightened, and the owner of the land through which
same shall pass requires damages, the board shall by resolution proceed to
condemn land for the same, and provide damages therefor in the manner set
forth in the laws of the state. The names of any number of nonresident owners
may be inserted in one (1) advertisement.
(2) Whenever the funds to settle the damages assessed by the jury of
view, as provided in this section, shall be in the hands of the recorder for the
benefit of the owner of the land, the board of commissioners may condemn the
land by ordinance, and, after allowing such property owners five (5) days’ time
in which to open such street, may order such street to be opened, and the same
shall be and become a public thoroughfare. (1985 Code, § 21-8)
16-109. Grades--establishment generally. (1) Every grade shall be
fixed by the engineer and established by resolution of the board of
commissioners on presentation of a profile showing such grade, and such profile
shall be known as the official profile of such street or part of street. No grade,
when once established, shall be changed by any person except on order of the
board, by resolution, attested to in same manner as provided in this section.
(2) On streets, along hill sides, where it is necessary for drainage and
economy, to have the curb grades higher or lower than the centerline of such
16-6
street, the same shall be shown on the profile and approved as street grades.
(1985 Code, § 21-9)
16-110. Grades--when required; building permit. No person shall
erect any permanent improvement without first obtaining the grade from the
city engineer and adhering to it. In case of such improvement being a building
of any kind the city engineer shall not furnish the grade until the owner has
obtained a building permit. (1985 Code, § 21-9.1)
16-111. Utility poles, pipes, etc.--permit. No public service
corporation, whether operating under a city franchise or under the general laws
of the state, shall locate any pole, wire, conduit, pipe or other apparatus without
first having obtained a permit from the city manager in writing, one (1) copy of
which shall be filed with the recorder. (1985 Code, § 21-10)
16-112. Utility poles--specifications generally; use; removal. The
city manager shall specify in the permit the kind, size and height of poles to be
used, the height at which all wires must be placed and the size, location and
depth of all pipes and conduits. The construction of such lines shall conform
thereto in all particulars, or be forthwith subject to removal. Any permit
granted under this section shall be subject to the right of the city, free of charge,
to place its fire alarm, telegraph or other electric lines, upon the poles or
through the conduits so licensed to be maintained; and shall be subject to the
right of the city to license the location of lines by any other person upon such
poles or through such conduits, upon the payment to the owner thereof of a
reasonable compensation, to be determined by the parties. The city manager
shall not grant permits for more than one (1) line of poles on any street, unless
it is impossible to use two (2) lines of wire on the same poles, and shall use every
endeavor to located poles where they shall be least objectionable. Any such
company, at its own expense, shall remove its poles or conduits to other suitable
locations whenever ordered to do so by the board of commissioners. (1985 Code,
§ 21-11)
16-113. Draining, discharging, etc., water across sidewalks. No
water shall be drained, discharged or permitted to drain from the roof of any
building, so as to flow across any sidewalk or walkway. The conductors for such
water shall be made by the owner of such building under such sidewalks or
walkways, and shall be constructed under the direction of the city manager.
(1985 Code, § 21-12)
16-114. Removal of snow, ice or dirt. No person shall allow any snow,
ice or dirt to remain upon any sidewalk in front of any property owned,
controlled or occupied by him, for a longer period than twelve (12) hours;
16-7
provided, that this shall not apply to dirt or gravel sidewalks. (1985 Code, § 21-13)
16-115. Cutting, breaking, etc., fastening animals to trees. No
person shall cut, break or injure any shade trees on the public streets or
sidewalks, or on the private premises of another, or fasten any horse or other
animal to a shade tree standing upon any public street, ground or square, or
suffer any animal over which, for the time being, he has charge, to stand or
remain near to, and within reach of such tree. (1985 Code, § 21-14)
16-116. Closing streets, alleys, sidewalks--generally. The city
manager shall close any public street, alley or sidewalk for such time as he may
deem necessary, for any of the following reasons or purposes:
(1) For necessary repairs to the street surfaces, or underground pipes
or wires;
(2) When a dangerous condition exists, pending repair of same;
(3) For new construction or street paving or any underground
construction; or
(4) For cases of serious illness, when a physician shall have certified
that the noise of traffic is endangering the life of his patient. (1985 Code,
§ 21-15)
16-117. Closing streets, alleys, sidewalks--procedure. Closing of
streets, alleys or sidewalks as authorized by § 16-116 shall be actual and
effective, by means of barriers plainly visible day or night so that an actual
removal of or disregard of such barrier shall be necessary to effect entry. (1985
Code, § 21-16)
16-118. Entering closed streets, etc. No person shall, without
authority, enter or remain upon any portion of the public street, alleys or
sidewalks which have been enclosed, barricaded or roped off by order of the city
manager or chief of police, or chief of the fire department. (1985 Code, § 21-17)
16-119. Permit to obstruct or excavate street--required. No person
shall break or dig up the grounds in any public street, way or public place or
lands of the city, or erect or place thereon any staging, or place or deposit
thereon any brick, stone, timber or other building material, without first having
obtained permission from the city manager in writing. (1985 Code, § 21-18)
16-120. Permit to obstruct or excavate street--prerequisites;
duties of permittee. (1) In all cases under § 16-119 in which a permit may be
given for obstructing or excavating any street, the city manager shall impose
such restrictions and limitations as he shall see fit, to make the street safe and
convenient for public travel, by the erection of barriers, the maintaining of
lights, the removal of rubbish or otherwise. Such permit shall express the time
16-8
for which it shall remain in force. It shall be a condition of such permit that the
person excavating any street shall cause the same to be refilled and tamped and
put in as good condition as it was before being opened, and in the case of a paved
street, the earth so excavated shall be hauled away and the excavation refilled
with slag or sand well tamped on which the paving shall be laid as it was before,
all done to the satisfaction of the city manager.
(2) If any street in the portion which has been so opened or dug up
shall require repairing and resurfacing within a period of six (6) months after
it has been so disturbed, the city manager shall give notice in writing to the
person who had or was given the right to make the excavation, to make such
repairs therein as are necessary. If such repairs are not made within seven (7)
days from the time of notification the city manager shall proceed to make such
repairs, and the expense of the same, in case of a department of the city, shall
be charged to such department, and in all other cases the same shall be paid by
the person making the excavation.
(3) No person shall be given a permit to place any building material
or other obstruction upon the streets or to excavate the same, without first
having executed a good and sufficient bond to the city in the sum of not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), conditioned to save the city harmless of damages resulting from
such obstructions or excavations, and conditioned also to make the repairs
required in this section. (1985 Code, § 21-19)
16-121. Contract for concrete walk, curbing, etc.; bond. (1) All
persons laying or constructing concrete walks, curbing, guttering, retaining
walls and similar structures in the city by contract with property owners or the
city, shall, before engaging in such work or contract, enter into good and
sufficient bond with good and solvent security to be approved by the city, with
the city, for the use and benefit of each person or owner for whom the work is
to be done, in the penalty for sixty (60) per cent of the contract of such work,
conditioned that the contractor shall lay or construct the same according to
plans and specifications and maintain same for three (3) years.
(2) Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
His contract for such work shall be void and of no effect and collection therefor
shall not be made until such bond shall have been furnished. The city engineer
shall be the inspector and arbiter to determine whether this section is complied
with. (1985 Code, § 21-20)
16-122. Washing vehicles, etc. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person
to discharge into any street, gutter or alley within the city, any water used by
such person on the premises owned or occupied by him, in the washing of
vehicles or for any other purpose or to discharge into such streets, gutters or
alleys any refuse caused by the use of water on such premises.
16-9
(2) This section shall not apply to the natural drainage of rain or
melted snow from the premises of any owner or occupant. (1985 Code, § 21-21)
16-123. Catch basins--when required. Any person using water on the
premises owned or occupied by him, in such a manner and in such quantities as
to cause water or refuse to flow or be discharged into the streets, gutters or
alleys of the city, in the absence of appliances to prevent such discharge of water
or refuse, is required to connect with the sanitary or storm sewer of the city in
such manner that all such water shall flow into such sewer and not into the
street, gutters or alleys of the city and to construct a catch basin upon his
premises in such a manner and to maintain such catch basin in such manner
that mud, debris and refuse caused from the use of such water will not enter
into such sewer line. (1985 Code, § 21-22)
16-124. Catch basins--specifications generally. All catch basins
required by § 16-123 shall be installed or constructed in a manner approved by
the city engineer, and all sewer taps made under the requirements of this code
shall be made in a manner approved by the city engineer. (1985 Code, § 21-23)
16-10
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, SIDEWALKS, ETC.
SECTION
16-201. Sidewalk specifications.
16-202. When owner to construct or repair sidewalk.
16-203. Notice to owner to construct or repair.
16-204. Compliance with notice; work done by city.
16-205. Curbing alterations, etc.
16-201. Sidewalk specifications. The specifications for the
construction, repair or replacement of sidewalks and curbs shall be prepared by
the city engineer and all work shall be performed pursuant to such
specifications, copies of which shall be on file in the city engineer’s office. (1985
Code, § 21-40)
16-202. When owner to construct or repair sidewalk. For the
purpose of securing good and substantial sidewalks in the city and securing
uniformity in the construction thereof, the board of commissioners, whenever
deemed necessary by it, for the public welfare, may require the owner of any lot,
or part of lot, in the city, fronting upon any public street, to construct and keep
in repair a good and substantial sidewalk or foot pavement, along the whole
street frontage of his lot, and of width and material prescribed by the board.
(1985 Code, § 21-41)
16-203. Notice to owner to construct or repair. When so instructed
by resolution by the board of commissioners, the recorder shall give the owner
of a lot written notice stating the action of the board, and especially setting forth
the work to be done pursuant to § 16-202 and the length of time within which
same must be done; provided, that the time fixed shall not be less than twenty
(20) days. (1985 Code, § 21-42)
16-204. Compliance with notice; work done by city. If the owner
of any lot shall refuse to build or repair foot pavements within the time required
by a notice so to do, and agreeably thereto, the board of commissioners, through
any officer or agent it may designate, may contract for the construction or repair
of same and shall pay the cost thereof out of the street fund, and the amounts
so paid shall be a lien upon such lots or property and may be enforced by
attachments at law or in equity; or the amount may be recovered against the
owner by suit before any court of competent jurisdiction. The city attorney is
authorized to proceed to enforce the lien declared and fixed by the charter and
this chapter. (1985 Code, § 21-43)
16-11
16-205. Curbing alterations, etc. No curbing along the streets and
alleys of the city shall be changed, altered or cut except under the supervision
and direction of the city engineer or some competent person appointed by him.
(1985 Code, § 21-44)
16-12
CHAPTER 3
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION
16-301. Policy.
16-302. Definitions.
16-303. Prohibited locations.
16-304. Placement.
16-305. Width of approach.
16-306. Construction details.
16-307. Permit--required.
16-308. Permit--application.
16-309. Permit--prerequisites to issuance.
16-310. Permit--issuance; fees.
16-311. Permit--no existing public sidewalks.
16-301. Policy. While acknowledging that it is every property owner’s
legal right to have access, it is also the city’s responsibility to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the traveling public. To this end, and because of
proliferation of curb cuts causes increased traffic hazards, it is the policy of the
city to limit the number and placement of curb cuts only to those necessary to
meet minimum legal obligations. The city engineer shall enforce this policy
when reviewing and permitting driveway entrances. The “Guidelines for Urban
Major Street Design, Recommended Practices,” written by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Technical Committee 5-5, shall be used as the
minimum standard. In cases where these guidelines differ from the adopted
standards shown below, the adopted standards shall apply. (1985 Code, § 21-61)
16-302. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
(1) “Curb return.” The curve portion of a street curb or alley curb at
the street or alley intersections.
(2) “Driveway.” An area on private property where automobiles and
other vehicles are operated or allowed to stand.
(3) “Driveway approach.” Any area, construction or facility between
the roadway of public street and private property intended to provide access for
vehicles from the roadway of a public street to something definite on private
property such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least seven (7) feet
wide intended and used for an entrance or exit of vehicles.
(4) “End slopes.” Those portions of a driveway approach which provide
a transition from normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the
approach, by means of sloping surface. (1985 Code, § 21-62)
16-13
16-303. Prohibited locations. (1) No driveway approach shall be
permitted to encompass any city or other public facilities. Under the permit
provided for in § 16-307, the applicant may be authorized to relocate any such
utility upon application to the subject utility provider and upon making suitable
arrangements for financial reimbursements to such provider.
(2) No residential driveway approach including end slopes shall be
permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the edge of a cross street or within five
(5) feet of the curb return, whichever is greater. No commercial driveway
approach including its end slopes and curb return shall be permitted within
seventy-five (75) feet of the edge of a cross street or within ten (10) feet of the
curb return, whichever is greater. See Figure 1.
(3) No driveway or series of driveway approaches serving other than
residential property shall be permitted to be constructed in such a way that the
exit from such property would be accomplished by backing vehicles into a street
right-of-way or roadway. (1985 Code, § 21-63)
16-304. Placement. (1) Not more than one (1) driveway approach shall
be permitted per lot when the lot is one hundred (100) feet or less in width
fronting on any street. Additional driveway approaches for lots fronting more
than one hundred (100) feet on a street shall be at the professional discretion of
the city engineer. The city engineer shall use as the basis for judgment such
factors as street design and capacity, traffic counts, surrounding land use, and
other established engineering guidelines.
(2) Driveways shall not be permitted at locations hidden from the user
of the public street, as where sight distance problems exist.
(3) Horizontal approach angles between the centerline of the driveway
and the centerline of the public street shall be a minimum of seventy (70)
degrees. (1985 Code, § 21-64)
16-305. Width of approach. The width of a driveway approach shall
not exceed the following dimensions measured at curbing from top of end slopes:
(1) The maximum width for residential driveways shall be fifteen (15)
feet for single driveways and twenty-four (24) feet for double driveways.
(2) The maximum width for commercial driveways shall be forty (40)
feet, not including turning radii. See Figure 2. (1985 Code, § 21-65)
16-306. Construction details. (1) All driveway approaches between
the curbline and the property line shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete proportioned to the satisfaction of the city engineer, except as provided
in § 16-311, or if permitted by the city engineer, asphalt concrete may be used
between the back of the curbline and the street side of the sidewalk line. The
concrete of the driveway approach, including the sidewalk section, shall be at
least six (6) inches thick for residential approaches and at least eight (8) inches
thick for commercial approaches.
16-14
(2) The sidewalk section of the driveway approach shall be finished
and scored as specified by the city engineer for typical sidewalk construction.
Apron and end slope areas of the driveway approach shall be finished, after
troweling smooth and scoring, with a fiber pushbroom drawn over the surface
parallel to the curbline.
(3) Driveways with a grade of four (4) per cent or greater shall conform
to Figure 8, as shown in Article IV, Standards of Design for Streets and
Drainage. (1985 Code, § 21-66)
16-307. Permit--required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct or maintain a driveway approach in the city without first obtaining a
permit. (1985 Code, § 21-76)
16-308. Permit--application. Any person desiring to obtain a permit
for driveway approaches shall file an application with the city engineer. This
application shall be in writing upon forms provided by the city and shall contain
information showing the type of construction, the length of the driveway, the
exact location of the driveway and any other information which may be required
by the city engineer. (1985 Code, § 21-77)
16-309. Permit--prerequisites to issuance. The owner and contractor
shall protect the public from injury or damage during the construction of
driveway approaches and it is stipulated, as an essential condition of the
issuance of a permit, that the city shall not be liable for damage which may arise
from the prosecution of such work. (1985 Code, § 21-78)
16-310. Permit--issuance; fees. Upon approval of such improvements,
covered by this chapter, by the city engineer the applicant shall pay five dollars
($5.00) per fifteen (15) feet of driveway approach width or fraction thereof for
the permit. (1985 Code, § 21-79)
16-311. Permit--no existing public sidewalks. Where standard curb
and gutter have been installed but concrete sidewalks have not been installed,
the permit may authorize the applicant to construct the driveway approach from
the curbline to the applicant’s premises of the same materials as those used for
paving the applicant’s premises, or of any other material satisfactory to the city
engineer. Such driveway approach shall be constructed to the established grade
and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. The permit
shall provide and the applicant shall agree that if and when thereafter concrete
sidewalks are constructed the applicant or his successor shall install concrete
driveway approaches as specified in § 16-304. (1985 Code, § 21-80)
16-15
CHAPTER 4
RAILROADS
SECTION
16-401. Speed limit.
16-402. Obstructing crossing.
16-403. Crossing at street intersection; specifications.
16-404. Service of process, etc., upon railroads, etc.
16-405. Trespassing.
16-406. Soliciting patronage, etc., at depots, etc.
16-407. Maintenance or order, etc., at depots.
16-408. Children loitering about depots, etc.
16-401. Speed limit. It shall be unlawful for any railway company or
its employees to operate or cause to be operated, within the corporate limits of
the city, any train of cars, locomotive, handcar or rolling stock of any kind at a
greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles per hour. (1985 Code, § 18-1)
16-402. Obstructing crossing. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit any locomotive engine, car or train of cars to stand upon any
street crossing within the city for a longer time than four (4) minutes at one (1)
time, which crossing shall not again be obstructed until all travelers awaiting
upon the highway over such crossing shall have passed. (1985 Code, § 18-2)
16-403. Crossing at street intersection; specifications. It shall be
the duty of each railroad entering the city to provide good and substantial
crossings at every street intersection, all to be done in a manner satisfactory to
the city engineer. (1985 Code, § 18-3)
16-404. Service of process, etc., upon railroads, etc. When any
railroad or other corporation is charged with a violation of this code or other
ordinance of the city, the warrant or process shall be served upon the highest
agent of such company to be found in the city, and such service shall be deemed
sufficient notice to such company or corporation. (1985 Code, § 18-4)
16-405. Trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
railroad employee or passenger, to get upon any engine, car or train of cars
attached to an engine, or to stand upon the steps or platform of any passenger
car, or to ride or to attempt to ride upon an engine from one (1) point to another.
(1985 Code, § 18-5)
16-406. Soliciting patronage, etc., at depots, etc. It shall be
unlawful for any person at any depot or regular stopping place of trains to call
16-16
out or to solicit patronage, in a noisy or boisterous manner, for any hotel,
restaurant, boardinghouse, taxicab, bus or transfer wagon, or for the care and
delivery of baggage or other thing, or for any such person soliciting such
patronage to go upon any railroad platform or within fifty (50) feet of any
railroad train, while same is standing at its usual stopping place; nor shall such
person crowd the ticket or other offices of any railroad or other company or
corporation, engaged in the carrying of passengers or freight, so as to annoy,
inconvenience or otherwise interfere with the traveling public, or the business
of such railroad, company or corporation. (1985 Code, § 18-6)
16-407. Maintenance of order, etc., at depots. On arrival and
departure of the railroad trains at the depots within the city, it shall be the duty
of some member of the police force to be present and preserve order and keep
doorways and passageways in and above the depot cleared of all persons not on
business, or not properly there; and any person refusing to obey such officer may
be by him arrested and brought before the city judge. (1985 Code, § 18-7)
16-408. Children loitering about depots, etc. It shall be unlawful for
the parents or guardians of children or wards under fourteen (14) years of age
to permit such children or wards to loiter around, in or about any railroad depot,
track or similar place within the city, without a guardian or protector. It shall
be the duty of all police officers of the city to take immediate charge of such
children or wards and return them to their homes, and promptly arrest the
parents or guardian of such children, and bring them before the city judge.
(1985 Code, § 18-8)
17-1
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. CONTAINERS.
3. RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.
4. NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.
5. AUTOMATED COLLECTION PROGRAM.
6. SANITARY REFUSE DISPOSAL SITES.
7. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES.
8. LITTER/NUISANCES/OVERGROWN YARDS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
17-101. Definitions.
17-102. Purpose.
17-103. Rules and regulations.
17-104. Business of landscaping, plant trimmings, etc.
17-105. Carrying material; trucking foreign material.
17-106. Decaying vegetables or fruits in railroad cars, etc.
17-107. Burning refuse on streets, etc.
17-108. Throwing refuse in vacant lots, etc.
17-109. Service fees.
17-110. Exclusive collection.
17-111. Unauthorized removal of material from garbage collection and recycling
containers.
17-101. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given in
this section:
(1) "Aircraft." Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter than air dirigibles and balloons.
(2) "Ashes." All residue resulting from the combustion of coal, coke,
wood or any other material or substances in domestic, industrial or commercial
stoves, furnaces or boilers.
(3) "Authorized residential containers." (a) For manual waste
collection only - galvanized metal or plastic containers of substantial
construction with a tight, rodent proof lid having a capacity of not less
17-2
than ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty (30) gallons and weighing no
more than fifty (50) pounds when full.
(b) For automated waste collection only - 65 or 95 gallon
universal rollout carts as provided or sold by the City of Johnson City.
(4) "Building material." Any material such as lumber, brick, block,
carpet, stone, plaster, concrete, asphalt, roofing shingles, gutters, flooring,
carpeting or other substances accumulated as the result of repairs or additions
to existing buildings or structures, or as the result of construction of new
buildings or structures.
(5) "Bulk container." A front-end loading, enclosed, metal,
dumpster-type containers having a capacity of not less than four (4) cubic yards
nor greater than eight (8) cubic yards. Such containers shall have the capacity,
size and be the type as specifically authorized and approved by the director of
the department of public works.
(6) "Cuttings." All tree limbs, trimmings, shrubbery, etc.
(7) "Establishment." An establishment shall include all structures,
businesses, and/or units located on one common ground. The director of the
department of public works shall determine the appropriateness of such
definition on a case-by-case basis. The owner of the common ground shall
maintain final responsibility for all fees, etc., for collection services provided
under this chapter.
(8) "Garbage." Putrescible animal and vegetable waste, liquid or other
waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and all cans, bottles or other containers originally used for
foodstuffs.
(9) "Garden refuse." All accumulations of plants, stems, roots,
vegetables and fruits remaining after harvest.
(10) "Hazardous refuse." Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance
or article, which may constitute a hazard to health or may cause damage to
property by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, unstable,
irritating, radioactive or otherwise harmful.
(11) "Industrial waste." All wastes peculiar to industrial,
manufacturing or processing plants.
(12) "Landscape debris." Any material such as dirt, soil, rock, mulch,
timbers, cross ties, concrete blocks, pavers or other substances accumulated as
a result of landscaping activity.
(13) "Litter." All garbage, refuse and trash and all other waste material
which, if thrown, deposited or left unattended as prohibited in this chapter,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
(14) "Newspaper." Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service,
in accordance with federal statute or regulations, any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and any
17-3
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than (4) issues
per year and sold to the public.
(15) "Nonresidential establishment." Any establishment except those
defined under "residential establishment." Nonresidential establishments shall
be divided into the following categories:
(a) Commercial. Restaurants, motels, hotels, private
cemeteries, retail and wholesale business establishments and offices
where a product is not manufactured;
(b) Educational facilities. All public schools and universities;
(c) Fraternal, social and professional clubs and organizations.
Lodges, social clubs, labor unions, etc;
(d) Governmental. Local, state and federal governmental
agencies;
(e) Industrial. All manufacturing and fabricating businesses;
(f) Multiple-family structures. Any apartment complex with
four (4) or more units or any type of condominium under the Horizontal
Property Act; any mobile home park with four (4) or more units and
public housing;
(g) Private educational facilities. All nonpublic schools, colleges
and universities;
(h) Professional. All hospitals, doctors’ offices, animal hospitals,
clinics, etc; and
(i) Religious. All churches, synagogues and church-operated or
affiliated agencies.
(16) "Park." A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any
other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
(17) "Private premises." Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building
or other structure.
(18) "Producer." Either the person responsible for the ashes, garbage,
refuse, trash, industrial waste and any other waste material or the occupant of
the place or building in which such is produced or in which the person
responsible for such has a place of business or residence.
(19) "Public place." Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
(20) "Refuse." All perishable and nonperishable solid wastes (except
body wastes) including garbage, trash, industrial waste, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals and abandoned automobiles.
17-4
(21) "Residential establishments." Single or multiple-family dwelling
units up to and including apartment complexes, condominiums or trailer parks
of three (3) or less units.
(22) "Sanitary refuse disposal site." Any site wherein solid waste is
properly disposed of, including but not limited to landfills, public incinerator
plants, publicly operated convenience centers, publicly operated transfer station
sites, publicly operated recycling centers, and brush burner sites operated by the
city.
(23) "Trash." Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, boxes, cloth, wrappings,
crates, grass clippings, cuttings, leaves, glass and similar material. It shall not
include bulky refuse, meaning stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing
machines, furniture, automotive parts, tires, bedding, furnaces or similar bulky
material weighing more than fifty (50) pounds and/or having a volume greater
than thirty (30) gallons. Trash shall be divided into three (3) categories:
(a) Business trash. Any waste accumulations of dust, paper,
cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations other than garbage,
household trash or industrial waste which are usually attendant to the
operation of stores, offices and similar businesses;
(b) Household trash. Waste accumulations of paper, sweepings,
dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage
which is usually attendant to housekeeping; and
(c) Yard trash. Cuttings, leaves, grass clippings, etc., resulting
from normal maintenance and care of landscaped, manicured grounds
and lawns, but does not include cuttings and leaves from that portion of
grounds that have been left in its natural state without annual
maintenance.
(24) "Vacant property." All parcels of land without any permanent
dwelling or business structure or any parcels of land with a dwelling or business
structure or any parcels of land with a dwelling or business structure that have
remained vacant for a period of six (6) months without routine maintenance to
that yard and grounds. This shall also include portions of grounds and/or yards
left in their natural state. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-102. Purpose. This chapter is determined and declared to be a
sanitary measure for the protection and promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of Johnson City. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-103. Rules and regulations. The director of the department of
public works may make necessary or desirable rules and regulations that are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter in order to aid in its
administration and in order to insure compliance and enforcement. (Ord.
#3985-03, March 2004)
17-5
17-104. Business of landscaping, plant or trimmings, etc. No
person shall perform any service for economic gain wherein trees or shrubbery
are cut, trimmed, removed or altered and wherein an accumulation of brush,
wood, vines, debris or other refuse attendant to landscaping is the result of such
work or service without holding a valid license to do business in the city and
without being equipped with a truck or other vehicle capable of removing said
brush, wood, vines, debris or other refuse and said refuse shall be so removed
by the person causing or creating its accumulation. (Ord. #3985-03, March
2004)
17-105. Carrying material; trucking foreign material. The owner,
lessee or operator of every vehicle engaged in hauling any sand, gravel, dirt,
stone, rock, brick, coal, limestone, limestone dust, asphalt, garbage, trash, or
any material which, as a result of such a vehicle movement, may be likely to
blow, fall or be scattered on or along city streets and alleys shall maintain such
a vehicle in a secure condition and shall direct and supervise the loading of said
vehicle in such a manner as to prevent any portion of such materials, products
or substances from falling, blowing or being scattered on city streets or alleys.
Nor shall garbage or other materials offensive to the sight or smell be removed
or carried on or along the streets and alleys of the city except in trucks having
watertight beds or boxes with proper cover. All vehicles transporting solid
waste or other aforementioned material in public places shall be covered or
tarped during transportation, and shall be secured to prevent such materials,
products, or substances from blowing, falling, or scattering on city streets or
other public places. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within
the city, the wheels and tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley
or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, "litter" or foreign matter of
any kind. In addition to such other penalties as may be prescribed elsewhere
herein, any person violating this section shall be liable for the cost of such cleanup
measures as the director of the department of public works may deem
reasonably necessary, which measures said director shall cause to be performed
and shall bill to the aforesaid violator at a rate to be determined by the Board
of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-106. Decaying vegetables or fruits in railroad cars, etc. It shall
be unlawful for any person having possession and control of any decaying or
damaged vegetables or fruits to permit the same to remain in any railroad car
or elsewhere within the city for twelve (12) hours after such fruit and vegetables
shall be found to be in a decaying or damaged condition. If any such vegetables
or fruits are not removed immediately upon notice to a dumping area previously
designated as such by the director of the public works, the chief of police shall
have the same removed at the cost of the person having possession of the same,
and shall bill said person for that service at a rate to be determined by the board
of commissioners. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-6
17-107. Burning refuse on street, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
persons to burn, or cause to be burned, rubbish on any street, alley or highway.
(Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-108. Throwing refuse in vacant lots, etc. It shall be unlawful for
any person to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any refuse
or waste material in or upon lots or in any yards, or on or upon any street, alley
or other public place in the city. Such material may be thrown or placed upon
lots, streets and alleys only under a permit issued by the city. (Ord. #3985-03,
March 2004)
17-109. Service fees. The board of commissioners shall from time to
time establish by resolution all garbage, trash, service and landfill fees and any
permit fees applicable to any activity under the provisions of this chapter of the
code. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-110. Exclusive collection. It is hereby declared to be the exclusive
right of the City of Johnson City to engage in the collection, removing, and
disposal of refuse within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for
any person other than the city or its authorized contractor to engage in the
business of collecting, removing, and disposing of refuse in the city, except those
private collectors specifically authorized by the city. The city shall establish
rules and regulations to be adopted by the board of commissioners to govern the
activities of such private collectors. This does not prohibit establishments from
collecting and hauling their own refuse so long as such refuse is stored, collected
and hauled as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-111. Unauthorized removal of material from garbage
collection and recycling containers. (1) Any and all garbage, trash, refuse
or other material, of whatever nature, placed in containers utilized by the city
for the purpose of collecting garbage, trash, or refuse for the purpose of disposal
or recycling shall be deemed to be abandoned property, and its removal from any
of said containers by any person not authorized to carry out such removal by the
city manager is hereby prohibited.
(2) Any person except the lawful owner of such material who removes
such material from any of the aforesaid containers without authorization of the
city manager shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-7
CHAPTER 2
CONTAINERS
SECTION
17-201. Required; premises kept clean.
17-202. Unsatisfactory containers.
17-203. Proximity of other personal effects.
17-204. Residential containers; storage.
17-205. Nonresidential containers; storage.
17-201. Required; premises kept clean. (1) All persons within the
city are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free
from the accumulation of refuse, except when stored as provided in this chapter.
(2) It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control
of any premises of a residential establishment and the keeper of or owner of any
nonresidential establishment, where garbage or trash is created or accumulated,
to keep or cause to be kept at all times containers, specified herein, for the
deposit of garbage and trash generated on the premises. (Ord. #3985-03, March
2004)
17-202. Unsatisfactory containers. Containers used for the deposit
of garbage, business trash and/or household trash shall be in such good
condition that collection thereof shall not injure the person collecting the
contents nor be unsuitable for the healthful and sanitary storage of refuse
substances. The city is hereby authorized to confiscate or to remove
unsatisfactory containers as determined by the director of public works from the
premises of residential or nonresidential establishments that do not comply with
the requirements of this article; provided, however, that the owners, or their
agents or lessees, of such containers shall be duly notified of such impending
action by five (5) days' notice in writing delivered to the premises on which the
unsatisfactory container is located or affixed to such container deemed to be
unsatisfactory. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-203. Proximity of other personal effects. Garbage and trash shall
not be stored in close proximity to other personal effects, which are not desired
to be collected, but shall be reasonably separated in order that the collector can
clearly distinguish between what is to be collected and what is not to be
collected. Personal effects stored or placed within three (3) feet of a container
or pile of trash shall be prima facie presumed to be garbage or trash. (Ord.
#3985-03, March 2004)
17-204. Residential containers; storage. Lids or covers of authorized
residential containers shall be kept tightly closed and watertight at all times
17-8
other than when refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. Refuse
may be stored for collection in the following manner:
(1) Ashes, garbage and household trash shall be stored in authorized
residential containers. Furniture, appliances, and yard trash may also be
separated from garbage and stored as trash.
(2) Small items of trash including household trash and grass clippings,
small amounts of leaves and vines may be stored in heavy duty plastic bags,
with no container exceeding fifty (50) pounds in weight when full.
(3) Leaves may be raked into piles and windrows at the curbside for
collection, beginning in the fall, on a specific date established by the director of
the department of public works and beginning again for a two week period in
the spring, or as deemed appropriate by the city public works director. Prior to
and after these dates, leaves shall be stored in the appropriate authorized
residential container.
(4) Cuttings or brush, limbs and shrubbery shall be stored in neat
piles. Each tree and shrubbery branch and limb shall be cut in lengths of not
more than ten (10) feet and stumps, branches and limbs shall weigh no more
than one hundred (100) pounds each.
(5) Items of trash too large to place in a container, with the exception
of furniture and appliances shall be the responsibility of the producer and/or
property owner to properly dispose.
(6) Appliances and certain other household items such as stoves,
refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, bedding and air
conditioners, having a weight greater than fifty (50) pounds and/or a volume
greater than thirty (30) gallons, shall be stored in a safe and secure place, and
the domestic producer shall call the department of public works to notify them
that the above items are ready for pickup. Collection of these items will be from
curbside only. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-205. Nonresidential containers; storage. Refuse produced by
keepers and/or owners of nonresidential establishments shall be stored for
collection in the following manner:
(1) A bulk container, as defined in § 17-101 shall be required for all
nonresidential establishments producing garbage and/or trash. Such containers
shall have the capacity sizes and be the type as specifically authorized and
approved by the director of the department of public works. A need for more
than the aforementioned number of eight (8) authorized residential containers
may require at the discretion of the public works director that establishment to
acquire an acceptable bulk container.
(2) The director of the department of public works may exempt
nonresidential establishments from the use of bulk containers if the volume of
garbage and trash does not justify such use and/or if no suitable site for a bulk
container can be found. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-9
CHAPTER 3
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION
SECTION
17-301. Collection; frequency, placement, etc. - garbage.
17-302. Same - trash.
17-301. Collection; frequency, placement, etc.--garbage. (1) Ashes,
garbage, household trash, and containerized "yard trash" shall be collected from
each residential establishment at least once a week by the city. In the event of
severe winter weather or other unforeseen disaster, collection may be suspended
until the following week. The director of the department of public works shall
prepare schedules for regular collection of refuse.
(2) Residential collection shall be made from curbside and approved
city alleys at the exact location as determined by the director of public works.
Where there is no approved alley or curbside, containers shall be located as
indicated by the director of the department of public works. Alley collection
service may be denied to residential establishments by the director of the
department of public works, if such alley is not easily accessible to the city
garage truck.
(3) If two (2) or more residential establishments are located on a
private road and not within a reasonable distance of a public street or alley, as
determined by the director of the department of public works, collection of refuse
stored in authorized residential containers may be made along the private road
only if the owners(s) provides written approval for city collection trucks to travel
on the private road. The city shall not be liable for any damages done to the
private road as a result of normal use for ingress and egress. If approval is not
granted by all owners along private drive, said owners must place containers
along a public street at a location determined by the director of public works.
(4) Domestic producers of ashes, garbage and household trash shall
provide sufficient container space to hold one (1) week's accumulation of refuse
not to exceed eight (8)-30 gallon authorized residential containers, or three
(3)-95 gallon residential containers.
(5) Residential and recycling containers shall be placed at the
appropriate location as described in subsection (2) above no later than 6:00 a.m.
on the day of collection and removed from curbside on the same day, after
collection has occurred.
(6) The director of public works shall determine the method of solid
waste collection for residential establishments. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-302. Same - trash. (1) Trash shall be collected from each residential
establishment not more than once a week by the city and on a schedule
developed by the director of the department of public works.
17-10
(2) Trash collection shall be made from curbside only. Where there is
no curb, containers and/or refuse shall be located as indicated by the director of
the department of public works.
(3) Leaves raked into piles and windrows for collection during the leaf
season, as defined in § 17-204, shall be collected at curbside only. The placing
of leaves in public streets gutters or over storm drains is prohibited. Collection
of leaves, during the leaf season, shall be provided to each residential
establishment at least once per month and more frequently, if possible. The
director of the department of public works shall prepare schedules for leaf
collection and shall notify domestic producers of such schedules.
(4) Certain household items and appliances such as stoves,
refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, dryers, furniture, mattresses,
bedsprings and air conditioners shall be collected by the city on an "on call"
basis as follows:
(a) The producer shall call the department of public works and
shall request that such items be picked up prior to placing those items at
curbside or any other location as directed by the director of the
department of public works.
(b) A fee established by the board of commissioners may be
charged for this service.
(5) Trash or any other refuse not stored and placed as provided in
chapters 3 and4 shall be removed from the premises by the producer or at his
expense. The following items of refuse shall also be removed by the owner
and/or producer or at his expense:
(a) Building material as defined in chapter 1, whether
generated by a contractor or the owner or any other person;
(b) Garden refuse and landscape debris not placed in an
authorized container as defined in chapter 1;
(c) Any refuse not resulting from the normal and routine
maintenance of yard, grounds and residences, such as refuse removed
from property after the owner was ordered to remove such refuse by the
health inspector and any other authorized city officials;
(d) Automobile, truck, tractor and other vehicle tires and any
other motor vehicle parts shall be disposed of by the owner or producer;
(e) Any trash pushed or pulled into piles by mechanical means
shall be disposed of by the owner or producer;
(f) Any trash resulting from work performed by contractors or
any other person for economic gain, whether such gain is in the form of
cash or barter, shall be removed by the owner, occupant or producer
except normal and routine yard trash generated by "yardworkers" shall
be collected by in accordance with chapters 3 and 4. "Yardworkers" as
used herein shall mean persons hired by citizens to perform routine lawn
maintenance on a repetitive basis and does not include full-time
employees or persons hired to do one-time tasks;
17-11
(g) Any other trash or refuse except certain household items and
appliances defined in subsection (4) of this section, weighing in excess of
fifty (50) pounds or having a volume of more than thirty (30) gallons shall
be removed by the producer.
(6) The accumulation of not more than one (1) trailer load of cuttings
nor one (1) truck load of yard trash shall be removed from any residential
establishment by the city per scheduled pickup unless it is determined by the
director of the department of public works to be in the best interest of the city
for health, safety and welfare reasons to remove the entire accumulation.
(7) Refuse collection from vacant property located in residential areas
will be limited to debris resulting from cleaning such property. "Cleaning" is
defined as the removal of brush, leaves, litter and other refuse already lying on
the ground. It also includes grass cuttings and small volumes of vines
appropriately cut and stacked. Refuse resulting from the clearing of vacant
property shall be removed by the owner or at their expense. "Clearing" is
defined as the cutting or pruning of trees, grubbing, clearing of fence rows,
demolition of structures, or grading and excavation of the property. (Ord.
#3985-03, March 2004)
17-12
CHAPTER 4
NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTION
SECTION
17-401. Garbage and trash collection; frequency, placement, etc.
17-402. Industrial waste.
17-403. Cardboard boxes, cartons.
17-404. Hazardous refuse.
17-401. Garbage and trash collection; frequency, placement, etc.
(1) Collection of refuse for nonresidential establishments shall be
limited to garbage, household trash and business trash stored in authorized
containers. Bulky items of trash, furniture, appliances, office machines,
cuttings, and yard trash that cannot be placed in authorized containers will not
be collected by the city and shall be removed by the owner or producer.
(2) Tenants, lessees, occupants or owners of nonresidential
establishments shall provide a safe and convenient entrance to and through the
premises for the purpose of collection refuse. The city shall not be liable for
damage done to driveways, parking lots, utility wires and connections, or other
properties, resulting from normal use for ingress and egress to collect refuse,
unless caused by negligence on the part of the city or its employees.
(3) The director of public works shall determine the method of solid
waste collection for each nonresidential establishment. (Ord. #3985-03, March
2004)
17-402. Industrial waste. The collection and disposal of industrial
waste shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, occupant or producer.
(Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-403. Cardboard boxes, cartons. Prior to being deposited as refuse
for collection in approved containers, all cardboard boxes, cartons and crates
shall be completely collapsed. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-404. Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any
receptacle, container or unit used for refuse collection by the city. The collection
and disposal of such refuse shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee,
occupant or producer. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-13
CHAPTER 5
AUTOMATED COLLECTION PROGRAM
SECTION
17-501. Providing of rollout refuse cart.
17-502. Location of rollout refuse cart.
17-503. Contents of rollout refuse cart.
17-504. Replacement carts.
17-501. Providing of rollout refuse cart. (1) Prior to June 30, 2004
one rollout refuse cart will be provided by the City of Johnson City at no cost to
the following establishments:
(a) Single family residence
(b) Each unit of any multi-family structure using cans as of
July 1, 2001
(c) Non-residential establishments using cans as of July 1, 2001
(one additional container may be provided at no cost if multiple
containers were used prior to July 1, 2001)
(2) Multi-family and commercial establishments wishing to use roll-out
carts after July 1, 2001 will be provided carts by the City of Johnson City only
if required not to use a bulk container as specified in § 17-204.
(3) Additional carts may be purchased for a one-time fee as established
by resolution of the board of commissioners.
(4) After June 30, 2004, the board of commissioners may establish by
resolution an initial set-up fee for all new customers or non-residential
customers eligible to switch services. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-502. Location of rollout refuse cart. (1) The director of public
works will designate the exact location of each cart to be collected. Carts must
be located no greater than 3 ft. from edge of pavement or gutter unless specified
otherwise by the director of public works.
(2) Carts must be 3 ft. from stationary objects such as mailboxes and
utility poles. Carts shall not be located under any overhead obstacles, such as
utility lines and canopies.
(3) Containers not placed in a manner as directed by the director of
public works, such as the direction of container opening, location, etc. shall not
be collected. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-503. Contents of rollout refuse cart. (1) Cart must not contain hot
ashes, liquids, paints, tires, red bags, animal carcass or parts, household
hazardous waste or automobile parts.
(2) All animal waste must be double bagged prior to placing it in the
cart.
(3) Total weight of cart and contents shall not exceed 250 pounds.
17-14
(4) Lid of cart must be in fully closed position to ensure collection.
(Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
15-404. Collection of rollout refuse cart. (1) Only those carts
provided and sold by the City of Johnson City will be collected by the City of
Johnson City.
(2) Any waste placed outside the cart, with the exception of furniture
and appliances, will not be collected by the City of Johnson City.
(3) Carts that cannot be collected on regular collection day due to:
(a) Not being out at times of collection;
(b) Improper location;
(c) Not facing street properly;
(d) Overloaded;
(e) Unacceptable contents;
(f) Contents lodged or frozen in cart; or
(g) As otherwise determined by the director of public works to
be in violation of the health, safety and welfare of the community or its
employees,
will not be collected until the following collection week. It is the producer's
responsibility to remove and dispose of any additional accumulation of waste in
an approved manner. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
15-405. Replacement carts. (1) Carts that are assigned to individual
establishments remain the property of the City of Johnson City. Carts removed
from such establishments will be considered stolen and appropriately processed
through applicable courts of law.
(2) Any cart that is lost, stole or damaged by the user shall be replaced
by that user at their cost.
Replacement of containers due to normal wear and tear shall be replaced
by the user at a cost as determined from time to time by resolution of the board
of commissioners. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-15
CHAPTER 6
SANITARY REFUSE DISPOSAL SITES
SECTION
17-601. Designation.
17-602. City use.
17-603. Days and hours of operation.
17-604. Material disposal control, fees, rates.
17-601. Designation. The city manager may select and designate,
subject to approval of the board of commissioners, suitable and proper sites or
locations as and for sanitary refuse disposal sites for the city. (Ord. #3985-03,
March 2004)
17-602. City use. Sanitary refuse disposal sites selected, designated and
approved under § 17-601 shall be used by such persons or other entities as is
expressly permitted by the board of commission. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-603. Days and hours of operation. Any dumping of refuse in
sanitary refuse disposal sites by individuals or private haulers shall be done at
such times as may be designated by the board of commissioners. Such dumping
shall be subject to the direction and control of, and at the specific places
designated by, the attendant in charge at such sanitary refuse disposal sites.
(Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-604. Material disposal control, fees, rates. It shall be unlawful
for any person to dispose of materials, waste materials, or refuse, not suitable
for the applicable disposal site as determined by the board of commissioners.
All federal and state rules and regulations concerning hazardous and special
waste disposal processes shall be followed. Disposal fees, rates, and credits, if
any, at the applicable disposal site(s), including transfer station sites and city
operated recycling centers, shall be established by resolution of the board of
commissioners. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-16
CHAPTER 7
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES
SECTION
17-701. Schedule of fees, rates, credits, etc., for collection and disposal.
17-702. Billing of service fee.
17-703. Failure to pay service fee.
17-704. Responsibility for service fee.
17-701. Schedule of fees, rates, credits, etc., for collection and
disposal. The board of commissioners shall establish by resolution a schedule
of fees, rates, and/or credits for the following:
(1) The collection and disposal of all solid waste generated within the
corporate limits of the City of Johnson City;
(2) The collection and disposal of all solid waste generated through any
utility district or other entity controlled by the city; and
(3) Disposal of all solid waste in any city-owned or controlled sanitary
refuse disposal site, transfer station, convenience center and/or recycling station
or center. A copy of said schedule shall be kept in the city recorder's office for
public inspection and the appropriate rates shall be conspicuously posted at all
solid waste and disposal facilities. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-702. Billing of service fee. The solid waste service fee for collection,
removal, and disposal of refuse by the city shall be included as a separate item
each month on the bills rendered by the city water and sewer system for water
service to all city water customers, except those industrial, commercial and
residential entities which utilize bulk container service may be billed separately
by the city recorder's office. Said charges shall be rendered on the first water
bill sent on and after September 1, 1991, and for each month thereafter. The
accounts shall be paid monthly at the same time water bills are paid, except that
bulk container accounts billed separately by the city recorder's office shall be
due in fifteen days. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-703. Failure to pay service fee. Water service shall be
discontinued for failure to pay any solid waste collection or disposal fee, in
accordance with the city's policy for discontinuation of water service for failure
to pay bills for the same, as said policy may from time to time be amended.
Collection service for bulk container accounts shall be discontinued for
failure to pay bills for the same, as said policy may from time to time be
amended.
When service commences or ceases, applicable fees may be prorated. If
water services shall be supplied to a location, the occupant or tenant of which
has vacated said premises, and the city is satisfied that there has been a
termination of the need for refuse collection, then the city, on application of the
17-17
owner or agent therefore, may suspend liability for such solid waste fees, and
said fees shall be reinstated with the next water bill rendered to an occupant or
tenant of the premises. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-703. Responsibility for service fee. In case of premises containing
more than one dwelling unit or place of business, and where each such unit or
place of business is billed separately for water, such solid waste fees shall be
billed to each person in possession, charge or control who is a water customer
of the City of Johnson City Water and Sewer System. In the case of premises
containing more than one dwelling unit or place of business which are served
through a single water meter, so that the occupants or tenants cannot be billed
separately, the customer responsible for the water bill shall be liable for the
solid waste service fees for the premises. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-18
CHAPTER 8
LITTER/NUISANCES/OVERGROWN PREMISES
SECTION
17-801. Nuisances--enumerated.
17-802. Public places.
17-803. Manner of placement in receptacles.
17-804. Sweeping, etc., litter into gutters, etc.
17-805. Duty to clean sidewalks.
17-806. Throwing litter from vehicles.
17-807. Parks.
17-808. Lakes and fountains.
17-809. Dropping litter, etc., from aircraft.
17-810. Occupied private property.
17-811. Reserved.
17-812. Vacant lots.
17-813. Abating nuisance.
17-801. Nuisances--enumerated. The following are hereby declared
to be public nuisances, dangerous to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the
public, and it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, erect, maintain, or allow
same upon any premises:
(1) Every pool, pond, privy, privy vault, cowpen, pigpen, stable or other
place or enclosure within the city limits which shall become filthy and offensive;
(2) Every pen or other enclosure in which swine are kept;
(3) Every house or structure of any description which has fallen into
decay or into heaps and piles;
(4) Every waste or sewer pipe from any kitchen, bathroom, house or
other premises, discharging into the street;
(5) Every lot, premises or other enclosure on which filth, garbage,
slops, manure, or other foul matter is thrown and allowed to accumulate so as
to become offensive;
(6) Any weeds of a height of more than twenty-four (24) inches above
the surface of the ground to grow and stand upon the same. Weeds includes all
rank vegetable growths which exhale unpleasant and noxious odors and/or
growths that may conceal filthy deposits, vermin, litter, used metal cans, empty
bottles, broken glass or any decaying vegetable or animal matter. (Ord.
#3985-03, March 2004)
17-802. Public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in permitted
landfills. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-19
17-803. Manner of placement in receptacles. Persons placing litter
in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord.
#3985-03, March 2004)
17-804. Sweeping, etc., litter into gutters, etc. No person shall
sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-805. Duty to clean sidewalks. Persons owning or occupying places
of business within the city as well as owners of private property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-806. Throwing litter from vehicles. No person , while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other
public place within the city, or upon private property. (Ord. #3985-03, March
2004)
17-807. Parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park
within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part
of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-808. Lakes and fountains. No person shall throw or deposit litter
into any fountain, pond, lake stream, bay or any other body of water in a park
or elsewhere in the city. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-809. Dropping litter, etc., from aircraft. No person in an aircraft
shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other
object. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-810. Occupied private property. (1) No person shall throw or
deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned
by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private
property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements, upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property.
17-20
(2) The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. This section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (Ord. #3985-03,
March 2004)
17-811. Reserved. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-812. Vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on or upon
any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such
person or not. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004)
17-813. Abating nuisance. (1) Notice to remove. When in the opinion
of the director of development services, or his or her designee, weeds, brush or
any nuisance as defined in § 17-801, is determined to be located on open or any
private property within the City of Johnson City, said director of development
services or his or her designee may notify the owner of such property to properly
abate such aforesaid nuisance located on said owner's property. Such notice
shall be by certified mail, addressed to such owner at his or her last-known
address. Such notice may also include placards posted on subject property, etc.,
and/or notice in nonlegal section of local newspaper.
(2) Non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner
or agent so notified to properly abate the aforesaid nuisance within fifteen (15)
days after receipt of written notice provided in subsection (1) above, or within
thirty (30) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned
to the city by the postal service because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
the aforesaid director of development services may pay for the abatement of
such nuisances or may order its abatement by the city.
(3) Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the
abatement of the nuisance in accordance with the foregoing subsections or paid
for its abatement, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid
by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on
the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and such charge
shall be due and payable by such owner at the time of payment of such bill.
(4) Lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner
within four (4) months after the abatement of such nuisance as provided for in
the foregoing subsections, then the director of development services or his or her
designee, shall cause to be recorded in the office of the register for the county,
a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date
that the work was done, and the location of the property on which such work
was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and
privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection,
until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected
17-21
in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to a
delinquent penalty of ten percent (10%) in the event same is not paid in full on
or before the tax bill upon which said charge appears become delinquent. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima
facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and the work
has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes
a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and the
same is due and collectable as provided by law. (Ord. #3985-03, March 2004, as
amended by Ord. #4517-13, Feb. 2014)
18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. CITY WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
3. WASTEWATER TREATMENT (SEWER) SYSTEM.
4. WATER.
5. CONNECTIONS WITH PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.
6. ADJUSTMENT TO BILLS.
7. ILLICIT DISCHARGE ORDINANCE.
8. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE.
9. STORMWATER USER FEE.
10. UTILITY DEPOSIT POLICY.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
18-101. Definitions.
18-102. Sewage disposal--generally.
18-103. Sewage disposal--duty of owner.
18-104. Sewage disposal--duty of occupant.
18-105. Toilets.
18-106. Inspections; correction of deficiencies.
18-107. Carnivals, circuses, etc.
18-101. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter:
(1) "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
1Charter references
City bonds: art XV.
Collection of special assessments by chancery proceedings: § 56.
Collection of special assessments: § 65.
Departments: art XVIII.
Public utilities: § 7.12, et seq.
Sanitation charged against abutting property: § 7.18.
Sewers: § 7.19, et seq.
State law references
Revenue bonds: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-34-101, et seq.
Sewers and waterworks: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 7, ch. 35.
18-2
laboratory procedures, five (5) days; twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in
terms of concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
(2) "Human excreta" shall mean the bowel and kidney discharges of
human beings.
(3) "Suspended solids" shall mean the total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids,
and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
(4) "Wastewater" shall mean the liquid and water-carried industrial
or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities,
and institutions, together with such ground, surface or storm water as may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the publicly owned treatment works. (1985 Code, § 19-1)
18-102. Sewage disposal--generally. (1) Every residence, building or
place where human beings reside, assemble or are employed, within the police
jurisdiction of the city, shall have a sanitary method of disposal of sewage and
human excreta as required by this chapter.
(2) No sewage or human excreta shall be thrown out, deposited,
burned or otherwise disposed of except by a sanitary method of disposal as
specified in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 19-2)
18-103. Sewage disposal--duty of owner. It shall be the duty of the
owner of any property upon which facilities for sanitary human excreta disposal
are required by § 18-102 to provide such facilities. (1985 Code, § 19-3)
18-104. Sewage disposal--duty of occupant. It shall be the duty of
the occupant, tenant, lessee or other person in charge to maintain the facilities
for human excreta disposal in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and
no refuse or other material which may unduly fill up, clog or otherwise interfere
with the operation of such facilities shall be deposited therein. (1985 Code,
§ 19-4)
18-105. Toilets. On any lot or premises provided with a connection to
the sewer, no method of human excreta disposal other than flush toilets shall
be employed. (1985 Code, § 19-5)
18-106. Inspections; correction of deficiencies. (1) It shall be the
duty of the health officer to make an inspection of the methods of disposal of
sewage and human excreta. Written or verbal notification of any violation of
this chapter shall be given by the health officer to the person responsible
hereunder for the correction of the conditions, and correction shall be made
within ten (10) days after notification. If the health officer shall advise any
person that the disposal of sewage and human excreta made by such person
constitutes an immediate and serious menace to health, such person shall at
18-3
once take steps to remove the menace and failure to remove such menace
immediately shall be punishable as provided in § 1-104 of this code; but such
person shall be allowed the number of days provided in this section within which
to make permanent correction.
(2) If the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with within
ten (10) days following the date of notification of the violation, the city shall
have the right to make or have made such changes or corrections as are deemed
necessary by the health officer to meet the requirements of this chapter. The
cost of changes and corrections necessary to meet the provisions of this chapter
shall be charged as may be appropriate in each case. (1985 Code, § 19-6)
18-107. Carnivals, circuses, etc. Whenever carnivals, circuses and
other transient groups of persons come within the city, such groups shall provide
a sanitary method for disposal of sewage and human excreta. Such group shall
make all reasonable changes and corrections proposed by the health officer. The
notice required in § 18-106 shall not apply to this section. (1985 Code, § 19-7)
18-4
CHAPTER 2
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
SECTION
18-201. Operating agency.
18-202. Operating authority.
18-203. Costs of operating and maintenance.
18-204. Connection with sewer required.
18-205. Tapping fees.
18-206. Permits and inspection fees.
18-207. Use of existing systems.
18-208. Determination of costs.
18-209. Classification of users.
18-210. Computation of costs.
18-211. Frequency of analysis.
18-212. Disputed analysis; regauging and sampling of wastes.
18-213. Monthly rates.
18-214. Monthly bills.
18-215. Water and sewer bills combined.
18-216. Discontinuance of service upon failure to pay bills, etc.
18-217. Service charges.
18-218. Other charges.
18-201. Operating agency. That the operating body for the Brush
Creek, Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater System shall be the Water/Sewer
Department of the City of Johnson City. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced
by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-202. Operating authority. The Water/Sewer Department of Johnson
City shall have charge of the management, operation and maintenance of all
aspects of the Brush Creek, Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater Systems and
all wastewater properties, including all future improvements and extensions
and including all real and personal property of every nature comprising part of
or used or useful in connection with such system and including all
appurtenances, contracts, leases, franchises, and other intangibles. (Ord.
#4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-
18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-203. Costs of operating and maintenance. All costs of operation,
maintenance, administration and debt services shall be paid from the revenues
to be derived from such system. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-5
18-204. Connection with sewer required. Each owner, tenant or
occupant of any lot or parcel of land within the Brush Creek, Knob Creek and
Regional Wastewater Systems, which lot or parcel abuts upon a street or other
public way containing a sanitary sewer or is within two hundred feet (200') of
a sanitary sewer, and upon which lot or parcel a building is situated for
residential, commercial or industrial use, is hereby required to connect such
building with such sanitary sewer and to cease to use any other means for the
disposal of sewage waste or polluting matter, and all cesspools, pits and privies
on such property shall be a nuisance and shall be abated. Failure to comply with
this section shall subject such owner, tenant or occupant to a fine of not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each thirty (30) day period from written
notice of the availability of such sewer service said owner, tenant or occupant,
given by certified mail by the chief department head of the operating authority.
(Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord.
#4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-205. Tapping fees. Each person desiring to tap or connect with the
Brush Creek, Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater System of the city, shall
first obtain a permit therefore from the city and pay in cash to the city a tap or
connection fee as hereinafter provided for each tap or connection prior to the
time of the issuance of the permit in accordance with the schedule which follows
effective July 1, 2012:
TAPPING FEES
Inside
Corporate
Limits
Outside
Corporate
Limits
(1) Single Family Residence $1,550.00 $3,100.00
(2) Small Commercial Users (i.e.
service stations, office buildings,
other non-residential users, etc.) of
less than 10,000 square feet
$1,550.00 $3,100.00
(3) Car Wash $1,550.00
first bay
$900.00 each
additional bay
$3,100.00
first bay
$1,800.00
each
additional
bay
18-6
(4) Apartments, Condominiums, Multi-
Unit Family Complexes, etc., per
unit; Trailer Courts, trailer or unit
$1,550.00 for
the first unit
$900.00 for the
next (50) units
plus $550.00
for each
additional unit
$3,100.00
for the first
unit
$1,800.00
for the next
(50) units
plus
$1,100.00
for each
additional
unit
(5) Factories, Shopping Centers,
Schools, Warehouses, Parking
Garages
$1,550.00 for
the first 10,000
sq. ft. of floor
space plus
$900.00 for
each additional
10,000 sq. ft. of
floor space
$3,100.00
for the first
10,000 sq.
ft. of floor
space plus
$1,800.00
for each
additional
10,000 sq.
ft. of floor
space
(6) Motels, Hotels, Hospitals, Nursing
Homes, Dormitories
(a) Each Rental unit/room with no
in-room kitchen facilities
$1,550.00 for
first unit
$550.00 for
each additional
unit
$3,100.00
for first unit
$1,100.00
for each
additional
unit
(7) Rental Housing with private
bathroom facilities per bedroom
$1,550.00 for
first rental
space $550.00
for each
additional
rental space
$3,100.00
for first
rental space
$1,100.00
for each
additional
rental space
18-7
(8) Additional existing units on same
lot or parcel of land with existing
residence and connected to the same
sewer tap
$1,550.00 $3,100.00
(9) New residences located in areas
developed under the regulations
governing the subdivision of land of
governing the subdivision of land of
the Johnson City Regional Planning
Commission in which adequate and
proper sewer lines constructed in
conformity with applicable statutes
of the State of Tennessee and
Ordinances of the City pertaining to
sanitation have been constructed as
a part of private subdivision
development
$1,050.00 $2,100.00
(10) On-Site Residential Pumping
System
(a) Standard On-Site Residential
Pump
$3,500.00 $7,000.00
(b) Extra Volume Storage Pump $4,900.00 $9,800.00
BOONES CREEK DRAINAGE BASIN TAPPING FEES
Inside
Corporate
Limits
Outside
Corporate
Limits
(1) Single Family Residence $2,745.00 $ 5,490.00
(2) Small Commercial Users (i.e.
service stations, office buildings,
other non-residential users, etc.) of
less than 10,000 square feet
$2,745.00 $5,490.00
18-8
(3) Car Wash $2,745.00 first
bay $1,610.00
each additional
bay
$5,490.00
first bay
$3,220.00
each
additional
bay
(4) Apartments, Condominiums, Multi-
Unit Family Complexes, etc., per
unit; Trailer Courts, trailer or unit
$2,745.00 for
the first unit
$1,610.00 for
the next (50)
units plus
$850.00 for
each additional
unit
$5,490.00
for the first
unit
$3,220.00
for the next
(50) units
plus
$1,700.00
for each
additional
unit
(5) Factories, Shopping Centers,
Schools, Warehouses, Parking
Garages
$2,745.00 for
the first 10,000
sq. ft. of floor
space plus
$1,610.00 for
each additional
10,000 sq. ft. of
floor space
$5,490.00
for the first
10,000 sq.
ft. of floor
space plus
$3,220.00
for each
additional
10,000 sq.
ft. of floor
space
(6) Motels, Hotels, Hospitals, Nursing
Homes, Dormitories
(a) Each Rental unit/room with no
in-room kitchen facilities
$2,745.00 for
first unit
$1,000.00 for
each additional
unit
$5,490.00
for first unit
$2,000.00
for each
additional
unit
18-9
(7) Rental Housing with private
bathroom facilities per bathroom
$2,745.00 for
first rental
space
$1,000.00 for
each additional
rental space
$5,490.00
for first
rental space
$2,000.00
for each
additional
rental space
(8) Additional existing units on same
lot or parcel of land with existing
residence and connected to the same
sewer tap
$2,745.00 $5,490.00
(9) New residences located in areas
developed under the regulations
governing the subdivision of land of
governing the subdivision of land of
the Johnson City Regional Planning
Commission in which adequate and
proper sewer lines constructed in
conformity with applicable statutes
of the State of Tennessee and
Ordinances of the City pertaining to
sanitation have been constructed as
a part of private subdivision
development
$2,745.00 $5,490.00
(10) On-Site Residential Pumping
System
(Requires evaluation and written approval)
(a) Standard On-Site Residential
Pump
$3,920.00 $7,840.00
(b) Extra Volume Storage Pump $5,420.00 $10,840.00
Where multiple categories apply, the water/sewer department director or
designee shall calculate the appropriate tap fee and provide the calculation in
writing. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012,
and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-206. Permits and inspection fees. Any facility requiring sewer
service outside the corporate limits of the City of Johnson City shall obtain a
18-10
permit issued by the city and shall also have an inspection conducted by the city.
The permit and inspection fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for sewer
connections categorized under § 18-205 of this chapter as: (1), (2), (3), (8), and
(9). The permit and inspection fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for sewer
connections categorized under § 18-205 of this ordinance as: (4), (5), (6), (7), and
(10). The permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the
application for service is filed. Permit fees shall cover the costs of inspecting new
and/or existing plumbing within subject building establishments as well as
inspection of building sewers, property sewers, and sewer service lines and
connections to public sewers. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-207. Use of existing systems. All cesspools, privies, privy vaults and
septic tank systems in use in the Brush Creek, Knob Creek and Regional
Wastewater Systems may continue to be used, if kept in a proper and sanitary
condition, until such time as a sewer shall be constructed in a street or alley
abutting or adjacent to or within two hundred feet (200') of the property on
which the same may be located, so that such property may obtain the use of and
be connected with such sewer when the same shall be connected therewith as
provided in § 18-204. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12,
June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-208. Determination of costs. (1) There shall be and there are
hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of the Brush Creek,
Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater Systems and for the services supplied by
the wastewater system. Said charges shall be based upon the costs categories
of:
(1) Administration costs including billing and accounting costs,
(2) Operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater treatment
system.
The distribution of the total yearly costs of the operation and
maintenance costs of the wastewater system shall result in payment in
proportion to each user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the
system. As a minimum the total wastewater loading per customer (user) shall
be determined by three (3) factors as follows:
(1) Wastewater flow in gallons per day or other appropriate unit rate
of flow,
(2) Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) expressed in pounds per day
or other appropriate weight per unit for time units, and
(3) Suspended Solids (SS) expressed in pounds per day or other
appropriate weight per unit of time units.
If it is determined by the city that the discharge of other loading
parameters or wastewater substances are creating excessive operation and
18-11
maintenance costs within the wastewater system, whether collection or
treatment, then the monetary effect of such a parameter or parameters shall be
borne by the dischargers of such parameters in proportion to the amount of
discharge. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012,
and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-209. Classification of users. Users of the wastewater system shall
be classified into two (2) general classes or categories depending upon the users'
contribution of wastewater loads; each class being identified as fol lows:
Class I: Those users whose biochemical oxygen demand is two hundred
(200) milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) by weight, and whose suspended
solids discharge is two hundred (200) milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) by
weight or less.
Class II: Those users whose biochemical oxygen demand exceeds two
hundred (200) milligrams per liter concentration (200 mg/l) by weight
and/or whose suspended solids exceeds two hundred (200) milligrams per
liter concentration (200 mg/l).(Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-210. Computation of costs. (1) Operation and maintenance costs
recovery. (a) All users who fall under Class I shall pay a single unit charge
expressed as dollars per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water purchased
($/1,000 gallons) with the unit charge being determined in accordance
with the following formula:
Ci = T.S.C.
Vt
Where;
Ci = The Class I total unit cost in $/1,000 gallons.
T.S.C. = The total system yearly operation and maintenance
costs as determined by yearly budget projections.
Vt = The total volume of wastewater contribution from all
users per year as determined from projections from
one city fiscal year to the next.
(b) All users who fall within the Class II classification shall pay
the same base unit charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water
purchased as for the Class I users and in addition shall pay a surcharge
18-12
rate on the excessive amounts of biochemical oxygen demand and
suspended solids in direct proportion to the actual discharge quantities.
(c) When either or both the total suspended solids or
biochemical oxygen demand quantities discharged into the Brush Creek,
Knob Creek or Regional Wastewater Systems is in excess of those
described in § 18-208 - Class I users, thus being classified as Class II
users, the following formula shall be used to compute the appropriate
user charge if deemed necessary by the director of the department of
water and sewer services:
Cu = Vc Vu + Bc Bu + Sc Su
Where:
Cu = Total user charge per unit of time.
Vc = Total cost for transportation and treatment of a unit
of wastewater volume.
Vu = Volume contribution per unit of time.
Bc = Total cost for treatment of a unit of Biochemical
Oxygen Demand (BOD).
Bu = Total BOD contribution from a user per unit of time.
Sc = Total cost of treatment of a unit of suspended solids.
Su = Total suspended solids contribution from a user per
unit of time.
(2) Administrative and debt service costs recovery. All users, whether
Class I or Class II shall pay an additional charge which shall be based on all
costs necessary to bill, collect, and administer the wastewater program and that
revenue necessary to repay all debts acquired by the city in order to design and
construct said Brush Creek, Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater systems.
(Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord.
#4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-211. Frequency of analysis. (1) The waste discharges of each Class
II user discharging same into the city sanitary sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of said
wastes shall be made semi-annually, or more often as may be deemed necessary,
by the director of the department of water and sewer services, or his authorized
assistants.
(2) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the actual quality of the wastes. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of said wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods" for the examination of water and wastewater published by
the American Public Health Association. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced
by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-13
18-212. Disputed analysis; regauging and sampling of wastes.
In the event that an analysis of wastes, determined by the samplings and
gauging of wastes from a person or industry by the city is disputed; a program
of resampling and gauging, with subsequent chemical determination may be
instituted as follows:
(1) The person or industrial user interested must submit a request for
resampling and gauging of their wastes to the director by letter and bind
themselves to bear the expenses incurred by the city in resampling and gauging
and subsequent determination of the wastes.
(2) The chemist or engineer employed by the company responsible for
the request submitted to the city must confer with the city's person in charge of
gauging and sampling, They will establish the length of the re-run and the
methods to be employed to determine the flow and to sample the flow.
(3) The chemist or engineer engaged by the person or industry may be
present during the gauging arid sampling operation and also in the city's
laboratory during the chemical analysis.
(4) The results of the analysis, determined from the quantity and
quality of the flow shall be considered the analysis of record and shall be used
to establish current billing procedures. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced
by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-213. Monthly rates. (1) Recovery of all costs. There shall be and
hereby are established monthly rates and charges necessary to recover the costs
associated with the administrative, debt service, and operation and maintenance
of the Johnson City Brush Creek, Knob Creek and Regional Wastewater
Systems based on the one hundred percent (100%) metered quantities of water
purchased and in accordance with the following rate schedule. To be in effect
with all bill calculations beginning August 1 for FY 2018-2019 and July I for
FY 2019-2020 and for all subsequent fiscal years.
Inside City FY
2018-2019
Outside City FY
2018-2019
Base Charge Per Bill $6.04 $11.72
Rate per 1,000 gallons $6.06 $11.76
Inside City FY
2019-2020
Outside City FY
2019-2020
Base Charge Per Bill $6.34 $11.98
Rate Per 1,000 gallons $6.68 $12.02
18-14
Inside City FY
2020-2021
Outside City FY
2020-2021
Base Charge Per Bill $6.65 $12.24
Rate Per 1,000 gallons $6.68 $12.29
Inside City FY
2021-2022
Outside City FY
2021-2022
Base Charge Per Bill $6.98 $12.49
Rate Per 1,000 gallons $7.01 $12.55
(2) For Class II users an additional charge for strength of waste is as
follows:
Inside City Outside City
BOD (based on the wastewater
flow and discharge of
concentration of BOD)
$503.07/ton $1,006.11/ton
SS (suspended solids based on the
wastewater flow and the
discharge concentration
suspended solids)
$262.09/ton $524.17/ton
(Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord.
#4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-214. Monthly bills. Each water meter shall be read periodically and
sewer bills rendered as promptly as may be possible following respective
readings. Residential customers who seasonally use water for irrigation are
allowed to purchase an irrigation meter for water use not returned to the
wastewater systems. Commercial, institutional, governmental, and industrial
customers with ongoing large processes may apply for a deduct water meter
approval to measure only those segregated volumes not discharged to the
wastewater systems. A system of billing shall be established by the finance
deportment commonly known as "cycle billing." A penalty of ten percent (10%)
of the sewer charge shall be added after billing due date if the bill has not been
paid.
If the bill is not promptly paid two (2) days after the billing due date, then
the same shall become delinquent and service shall be discontinued as provided
in § 18-216. Such service shall not be continued again until all delinquent
18-15
charges and all penalties shall have been paid. An additional charge of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be made for reinstating service when such
delinquent bill or bills are paid. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-215. Water and sewer bills combined. Water bills and sewer bills
may be combined in one statement in such manner as to require the payment
of both water charges and sewer charges as a unit. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004,
as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018
Ch11_4-4-19)
18-216. Discontinuance of service upon failure to pay bills, etc.
Payments of such bills as presented under §§ 18-206 and 18-213 shall be
enforced by discontinuing either the water service, the sewer service, or both
except to the extent that the city cannot do so without impairment of the
contract rights vested in the holders of the outstanding bonds payable from the
revenues of the water and sewer systems of the city. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004,
as replaced by Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018
Ch11_4-4-19)
18-217. Service charges. A service charge of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) will be made for each water tap; connection of new service twelve
dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for automatic landlord turn-on agreement or fifty
dollars ($50.00) for same day service); transfer of service; account name change;
reconnection of service following non-payment of bill to include returned checks;
and meter checks (no charge for first two (2) during last twelve (12) months). A
service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be added to an account turned
over to a collection agency. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) service fee will be
charged for tampering with water meters, locks, or attempting illegal hook-ups.
Tapping fees are presented under § 18-205 not paid within ten (10) days of
issuance of a building permit will be subject to a service fee of an additional ten
percent (10%) of the tapping fee. (Ord. #4051-04, Oct. 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #4453-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-218. Other charges. For approved septage haulers a biannual
permit is required. The permit fee is two hundred dollars ($200.00) to be paid
prior to the acceptance of septage by city. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of septage received is required at the time of discharge.
The fee for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of septage will not be prorated for
partial loads. (as added by Ord. #4453-12, June 2013, and replaced by Ord.
#4663-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-16
CHAPTER 3
WASTEWATER TREATMENT (SEWER) SYSTEM
SECTION
18-301. General provisions.
18-302. General sewer use requirements.
18-303. Pretreatment of wastewater.
18-304. Individual wastewater discharge permits and general permits.
18-305. Individual wastewater discharge and general permit issuance.
18-306. Reporting requirements.
18-307. Compliance monitoring.
18-308. Confidential information.
18-309. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
18-310. Administrative enforcement remedies.
18-311. Judicial enforcement remedies.
18-312. Supplemental enforcement action.
18-313. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
18-314. Wastewater treatment rates.
18-315. Private domestic wastewater disposal.
18-316. Severability and effective date.
18-317. [Deleted.]
18-318. [Deleted.]
18-319. [Deleted.]
18-320. [Deleted.]
18-321. [Deleted.]
18-322. [Deleted.]
18-323. [Deleted.]
18-324. [Deleted.]
18-325. [Deleted.]
18-326. [Deleted.]
18-327. [Deleted.]
18-328. [Deleted.]
18-329. [Deleted.]
18-301. General provisions. (1) Purpose and policy. This chapter sets
forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater treatment system;
hereinafter called Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the City of Johnson
City; hereinafter called Johnson City, and enables the Johnson City to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the state pretreatment
requirements (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14), the Clean Water Act (33 United
States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251, et seq.) and the general pretreatment
regulations (title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [C.F.R.] part 403). The
objectives of this chapter are:
18-17
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly
owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
(c) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(d) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(e) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and
(f) To enable Johnson City to comply with its national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly
owned treatment works is subject.
This chapter provides that all persons residing within the City Limits of
the City of Johnson City must have adequate wastewater treatment either in
the form of a connection to the publicly owned treatment works or, where the
system is not available, a private disposal system approved by the city.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge
permits or general permits to certain system users; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
(2) Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the
director to a duly authorized Johnson City employee.
(3) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD – Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP – Best Management Practice
BMR – Baseline Monitoring Report
C.F.R. – Code of Federal Regulations
CIU – Categorical Industrial User
COD – Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG – Fats, Oil and Grease
FSE – Food Service Establishment
GPD – Gallons per Day
18-18
IU – Industrial User
MGD- Million Gallons per Day
mg/l – milligrams per liter
NPDES – National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU – Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
POTW – Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA – Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU – Significant Industrial User
SNC – Significant Noncompliance
TSS – Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. – United States Code
(4) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.
(a) "Act" or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251,
et seq.
(b) "Approval authority." The Tennessee Division of Water
Pollution Control Director or his/her representative(s).
(c) "Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user."
(i) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar
policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is
authorized to make management decisions that govern the
operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions
taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.
(ii) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(iii) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to
18-19
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or their designee.
(iv) The individuals described in subsections (i) through
(iii), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to Johnson City.
(d) "Biochemical Oxygen Demand" or "BOD." The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees (20E)
centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
(e) "Best Management Practices" or "BMPs" means schedules
of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§ 18-302(1)(a) and (b) [Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.05(1)(a) and (2)]. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
(f) "Building inspector." The person representing the city's
building department which is responsible for all plumbing inspection of
establishments served by city utilities within the city limits.
(g) "Building sewer." A sewer conveying wastewater from the
premises of a user to the POTW.
(h) "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical
standard." Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that
appear in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
(i) "Categorical industrial user." An industrial user subject to
a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
(j) "Chemical Oxygen Demand" or "COD." A measure of the
oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in
water.
(k) "City," or "Johnson City," or "City of Johnson City." The City
of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(l) "Control authority." The City of Johnson City.
(m) "Daily maximum." The arithmetic average of all effluent
samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
(n) "Daily maximum limit." The maximum allowable discharge
limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are
18-20
expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.
(o) "Director of sanitary sewer department" or "director." The
person designated by Johnson City to supervise the operation of the
POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this chapter. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the
director.
(p) "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA." The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional
water management division director, the regional administrator, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
(q) "Existing source." Any source of discharge that is not a new
source.
(r) "Grab sample." A sample that is taken from a waste-stream
without regard to the flow in the waste-stream and over a period of time
not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(s) "Indirect discharge" or "discharge." The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
(t) "Instantaneous limit." The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of
the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
(u) "Interference." A discharge that, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use
or disposal; or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or the
collection system.
(v) "Local limit." Specific discharge limits developed and
enforced by [the city] upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in
Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.05(1)(a) and (2).
(w) "Medical waste." Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human
blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
(x) "Monthly average." The sum of all daily discharges
measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily
discharges measured during that month.
(y) "Monthly average limit." The highest allowable average of
daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharges measured during that month.
18-21
(z) "New source." (i) Any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section
307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
or
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that
causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation
are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent
to which the new facility is engaged in the same general
type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(ii) Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of section (i)(B) or (C) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(iii) Construction of a new source as defined under this
subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:
(1) Any placement, assembly, or installation
of facilities or equipment; or
(2) Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new
source facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are
intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable
time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do
18-22
not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
(aa) "Noncontact cooling water." Water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.
(bb) "Pass through." A discharge which exits the POTW into
waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of Johnson City's NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
(cc) "Person." Any and all persons, including individuals, firms,
partnerships, associations, public or private institutions, state and
federal agencies, municipalities or political subdivisions, or officers
thereof, departments, agencies, or instrumentalities, or public or private
corporations or officers thereof, organized or existing under the laws of
this or any state or country.
(dd) "pH." A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.
(ee) "Pollutant." Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD,
toxicity, or odor).
(ff) "Pretreatment." The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
(gg) "Pretreatment requirements." Any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other
than a pretreatment standard.
(hh) "Pretreatment standards" or "standards." Pretreatment
standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
(ii) "Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited discharges."
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 18-302(1) of this chapter.
(jj) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works" or "POTW." A
treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section
1292), which is owned by the City of Johnson City. This definition
18-23
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
(kk) "Septic tank waste." Any sewage from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
(ll) "Sewage." Human excrement and gray water (household
showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
(mm) "Significant Industrial User (SIU)." Except as provided in
subsections (iii) and (iv) of this subsection (mm), a significant industrial
user is:
(i) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or
(ii) An industrial user that:
(A) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand
(25,000) Gallons Per Day (GPD) or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process waste-stream which
makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
(C) Is designated as such by Johnson City on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
(iii) Johnson City may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant
categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user
on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than
one hundred (100) Gallons Per Day (GPD) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blow-down wastewater, unless specifically included in the
pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
(A) The industrial user, prior to Johnson City's
finding, has consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
(B) The industrial user annually submits the
certification statement required in § 18-306(13)(b) [see
Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(17)], together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(C) The industrial user never discharges any
untreated concentrated wastewater.
18-24
(iv) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
subsection (ii) of this subsection (mm) has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, Johnson City may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from
an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in
Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.08(6)(f), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(nn) "Slug load" or "slug discharge." Any discharge at a flow rate
or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 18-302(1) of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge
of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any
other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
(oo) "Storm water." Any flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation,
including snowmelt.
(pp) "Total suspended solids" or "suspended solids." The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
(qq) "User" or "industrial user." A source of indirect discharge.
(rr) "Wastewater." Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes
and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
(ss) "Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant." That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste. (1985 Code, § 19-87, as replaced by
Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-302. General sewer use requirements. (1) Prohibited discharge
standards. (a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all
users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:
(i) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste-streams with a
18-25
closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees (140E)
Fahrenheit (sixty degrees (60E) centigrade) using the test methods
specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21;
(ii) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment;
(iii) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference
but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") or one and
twenty-seven-hundredths centimeters (1.27 cm) in any dimension;
(iv) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(v) Wastewater having a temperature greater than one
hundred forty degrees (140E) Fahrenheit (sixty degrees (60E)
centigrade), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into
the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees (104E)
Fahrenheit (forty degrees (40E) centigrade);
(vi) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through;
(vii) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;
(viii) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the director in accordance with § 18-303(4) of
this chapter;
(ix) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(x) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently
imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating
Johnson City's NPDES permit;
(xi) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
(xii) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, de-ionized water,
18-26
noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized;
(xiii) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(xiv) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the director;
(xv) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test;
(xvi) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(xvii) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l for IUs. FSEs
are required to comply with the rules contained in the Johnson
City FOG Policy;
(xviii) Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion
hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any
point in the POTW, of more than seven percent (7%) or any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit of the
meter;
(xix) Hazardous waste, except as specifically authorized by
the director.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
(2) National categorical pretreatment standards. Users must comply
with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. chapter I,
subchapter N, parts 405–471.
(a) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only
in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with § 18-302(2)(d) and (e).
(b) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
director may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either
as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users.
(c) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard,
the director shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with Tennessee
Rule 1200-4-14-.06(5).
(d) When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only
in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that
Johnson City convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The
18-27
determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the
discretion of the director. Johnson City may establish equivalent mass
limits only if the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in
§ 18-302(2)(d)(i)(A) through (E) below.
(i) To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the
industrial user must:
(A) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ,
water conservation methods and technologies that
substantially reduce water use during the term of its
individual wastewater discharge permit;
(B) Currently use control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have
used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
(C) Provide sufficient information to establish the
facility's actual average daily flow rate for all
waste-streams, based on data from a continuous effluent
flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow
rate and the long-term average production rate must be
representative of current operating conditions;
(D) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or
pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent
mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge;
and
(E) Have consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior
to the industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits.
(ii) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits
must:
(A) Maintain and effectively operate control and
treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with
the equivalent mass limits;
(B) Continue to record the facility's flow rates
through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring
device;
(C) Continue to record the facility's production
rates and notify the director whenever production rates are
expected to vary by more than twenty percent (20%) from its
baseline production rates determined in subsection
(2)(d)(i)(C) of this section. Upon notification of a revised
production rate, the director will reassess the equivalent
mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
18-28
(D) Continue to employ the same or comparable
water conservation methods and technologies as those
implemented pursuant to subsection (2)(d)(i)(A) of this
section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass
limit.
(iii) When developing equivalent mass limits, the director:
(A) Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by
multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the
regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the
concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average
standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;
(B) Upon notification of a revised production rate,
will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the
limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the
facility; and
(C) May retain the same equivalent mass limit in
subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms
if the industrial user's actual average daily flow rate was
reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual
average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of
the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of
dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to
§ 18-302(6). The industrial user must also be in compliance
with § 18-313(3) regarding the prohibition of bypass.
(e) The director may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 C.F.R. parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the
director.
(f) Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply
with the equivalent limitations developed in this § 18-302(2) in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations
were derived.
(g) Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one (1)
limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second
limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four (4) day average,
limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production
or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and the
maximum equivalent limitation.
(h) Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a
production-based standard shall notify the director within two (2)
18-29
business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the
production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.
Any user not notifying the director of such anticipated change will be
required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were
based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate.
(3) State pretreatment standards. Users must comply with state
pretreatment standards as found in Tennessee Rule 1200-04-14.
(4) Local limits. (a) The director is authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.05(3).
(b) The director shall establish a policy granting industrial
users concentration based limits based on the allowable headworks
loadings as periodically revised. The policy shall be developed to equitably
distribute the available mass loading for each drainage basin; allow for
a reasonable percentage in reserve for future industrial users; and allow
for a reasonable safety factor to protect against pass through and
interference.
(c) The director may develop Best Management Practices
(BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or
general permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of
§ 18-302(1).
(5) Johnson City's right of revision. The City of Johnson City reserves
the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge
permits or in general permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
(6) Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or
in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(7) Requirements for proper wastewater disposal. (a) It shall be
unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City Limits
of the City of Johnson City, and human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any water of the State of
Tennessee within the City Limits of the City of Johnson City any sewage,
wastewater, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
(c) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
18-30
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, wastewater, or
other polluted waters within the City Limits of the City of Johnson City.
(d) Except as provided in § 18-302(1)(f), the owner of all houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, recreation,
employment, or other purposes situated within the city limits and
abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way, or easement in which there is
now located a public sanitary sewer in the city limits, is hereby required
as his/her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty (60) days after an official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred feet
(200') of the building drain as defined herein. The city may begin billing
monthly sewer use charges after notifying the owner that a public
sanitary sewer is available.
(e) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 18-302(7)(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with § 18-315(1) of this
chapter.
(f) The owner of a manufacturing facility may discharge
wastewater to the waters of the State of Tennessee provided that he
obtains an NPDES permit and meets all requirements of the federal
Clean Water Act, the NPDES permit, and any other applicable local,
state, or federal statutes and regulations.
(8) Physical connection to the publicly owned treatment works.
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection
with or opening into, use, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building
inspector for locations inside the city limits and/or the director for
locations outside the city limits.
(b) A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building
sewer.
(c) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found on examination and tested by the
building inspector or director to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(d) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
18-31
(e) Building sewer shall conform to the following requirements:
(i) The minimum size of a building sewer shall be four
inches (4").
(ii) The minimum dept of a building sewer shall be
eighteen inches (18").
(iii) Three inch (3") and larger building sewer shall be laid
on a grade minimum of one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. Larger
building sewers shall be laid on a grade that will produce a velocity
when flowing full of at least two feet (2') per second.
(iv) Slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be
neat and regular.
(v) Building sewer shall be constructed of:
(A) Lined cast or ductile iron soil pipe with
compression joints of approved type;
(B) Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) pipe with solvent
welded or rubber compression joints of approved type;
minimum thickness Schedule 40;
(C) ABS composite sewer pipe with solvent welded
or with rubber compression joints of an approved type;
(D) Concrete sewer pipe using rubber or neoprene
compression joints of an approved type; or
(E) Such other material of equal or superior
quality as maybe approved by the building inspector or
director. Cement mortar and leaded joints are expressly
prohibited.
(vi) A cleanout shall be located no more than five feet (5')
outside of the building, one (1) as it taps on to the utility lateral
and one (1) at each change in direction of the building sewer which
is greater than forty-five degrees (45E). Additional cleanouts shall
be placed not more than seventy-five feet (75') apart in horizontal
building sewers of four inch (4") nominal diameter and not more
than one hundred feet (100') apart for larger pipes. Cleanouts shall
be extended to or above the finished grade level directly above the
place where the cleanout is installed. A Y and one-eighth (1/8)
bend shall be used for the cleanout base. Cleanouts shall have a
minimum size of four inches (4").
(vii) Connections of building sewer to the publicly owned
treatment works shall be made at the appropriate existing wye or
tee branch using compression type couplings or collar type rubber
joint with corrosion resistant or stainless steel bands. Where
existing wye or tee branches are not available, connections of
building services shall be made at the tee, wye, saddle, or manhole
installed or inspected by the city.
18-32
(viii) The building sewer may be brought into the building
below the basement floor when gravity flow from the building to
the sanitary sewer is at a grade of one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot
or more if possible. In cases where the basement or floor levels are
lower than the ground elevation at the point of connection to the
sewer, adequate precautions by installation of check valves or
other backflow prevention devices to protect against flooding shall
be provided by the owner. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the
expense of the owner.
(ix) All installed building sewer shall be gas and water
tight.
(x) The methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, or other activities in the
construction of a building sewer which have not been described
above shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city
or to the procedures set forth in the appropriate ASTM and Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the building inspector or director before installation.
(9) Inspection of connections. (a) The sewer connection and all
building sewers from the building to the POTW shall be inspected before
the underground portion is covered. Inspections are to be made by the
building inspector inside the city limits or the director or duly authorized
representative of the director outside the city limits.
(b) The applicant for discharge shall notify the building
inspector or director when the building sewer is ready for inspection.
(10) Maintenance of building sewers. Each individual property owner
or user of the POTW shall be entirely responsible for the maintenance of the
building sewer located on private property. This maintenance will include repair
or replacement of the service line as deemed necessary by the director or
building inspector. (1985 Code, § 19-88, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug.
2011)
18-303. Pretreatment of wastewater. (1) Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 18-302(1) of this chapter
within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
18-33
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities
are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to Johnson City under the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Additional pretreatment measures. (a) Whenever deemed
necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste-streams from industrial waste-streams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The director may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow.
An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may be
issued solely for flow equalization.
(c) Grease, oil, sand interceptors shall be provided in
accordance with the city's FOG policy.
(d) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
(3) Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. The director
shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge
control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The director may require
any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take
such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges.
Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine
batch discharges;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 18-306(6) of this chapter;
and
(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents,
and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
18-34
(4) Hauled wastewater. (a) Septic tank waste may be introduced into
the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times
as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate § 18-302
of this chapter or any other requirements established by Johnson City.
The director will require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits or general permits.
(b) The director will require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits. The
director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits. The director
also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge
of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this
chapter.
(c) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads and clean
equipment only at locations designated by the director. No load may be
discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect
samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable
standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
(d) Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry,
known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are
RCRA hazardous wastes. (1985 Code, § 19-88.1, as replaced by
Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-304. Individual wastewater discharge permits and general
permits. (1) Wastewater analysis. When requested by the director, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater
within thirty (30) days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a
form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
(2) Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
requirement. (a) No significant industrial user shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first submitting an application to and
receiving approval from the director for discharge.
(b) The director may require other users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits or general permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
(c) Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual
wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee
18-35
to the sanctions set out in §§ 18-310 through 18-312 of this chapter.
Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit
does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal
and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(3) Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting: existing
connections. Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW
prior to the effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter and who
wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within one hundred
eighty (180) days after said date, apply to the director for an individual
wastewater discharge permit or a general permit in accordance with § 18-304(5)
of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue
after one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter
except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit issued by the director.
(4) Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting: new
connections. Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging
into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge
permit or general permit, in accordance with § 18-304(5) of this chapter, must
be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will
begin or recommence.
(5) Individual wastewater discharge and general permit application
contents. (a) All users required to obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit must submit a permit application.
Users that are eligible may request a general permit under § 18-304(6).
The director may require users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of a permit application:
(i) Identifying information.
(A) The name and address of the facility, including
the name of the operator and owner.
(B) Contact information, description of activities,
facilities, and plant production processes on the premises.
(ii) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.
(iii) Description of operations.
(A) A brief description of the nature, average rate
of production (including each product produced by type,
amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard
industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by
such user. This description should include a schematic
18-36
process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes;
(B) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which
are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to
the POTW;
(C) Number and type of employees, hours of
operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(D) Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);
(E) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains,
and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all
points of discharge.
(iv) Time and duration of discharges.
(v) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the
permit.
(vi) Flow measurement. Information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste-stream
formula set out in § 18-302(2)(c) (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06(5)).
(vii) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and any new
categorically regulated processes for existing sources.
(B) The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass,
where required by the standard or by the director, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process.
(C) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported.
(D) The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 18-306(10) of this chapter. Where the
standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation
as required by the director or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard.
(E) Sampling must be performed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 18-306(10) of this chapter.
18-37
(viii) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of
an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge based on § 18-306(4)(b)
[2300-4-14-.12(5)(b)].
(ix) Any request to be covered by a general permit based
on § 18-304(6).
(x) Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the director to evaluate the permit application.
(b) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.
(6) Wastewater discharge permitting: general permits. (a) At the
discretion of the director, the director may use general permits to control
SIU discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met. All
facilities to be covered by a general permit must:
(i) Involve the same or substantially similar types of
operations;
(ii) Discharge the same types of wastes;
(iii) Require the same effluent limitations;
(iv) Require the same or similar monitoring; and
(v) In the opinion of the director, are more appropriately
controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.
(b) To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a
written request for coverage that identifies its contact information,
production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for
monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in
accordance with § 18-306(4)(b) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other
information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a
pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is
not effective in the general permit until after the director has provided
written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in
accordance with § 18-306(4)(b).
(c) The director will retain a copy of the general permit,
documentation to support the POTW's determination that a specific SIU
meets the criteria in § 18-304(6)(a)(i) to (v) and applicable state
regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three
(3) years after the expiration of the general permit.
(d) The director may not control an SIU through a general
permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical
pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed
as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based
on the combined waste-stream formula (§ 18-302(2)(c)) or net/gross
calculations (§ 18-302(2)(d)).
18-38
(7) Application signatories and certifications. (a) All wastewater
discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements
must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain
the certification statement in § 18-306(13)(a).
(b) If the designation of an authorized representative is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written
authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be
submitted to the director prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.
(c) A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user by the director pursuant to § 18-301(4)(mm)(iii) must
annually submit the signed certification statement in § 18-306(13)(b).
(8) Individual wastewater discharge and general permit decisions.
(a) The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of
a complete permit application, the director will determine whether to
issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. The
director may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit.
(b) The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's
application for a wastewater discharge or general permit shall not
obligate the city to render the wastewater collection and treatment
services. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with
this chapter or the city's rules and regulations and general practice, the
application shall be rejected and there shall be no liability of the city to
the applicant of such service. (1985 Code, § 19-89, as replaced by
Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-305. Individual wastewater discharge and general permit
issuance. (1) Individual wastewater discharge and general permit duration.
An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be issued
for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of
the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit may
be issued for a period less than five (5) years at the discretion of the director.
Each individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit will indicate
a specific date upon which it will expire.
(2) Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
contents. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall
include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to
prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety,
18-39
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the
POTW.
(a) Individual wastewater discharge permits and general
permits must contain:
(i) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge
permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(ii) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to Johnson City in
accordance with § 18-305(5) of this chapter, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
(iii) Effluent limits, including best management practices,
based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(iv) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants or best management practice to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state, and local law;
(v) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for
a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge in accordance with § 18-306(4)(b);
(vi) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the
time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal,
state, or local law;
(vii) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined
by the director to be necessary;
(viii) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the director
(§ 18-306(4)(b)) must be included as a condition in the user's
permit or other control mechanism.
(b) Individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits
may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(i) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization;
(ii) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate
containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(iii) Requirements for the development and
implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions
including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
18-40
(iv) Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged
to the POTW;
(v) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees
for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(vi) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow
measurement devices;
(vii) A statement that compliance with the individual
wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the individual wastewater
discharge permit or the general permit; and
(viii) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(3) Permit modification. (a) The director may modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to,
the following reasons:
(i) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(ii) To address significant alterations or additions to the
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character
since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit
issuance;
(iii) A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
(iv) Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to Johnson City's POTW, city personnel, or the
receiving waters;
(v) Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual
wastewater discharge permit;
(vi) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in
any required reporting;
(vii) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to Tennessee Rule
1200-4-14-.13;
(viii) To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or
18-41
(ix) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in
accordance with § 18-305(5).
(b) The director may modify a general permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(i) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(ii) A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
(iii) To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or
(iv) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in
accordance with § 18-305(5).
(4) Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
transfer. Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general
permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee
gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the director and the director
approves the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit
coverage transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification
by the new owner or operator which:
(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit or coverage under the general permit void as of the
date of facility transfer.
(5) Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
revocation. The director may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit
or coverage under a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to,
the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the director of
changed conditions pursuant to § 18-306(5) of this chapter;
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification
statements;
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
18-42
(f) Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility
premises and records;
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(h) Failure to pay fines;
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or
any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the general permit or
this chapter.
Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general
permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits
issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit to that user.
(6) Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
reissuance. User with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in
accordance with § 18-304(5) of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit
or general permit. (1985 Code, § 19-90, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug.
2011)
18-306. Reporting requirements. (1) Baseline monitoring reports.
(a) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under Tennessee
Rule 1200-4-14-.06(1)(d), whichever is later, existing categorical
industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that
become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. A new
source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates
of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.
18-43
(i) All information required in §§ 18-304(5)(a)(i)(A)(2),
18-304(5)(a)(iii)(A), and 18-304(5)(a)(vi).
(ii) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The user shall provide the information
required in § 18-304(5)(a)(vii)(A) through (D).
(B) The user shall take a minimum of one (1)
representative sample to compile that data necessary to
comply with the requirements of this subsection.
(C) Samples should be taken immediately
downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or
immediately downstream from the regulated process if no
pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with
the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user
should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
allow use of the combined waste-stream formula in
Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06(5) to evaluate compliance
with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06(5) this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the control authority.
(D) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with § 18-306(10).
(E) The director may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as
the data provides information sufficient to determine the
need for industrial pretreatment measures.
(F) The baseline report shall indicate the time,
date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and
shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
(iii) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by
the user's authorized representative as defined in § 18-301(4)(c)
and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and,
if not, whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(iv) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
18-44
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in § 18-306(2) of this chapter.
(v) Signature and report certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with
§ 18-306(13)(a) of this chapter and signed by an authorized
representative as defined in § 18-301(4)(c).
(2) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by § 18-306(1)(b)(iv) of this
chapter:
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting
routine operation);
(b) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months
without approval of the director;
(c) The user shall submit a progress report to the director no
later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and,
if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
(d) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between
such progress reports to the director.
(3) Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the director a report containing the information described in §§ 18-304(5)(a)(vi)
and (vii) and 18-306(1)(b)(ii) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
§ 18-302(2), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 18-306(13)(a) of this
chapter. All sampling will be done in conformance with § 18-306(10).
18-45
(4) Periodic compliance reports. (a) All significant industrial users
must, at a frequency determined by the director submit no less than twice
per year reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured
or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user must submit documentation required by the director or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
(b) The City of Johnson City may authorize an industrial user
subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a
pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the
industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical
factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in
the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water
and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
industrial user. [see Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(5)(b)] This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
(i) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater
discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater
is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and
otherwise includes no process wastewater.
(ii) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration
of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge
permit, but in no case longer than five (5) years. The user must
submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be
granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge
permit. See § 18-304(5)(a)(viii).
(iii) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not
present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one (1)
sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any
treatment present at the facility that is representative of all
wastewater from all processes.
(iv) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed
in accordance with § 18-301(4)(c), and include the certification
statement in § 18-306(13)(a) (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06(1)(b)2).
(v) Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved
method from 40 C.F.R. part 136 with the lowest minimum
detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
(vi) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the director
must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons
18-46
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user
in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the director for
three (3) years after expiration of the waiver.
(vii) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision
of the user's permit by the director, the industrial user must certify
on each report with the statement in § 18-306(13)(c) below, that
there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due
to activities of the industrial user.
(viii) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be
present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur
in the user's operations, the user must immediately: comply with
the monitoring requirements of § 18-306(4)(a), or other more
frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the director, and
notify the director.
(ix) This provision does not supersede certification
processes and requirements established in categorical
pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the
categorical pretreatment standard.
(c) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with § 18-306(13)(a) of this chapter.
(d) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(e) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location
more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures
prescribed in § 18-306(11) of this chapter, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.
(f) If a user opts to send electronic (digital) documents to the
city to satisfy the requirements of this section, the user must confirm
with the director the most recent form of transmittal accepted.
(5) Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director
of any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter
the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before
the change.
(a) The director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 18-304(5) of this chapter.
(b) The director may issue an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit under § 18-305(7) of this chapter or modify an
18-47
existing wastewater discharge permit or a general permit under
§ 18-305(4) of this chapter in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
(6) Reports of potential problems. (a) In the case of any discharge,
including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a
non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a slug
discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the
POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of
the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions
taken by the user.
(b) Within seven (7) days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which
might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources,
or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
(c) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the
event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(d) Significant industrial users are required to notify the
director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a slug discharge.
(7) Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain
an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the director as the director may require.
(8) Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation. Re-sampling by the industrial user is not required if Johnson City
performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if Johnson City
performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was
conducted and the time when the user or Johnson City receives the results of
this sampling, or if Johnson City has performed the sampling and analysis in
lieu of the industrial user.
(9) Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
18-48
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R.
part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the director or other parties approved by EPA.
(10) Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting
requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that
is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
(a) Except as indicated in subsection (b) and (c) below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four (24) hour
flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by Johnson City, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols, including appropriate
preservation, specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four (24) hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide,
total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for
other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by
Johnson City, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required
to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using
grab collection techniques.
(c) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety (90) day compliance reports required in § 18-306(1) and (3)
[Tennessee Rule 1200-4-12-.12(2) and (4)], a minimum of four (4) grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease,
sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling
data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the
reports required by § 18-306(4) (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(5) and (8)),
the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
18-49
(11) Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to have
been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service,
the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(12) Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records
of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established under
§ 18-302(4)(c). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or
Johnson City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the director.
(13) Certification statements. (a) Certification of permit applications,
user reports and initial monitoring waiver. The following certification
statement is required to be signed and submitted by users submitting
permit applications in accordance with § 18-304(7); users submitting
baseline monitoring reports under § 18-306(1)(b)(v); users submitting
reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines under § 18-306(3); users submitting periodic compliance reports
required by 18-306(4)(a) through (d), and users submitting an initial
request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of § 18-306(4)(b)(iv).
The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative as defined in § 18-301(4)(c):
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure
that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons
directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
(b) Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial
users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial
18-50
user by the director pursuant to §§ 18-301(4)(mm)(iii) and 18-304(7) must
annually submit the following certification statement signed in
accordance with the signatory requirements in § 18-301(4)(c). This
certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
director:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly
responsible for managing compliance with the
categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 C.F.R.
____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from __________,
________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as ____________________
[facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant
Categorical Industrial User as described in
§ 18-301(4)(mm)(iii);
(b) The facility complied with all applicable
Pretreatment Standards and requirements during
this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100
gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given
day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the
following information.
________________________________________________
________________________________________________
(c) Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an
approved monitoring waiver based on § 18-306(4)(b) must certify on each
report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly
responsible for managing compliance with the
Pretreatment Standard for 40 C.F.R. _______ [specify
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)],
I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
there has been no increase in the level of ______ [list
pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities
at the facility since filing of the last periodic report
under § 18-306(4)(a). (1985 Code, § 19-91, as
replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-307. Compliance monitoring. (1) Right of entry: inspection and
sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
18-51
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter
and any individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
(a) Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the director shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
(b) The director shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
(c) The director may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their
accuracy or as required by the director.
(d) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by
the user.
(e) Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(2) Search warrants. If the director has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program of Johnson City designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the director may seek issuance of
a search warrant from the appropriate court of jurisdiction. (1985 Code, § 19-92,
as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-308. Confidential information. Information and data on a user
obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications,
individual wastewater discharge permits, general permits, and monitoring
programs, and from the director’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of
18-52
such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
effluent data, as defined at 40 C.F.R. 2.302 shall not be recognized as
confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
(1985 Code, § 19-93, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-309. Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The
director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW,
a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
subsections (3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in § 18-302;
(2) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by § 18-302 multiplied by the applicable criteria
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by § 18-302 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit,
or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
18-53
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (1985 Code,
§ 19-94, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-310. Administrative enforcement remedies. (1) Notification of
violation. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user
a written notice of violation. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of such notice,
an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the
user to the director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
(2) Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders,
assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to § 18-310(4) and
(5) of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
(3) Show cause hearing. The director may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director
and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified
18-54
mail (return receipt requested) at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as
defined in § 18-301(4)(c) and required by § 18-304(7)(a). A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
(4) Compliance orders. When the director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(5) Cease and desist orders. When the director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past
violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance
of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(6) Administrative fines. (a) When the director finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or the maximum fine allowed under State of
Tennessee law, whichever is greater at the time of violation. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly
or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for
each day during the period of violation.
18-55
(b) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of
the fine amount within fifteen (15) days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the
matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together
with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The
director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
(c) Other fines may be levied in accordance with the city's
enforcement response plan.
(d) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(7) Emergency suspensions. The director may immediately suspend
a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably
appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
§ 18-310(8) of this chapter are initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior
to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§ 18-310(3)
or 18-310(8) of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
(8) Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in
§ 18-305(6) of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
(a) Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit conditions;
18-56
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 18-302 of this
chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and
be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 18-310(3) of this chapter why
the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director
shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (1985 Code, § 19-95, as amended by Ord. #3379, April 1996, and
Ord. #3500, July 1997, and replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-311. Judicial enforcement remedies. (1) Injunctive relief. When
the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the director may petition the appropriate court of jurisdiction through Johnson
City's legal counsel for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, the general permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The director may
also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against a user.
(2) Civil penalties. (a) A user who has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to Johnson City for
a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or the
maximum fine allowed under State of Tennessee law, whichever is
greater at the time of violation but not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
(b) The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by Johnson City.
18-57
(c) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(d) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(3) Criminal prosecution. (a) A user who willfully or negligently
violates any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or the maximum fine allowed under State of
Tennessee law, whichever is greater at the time of violation per violation,
per day, or imprisonment for not more than the maximum allowed under
State of Tennessee law, or both.
(b) A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a monetary
penalty, or be subject to imprisonment, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
(c) A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to
this chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, or general permit
or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or the maximum fine allowed under State
of Tennessee law, whichever is greater at the time of violation per
violation, per day, or imprisonment, or both.
(d) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished
by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or the
maximum fine allowed under State of Tennessee law, whichever is
greater at the time of violation per violation, per day, or imprisonment,
or both.
(4) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter
are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these
actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
will generally be in accordance with Johnson City's Enforcement Response Plan.
However, the director may take other action against any user when the
18-58
circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than
one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (1985 Code, § 19-96,
as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-312. Supplemental enforcement action. (1) Liability insurance.
The director may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
or a general permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous
general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its
discharge.
(2) Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The director may
decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or
penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous
individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous general permit or order
issued hereunder.
(3) Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, a general permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be
severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(4) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the city's ordinances governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing Johnson City for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or
remedying said nuisance. (1985 Code, § 19-97, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-313. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. (1) Upset.
(a) For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance,
or careless or improper operation.
18-59
(b) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (c), below, are met.
(c) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(i) An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;
(ii) The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(iii) The user has submitted the following information to
the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission
must be provided within five (5) days:
(A) A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;
(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(C) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(e) Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(f) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(2) Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in § 18-302(1)(a) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions
in § 18-302(1)(b)(iii) through (xix) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not
know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:
(a) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or
18-60
(b) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
when Johnson City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit,
and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge
use or disposal requirements.
(3) Bypass. (a) For the purposes of this section:
(i) Bypass means the intentional diversion of
waste-streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(ii) Severe property damage means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent
loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
(b) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also
is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(c) Bypass notifications. (i) If a user knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at
least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(ii) A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided
within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact
dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the
bypass. The director may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty-four (24) hours.
(d) Bypass. (i) Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(A) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities,
retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is
not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
18-61
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal
periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance;
and
(C) The user submitted notices as required under
subsection (c) of this section.
(ii) The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it
will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (d)(i) of this
section. (1985 Code, § 19-98, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug.
2011)
18-314. Wastewater treatment rates. (1) Purpose. It is the purpose
of this section to provide for the equitable and reasonable recovery of costs from
users of the POTW, including costs of operation, maintenance, administration,
bond service costs, capital improvements, depreciation, and equitable cost
recovery of EPA administered federal wastewater grants.
(2) Types of charges and fees. Fees and charges are payable at a time
deemed appropriate by the director for the specific charge or fee. The charges
and fees established by the city may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Building and sewer permit and inspection fees;
(b) Tapping fees;
(c) Sewer use charges;
(d) Surcharge fees;
(e) Fees for applications to discharge;
(f) Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees;
(g) Fees for industrial discharge monitoring;
(h) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
(i) Fees for filing appeals;
(j) Fees to recover administrative and legal costs associated
with the enforcement activity taken by the director to address
noncompliance;
(k) Fees for hauled waste; and
(l) Other fees as Johnson City may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by Johnson City.
(3) Classification of users for charges and fees. Users of the
wastewater system shall be classified into two (2) general classes or categories
depending on the users' contribution of wastewater loads. The classes are
defined in general terms. The director may decide to select the class for a user
18-62
based on loading conditions not specifically defined. Each class user is identified
as follows:
(a) Class I or Domestic. Those users whose average BOD
demand is two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) by weight or less,
and whose suspended solids discharge is two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/l) by weight or less).
(b) Class II or Non-Domestic. Those users whose BOD demand
exceeds two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) by weight and whose
suspended solids discharge exceeds two hundred milligrams per liter (200
mg/l).
(4) Determination of costs. (a) The board of commissioners shall
establish monthly rates and charges for the use of the POTW and the
services supplied by the POTW. Said charges shall be based upon the cost
categories of administrative costs, including but not limited to, billing and
accounting costs; operation and maintenance costs of the POTW; and debt
service costs.
(b) The determination of costs will be made on an annual basis.
Adjustments to charges and fees may be made at any time in the fiscal
year at the discretion of the director with the approval of the board of
commissioners.
(c) All users shall pay a single unit charge expressed as dollars
per thousand of gallons ($/1,000 gallons) purchased. The rate shall be the
total cost to pay debt service, operate, and maintain the POTW divided
by the total volume of wastewater from all users per year as determined
from one (1) fiscal year to the next.
(d) The volume of water purchased which is used in the
calculation of sewer use charges may be adjusted by the director if a user
purchases a significant volume of water for consumptive use and does not
discharge it to the public sewer such as filling swimming pools, industrial
heating and humidifying equipment, etc. The user shall be responsible for
documenting the quantity of waste discharged to the POTW and applying
for a reduction.
(e) All Class II users shall pay a surcharge rate on the excessive
amounts of pollutants discharged in direct proportion to the actual
discharge quantities. The surcharges include but are not limited to any
pollutant that increases the costs of operating and maintaining the
POTW. The surcharge cost shall be determined by multiplying the
volume of wastewater discharged by the difference between the actual
and maximum discharge pollutant concentrations. The pollutant mass
discharged is then multiplied by the cost to treat the pollutant.
(5) Other surcharge fees. If it is determined by the city that the
discharge of other loading parameters or wastewater substances are creating
excessive operation and maintenance costs within the wastewater system,
18-63
whether collection or treatment, then the monetary effect of such a parameter
or parameters shall be borne by the dischargers of such parameters in
proportion to the amount of discharge. (1985 Code, § 19-99, as replaced by
Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-315. Private domestic wastewater disposal. (1) Availability.
(a) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 18-302(7)(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a
private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this
section and all other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(b) When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the POTW within sixty (60) days of official notice to
do so.
(2) Requirements for private domestic wastewater disposal. (a) A
private domestic wastewater disposal system shall not be constructed
within the city limits unless and until a certificate is obtained from the
director stating that the POTW is not accessible to the property and no
such sewer is proposed for construction in the immediate future.
(b) The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
Department of Environment and Conservation for the State of Tennessee.
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
(c) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from the
director. The owner shall supply any plans, specifications, and other
information deemed necessary by the director.
(d) A private sewage disposal system shall not be placed in
operation until the installation is complete to the satisfaction of the
director. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the owner shall notify the director when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection will be made within a reasonable
period of time after the receipt of notice by the director.
(e) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manor at all times, at no expense to the
city. If the system is not maintained to the satisfaction of the director, the
city reserves the right to remedy the situation by discontinuing water or
other services.
(f) No statement contained in this article shall be constructed
to interfere with any additional requirements that maybe imposed by the
local county health department, State of Tennessee, or federal
18-64
government. (1985 Code, § 19-100, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug.
2011)
18-316. Severability and effective date. Severability. If any
provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force
and effect. (1985 Code, § 19-101, as replaced by Ord. #4407-11, Aug. 2011)
18-317. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-102, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-318. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-103, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-319. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-104, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-320. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-105, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-321. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-106, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-322. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-107, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-323. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-108, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-324. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-109, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-325. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-110, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-326. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-111, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-327. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-112, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-328. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-113, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-65
18-329. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 19-114, as deleted by Ord. #4407-11,
Aug. 2011)
18-66
CHAPTER 4
WATER1
SECTION
18-401. Department designated.
18-402. Department--supervision; reports, etc.
18-403. Fluoridation authorized.
18-404. Fluoridation cost.
18-405. Disposition of revenues.
18-406. Prerequisites to laying service pipes to premises.
18-407. Application generally.
18-408. Application for construction or building purposes.
18-409. Application by tenants; deposit required; refund of deposit.
18-410. Furnishing water to persons outside city.
18-411. Connections to mains made by city; fees.
18-412. Laying service pipe--by plumbers.
18-413. Laying service pipe--extension to adjoining premises, etc.
18-414. Right of entry.
18-415. Turning water on or off.
18-416. Maintenance of service pipes, fixtures.
18-417. Meters.
18-418. Liability of city for interruption of services, etc.
18-419. Throwing sticks, etc.; injuring, defacing valves, pipes, etc.
18-420. Monthly billings generally.
18-421. Meter rates.
18-422. Cutoffs.
18-423. Connection fees and service charges.
18-401. Department designated. All business connected with the
control, operation and maintenance of the city water plant or system shall be
1Charter references
City bonds: art. XV.
Departments: art. XVIII.
Garbage removal charges on water bill: § 7.20.2.
Public utilities: § 7.12, et seq.
Waterworks: art. XXI.
State law references
Revenue bonds: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-34-101, et seq.
Safe Drinking Water Act: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-13-701,
et seq.
Sewers and waterworks: Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 7, Ch. 35.
18-67
known as the water and sewer department of the city, the entire control and
management of same to be vested in the board of commissioners, as set forth in
this chapter. (1985 Code, § 24-1)
18-402. Department--supervision; reports, etc. (1) The city manager
shall have general supervision over the operation of the water plant or system,
subject to the control of the board of commissioners, through this code and other
ordinances and resolutions. He shall see that all rules and regulations are
enforced and that all contracts and specifications are fulfilled. He shall have the
power and authority to hire all labor and buy all materials necessary to the
operation and maintenance of the system and to the making of all ordinary
repairs and extensions, subject to the conditions and restrictions of the charter
of the city. He shall make trips of inspection, shall note all leaks and waste of
water and notify persons to have same repaired at once.
(2) He shall submit to the board of commissioners monthly, a report
showing the receipts and disbursements, in detail, and the improvements and
extensions made, and such other matters as the board may deem necessary,
with his recommendations looking toward the betterment of the plant or system.
(3) He shall also make an annual report to the board, at its first
meeting in July of each year, containing a complete statement of all the
operations of the plant for the year ending on the thirtieth day of June prior,
and of its financial and physical condition on such date, together with an
estimate showing what improvements, alterations, additions and extensions he
may deem necessary or expedient and the probably cost of same. Such annual
report shall be published in one (1) of the newspapers of the city, making the
lowest bid for its publication.1 (1985 Code, § 24-2)
18-403. Fluoridation authorized. The water and sewer department
shall make plans for the fluoridation of the water supply of the city; shall submit
such plans to the department of public health of the state for approval and, upon
approval, shall add such chemicals as fluoride to the water supply in accord with
such approval as will adequately provide for the fluoridation of such water
supply. (1985 Code, § 24-3)
18-404. Fluoridation cost. The cost of fluoridation as provided by
§ 18-403 shall be borne by the revenues of the water and sewer department.
(1985 Code, § 24-4)
18-405. Disposition of revenues. The revenue and income derived
from the operation of the water plant shall be collected and paid over to the city
treasurer, shall be deposited in the banks of the city, as provided for other
1Charter reference
Report of city manager to board of commissioners: § 99.
18-68
funds, and shall be kept as a separate fund to be paid out in the manner and
under the conditions and restrictions provided by law.1 (1985 Code, § 24-5)
18-406. Prerequisites to laying service pipes to premises. No
person shall have the right to demand that the city shall lay a line of pipe to his
premises within the city limits, unless the revenue to be derived therefrom shall
equal at least ten (10) percent annually of the cost of same, or unless the
applicant shall pay such part of the cost of the proposed pipe line so that the
remainder that the city shall pay shall yield a revenue of not less than ten (10)
percent per annum. The board of commissioners shall require the applicant to
enter into such written obligations as it may deem proper to secure for the city
the prompt payment of such revenue. (1985 Code, § 24-6)
18-407. Application generally. All persons residing within the city,
and desiring to do so, may take or use the city water within the city limits, upon
paying the proper charges therefor, as specified in this chapter, or that may be
adopted. The application for a connection to the water mains for the use of
water must be signed by the owner of the premises to be supplied or his duly
authorized agent, on the proper form provided for that purpose; an application
signed by a tenant only will not be considered; provided, that such persons shall
comply in all other respects with the rules and regulations prescribed in this
chapter or that may hereafter be adopted by the board of commissioners. (1985
Code, § 24-7)
18-408. Application for construction or building purposes. (1) All
persons desiring to use city water in the construction of work of any kind, or for
building purposes, shall make proper application therefor, and shall first deposit
with the water and sewer department, a sum of money sufficient to cover the
expense or cost of tapping the city main, the cost of extending the pipe required
inside the premises and for the water to be used in such work for such purpose
based on the estimated amount of brick, stone, concrete and plastering work to
be done, and shall obtain a receipt from the water clerk that the sum has been
paid. The city manager shall not grant a permit for such water connection to be
made in default of said requirement. Property where water is used for building
will be held liable for the payment of water rent. If upon completion of the work,
the sum so deposited shall be found to be insufficient to cover the cost of the
water that was used, the balance due shall be collected from the person making
the original application.
(2) Water that is used in the construction of concrete sidewalks shall
be paid for when the contractor obtains a permit for the construction of such
work. (1985 Code, § 24-8)
1Charter reference
Disposition of water revenues: § 97.
18-69
18-409. Application by tenants; deposit required; refund of
deposit.
(1) Any person who applies for water service through a meter, at
premises owned by another person, shall be required to deposit with the cashier
of the water and sewer department a guarantee that his water bill will be
promptly paid. Any person who occupies such premises at which a meter is
installed will be required to make such deposit at the time of installation of the
meter.
(2) In the event the bill of such tenant who is required to make deposit
required by this section is not paid within fifteen (15) days from the time it is
due, the cashier of the finance department shall deduct the amount thereof from
the deposit required by this section, cut off the water at such service and remit
to the tenant the balance of his deposit.
(3) Upon the removal of the tenant from the premises so occupied, and
the payment of all water bills, the cashier of the finance department shall
refund to such tenant the amount of his deposit, less any deductions made.
(1985 Code, § 24-9)
18-410. Furnishing water to persons outside city. All water
supplied to persons or premises outside of the city limits shall be supplied only
through meters, and the rates or charges for such water, when consumed
outside the limits, shall be at least twenty-five (25) percent greater than is
charged for water consumed within the city.1 (1985 Code, § 24-10)
18-411. Connections to mains made by city; fees. All connections to
water mains shall be made and furnished by the city, located four (4) feet from
the property line and the person for whom such connection is made shall file
application and pay to the city before the work is started, such fees as are
prescribed for such connections. (1985 Code, § 24-11)
18-412. Laying service pipe--by plumbers. All plumbers who pay
license and privilege tax to the city recorder shall be entitled to and shall obtain
from the board of commissioners a permit giving them permission to lay service
pipes upon the premises of private persons, and only plumbers so licensed shall
lay such service pipes or connect same to the stopcock in the sidewalk. Such
work shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the city. (1985
Code, § 24-12)
18-413. Laying service pipe--extension to adjoining premises, etc.
No plumber or other person shall extend any water pipes or attachments to
conduct water into any adjoining premises or into any additional hydrant,
1Charter reference
Extension of water lines beyond corporate limits: § 99.
18-70
stable, closet or for any purpose whatsoever; nor make any attachment to any
old water pipe or fixture, nor to any pipe where water has been turned off,
without written permission from the water and sewer department and in every
case the plumber must turn off the water, after having tested his work, and
make returns to the water office within twenty-four (24) hours. The penalty for
a violation of this section shall be as provided in § 1-104 of this code, and in
addition thereto, the plumber shall forfeit his license in the discretion of the city
manager or the court trying the case. (1985 Code, § 24-13)
18-414. Right of entry. (1) The city manager or an inspector appointed
by him shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter any premises to
inspect any pipe, fixture or meter, and shall he be refused admittance the person
refusing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, pay a fine
of not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
such offense; the supply of water shall be cut off until such examination is made,
the required information obtained or repairs or alterations made.
(2) Inspectors and meter readers must be courteous and reasonable in
all demands made and must take due pains to inform and explain to consumers
the use of cutoffs, fixtures and meters and the nature of the service the city
experts to render, so as to give customers, as far as possible, satisfactory service.
(1985 Code, § 24-14)
18-415. Turning water on or off. (1) Water shall not be turned on or
off, by the stopcock in the sidewalk, to any premises for any purpose, except by
written authority from the water office.
(2) A stop and waste cock or cut-off valve must be placed by the
property owner, just inside the property line, to be under the control of the
tenant or owner, to be used by him in case of accident within the premises. This
is not intended to take the place of the stop and waste cock to be located within
the building as provided for in § 18-412.
(3) No person shall, by a false key or otherwise, after the water has
been cut off from any premises, cause such premises to be supplied with city
water.
(4) No person shall permit others to use water from his premises, and
the supply of water may be cut off from such premises, until all proper charges
for water so consumed shall have been paid. The owner or tenant of such
premises, and the persons guilty of using water from same, without previously
paying for same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(5) Persons moving from one (1) house to another, in order to get credit
for vacancy, must notify the water office of such removal, so that the water may
be shut off from the vacated premises. (1985 Code, § 24-15)
18-71
18-416. Maintenance of service pipes, fixtures. (1) All water
consumers must keep their own pipes, and fixtures connected therewith, in good
repair at their own expense and protected from frost, with stop and waste cock
so arranged as to draw off all water from pipes when shut off.
(2) If the service pipe, stopcock or any fixture, in or upon the premises
of any person, shall become leaky, it shall be the duty of such person to have
same repaired, without delay, and upon failure to do so, within forty-eight (48)
hours after notice has been served, the supply of water shall be shut off and not
let on again until all necessary repairs are made, in a manner satisfactory to the
city. (1985 Code, § 24-16)
18-417. Meters. Water meters shall be supplied and installed by the city
in such location and in such manner as shall be determined by the city. There
shall be at least one (1) meter to each consumer, installed under such conditions
as the city may impose. (1985 Code, § 24-17)
18-418. Liability of city for interruption of services, etc. The city
will not be liable for any damage that may result to consumers from the
shutting off of a water main or service pipe for any purpose or from any cause
whatsoever, even in cases where no notice is given and no deduction from water
bills will be made in consequence thereof. (1985 Code, § 24-18)
18-419. Throwing sticks, etc.; injuring, defacing valves, pipes, etc.
No person shall throw into any reservoir or basin, sticks, planks or anything
calculated to pollute the water or clog up the pipes and intakes, or in any way
injure, deface, impair or destroy any gate, valve, pipe or fixture of any kind, or
any part of any engine house, reservoir, pump, hydrant, fountain, water trough
or any property appertaining to the waterworks system or plant, nor shall any
person, except a member of the fire department or employee of the city
authorized so to do, open or in any way disturb any hydrant, fireplug, gate or
valve or remove or lift the cover of same.1 (1985 Code, § 24-19)
18-420. Monthly billings generally. Each water meter shall be read
monthly and water bills rendered as promptly as may be following respective
readings. A system of billing shall be established by the finance department
commonly known as "cycle billing." All water accounts shall be due and payable
ten (10) days after billing. All accounts unpaid by the due date shall be assessed
a penalty of ten (10) percent of the gross amount of the bill. If the bill has not
been properly paid within ten (10) days after the billing date, the same shall
1State law reference
Injury to or pollution of water storage structures: Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 39-6-1603.
18-72
become delinquent and service shall be discontinued as provided in § 18-216.
Such service shall not be continued again until all delinquent charges and all
penalties shall have been paid. An additional charge of five dollars ($5.00) shall
be made for reinstating service when such delinquent bills are paid. (1985 Code,
§ 24-20)
18-421. Meter rates. The monthly charges made by the water
department of the city to consumers of water, supplied through a meter, shall
be at the following rates to be in effect with all bill calculations beginning
August 1 of FY 2018-2019 and July 1 for FY 2019-2020 for all subsequent fiscal
years:
Inside City FY 2018-2019 Outside City FY 2018-2019
Base Charge Per Bill $4.86 $9.43
Rate 1 0-20,000 gal $3.79/K gallons $7.35/K gallons
Rate 2 20,001-190,000 gal $3.03/K gallons $5.88/K gallons
Rate 3 190,001-490,000 gal $2.73/K gallons $5.30/K gallons
Rate 4 Over 490,000 gal $2.46/K gallons $4.77/K gallons
Inside City FY 2019-2020 Outside City FY 2019-2020
Base Charge Per Bill $5.10 $9.64
Rate 1 0-20,000 gal $3.98/K gallons $7.52/K gallon
Rate 2 20,001-190,000 gal $3.18/K gallons $6.01/K gallon
Rate 3 190,001-490,000 gal $3.87/K gallons $5.42/K gallon
Rate 4 Over 490,000 gal $2.59/K gallons $4.90/K gallon
Inside City 2020-2021 Outside City 2020-2021
Base Charge Per Bill $5.35 $9.84
Rate 1 0-20,000 gal $4.18/K gallons $7.69/K gallon
Rate 2 20,001-190,000 gal $3.34/K gallons $6.15/K gallon
Rate 3 190,001-490,000 gal $3.01/K gallons $5.54/K gallon
Rate 4 Over 490,000 gal $2.72/K gallons $5.01/K gallon
Inside City 2021-2022 Outside City 2021-2022
Base Charge Per Bill $5.62 $10.06
Rate 1 0-20,000 gal $4.39/K gallons $7.86/K gallon
Rate 2 20,001-190,000 gal $3.51/K gallons $6.28/K gallon
18-73
Rate 3 190,001-490,000 gal $3.16/K gallons $5.66/K gallon
Rate 4 Over 490,000 gal $2.85/K gallons $5.10/K gallon
(1985 Code, § 24-21, as amended by Ord. #3896, June 2002, Ord. #4050-04, Oct.
2004, and Ord. #4315-08, June 2008, replaced by Ord. #4452-12, June 2012, and
amended by Ord. #4463-12, Sept. 2012, and Ord. #4662-18, July 2018
Ch11-4-4-19)
18-422. Cutoffs. Every premises to be supplied with city water must be
connected to the street main and have its separate cutoff. All cutoffs are under
the absolute control of the water and sewer department. (1985 Code, § 24-22)
18-423. Connection fees and service charges. Connection fees and
service charges for water connections inside and outside the city shall be as
follows: and the water department shall make no water connections without
having first collected the fees as fixed in this section, in cash:
(1) Fees for tapping (connection) and meter settings to be effective July
1, 2012.
Inside
Corporate
Limits
Outside
Corporate
Limits
5/8" Meter and Connection Charge $750 $1,250
1" Meter and Connection Charge $900 $1,500
1" Fire Service Meter and Connection Charge $950 $1,635
1 1/2" Meter and Connection Charge $1,180 $1,965
2" Meter and Connection Charge $1,360 $2,265
2" Fire Service Meter and Connection Charge $1,555 $2,590
2" Compound Meter and
Connection Charge
$2,395 $3,990
3" Meter and Connection Charge $3,740 $6,235
4" Meter and Connection Charge $6,000 $10,000
6" Meter and Connection Charge $9,550 $15,920
8" Meter and Connection Charge $13,150 $21,920
All connections larger than eight inches (8") to be figured at cost including
labor, materials, and overhead.
The water department of the city reserves the right to change meter size
based on consumption patterns without reimbursement of fees. Connection size
requested is not directly related to meter size. Requested meter and connection
size is subject to review and verification by the water department of the city.
Incorrectly sized meter and connections may be refused at the discretion of the
18-74
Water department director or designee.
(2) Temporary meter installations.
All charges are annual fees per meter based on a calendar year.
Inside
Corporate
Limits
Outside
Corporate
Limits
5/8" Meter Charge $150 $260
3" Meter Charge $325 $500
(3) Private fire protection systems (sprinkler or hydrants) and cost of
metering if required:
Inside Corporate
Limits
Outside Corporate
Limits
Fire Hydrant $2,100 $3,500
3" fire line $2,230
No monthly fee
$3.715
$50.00 monthly fee
4" fire line $2,545
No monthly fee
$4,245
$50.00 monthly fee
6" fire line $2,855
No monthly fee
$4,760
$50.00 monthly fee
8" fire line $3,325
No monthly fee
$5,545
$60.00 monthly fee
10" fire line $3,640
No monthly fee
$6,070
$60.00 monthly fee
12" fire line $4,420
No monthly fee
$7,370
$200.00 monthly fee
(4) Service charges. A service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
will be made for each water tap connection of new service (twelve dollars and
fifty cents ($12.50) for automatic landlord turn-on agreement or fifty dollars
($50.00) for same day service); transfer of service; account name change;
reconnect ion of service following non-payment of bill to include returned checks
and meter checks (no charge for first two (2) during last twelve (12) months). A
service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be added to an account turned
18-75
over to a collection agency. A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) service fee will be
charged for tampering with water meters, locks, or attempting illegal hook-ups.
(5) Discontinuance of service upon failure to pay bills, etc. Payments
of such bills as presented under §§ 18-421 and 18-423 shall be enforced by
discontinuing either the water service, the sewer service, or both except to the
extent that the city cannot do so without impairment of the contract rights
vested in the holders of the outstanding bonds payable from the revenues of the
water and sewer systems of the city. (Ord. #3896, June 2002, as amended by
Ord. #4050-04, Oct. 2004, and Ord. #4315-08, June 2008, and replaced by
Ord. #4452-12, June 2012, and Ord. #4662-18, July 2018 Ch11_4-4-19)
18-76
CHAPTER 5
CONNECTIONS WITH PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
SECTION
18-501. Definitions.
18-502. Penalties.
18-503. City to comply with state regulations.
18-504. Cross-connections, generally.
18-505. Statement concerning cross-connections, etc.
18-506. Inspection for cross-connections.
18-507. Right of entry.
18-508. Compliance.
18-509. Backflow device, installation.
18-510. Notice of unsafe water.
18-501. Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Auxiliary intake." Any piping, connection or other device whereby
water may be secured from a source other than that normally used.
(2) "Bypass." Any system of piping or other arrangement, whereby the
water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.
(3) "Cross connection." Any physical arrangement whereby a public
water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply
system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other
device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other
waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections or swivel or change-over
devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered
to be cross connections.
(4) "Interconnection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit, pool, storage reservoir or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
(5) "Person." Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
(6) "Public water supply." The water works system furnishing water
to Johnson City for general use and which supply is recognized as the public
18-77
water supply by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment.1 (1985
Code, § 24-40)
18-502. Penalties. Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00), and each day of continued violation after
conviction shall constitute a separate offense. Where cross-connections,
interconnections, auxiliary intakes or bypasses are found that constitute an
extreme hazard of immediate concern of contaminating the public water system,
the director of water and sewer services shall require that immediate corrective
action be taken to eliminate the threat to the public water system. Immediate
steps shall be taken to disconnect the public water supply from the on-site
piping system unless the imminent hazard(s) is corrected immediately. If
necessary, water service shall be discontinued (following legal notification) for
failure to maintain backflow prevention devices in proper working order.
Likewise the removal, bypassing or altering of the protective device(s) or the
installation thereof so as to render the device(s) ineffective shall constitute
grounds for discontinuance of water service. Water service to such premises
shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such
conditions or defects to the satisfaction of the director of water and sewer
services. (1985 Code, § 24-41)
18-503. City to comply with state regulations. The city public water
supply is to comply with Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 68-13-703 and
68-13-711(6), as well as the rules and regulations for public water supplies,
legally adopted in accordance with this code, which pertain to cross-connection,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses and interconnections, and establish an effective,
ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. (1985 Code, § 24-42)
18-504. Cross-connections, generally. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection
to be made, or allow one to exist, for any purpose whatsoever unless the
construction and operation of same has been approved by the Tennessee
Department of Health and Environment, and the operation of such crossconnection,
auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection is at all times under the
direct supervision of the city director of water and sewer services. (1985 Code,
§ 24-43)
1State law reference
Definitions for Tennessee Safe Drinking Water Act of 1983: Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 68-13-703.
18-78
18-505. Statement concerning cross-connections, etc. Any person
whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who
also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water
in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored
therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the director of
water and sewer services a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or
unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections.
Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross-connection,
auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises.
(1985 Code, § 24-44)
18-506. Inspection for cross-connections. The water and sewer
department shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the
public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are
deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the director of water
and sewer services of the city and as approved by the Tennessee Department of
Health and Environment. (1985 Code, § 24-45)
18-507. Right of entry. The director of water and sewer services of the
city or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter, at any
reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city water supply
for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for crossconnections,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. On request, the
owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access,
when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
(1985 Code, § 24-46)
18-508. Compliance. Any person who now has cross-connections,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall immediately, upon notice, comply with the provisions of this
chapter within the time designated to complete the work by the director of water
and sewer services of the city. (1985 Code, § 24-47)
18-509. Backflow device, installation. (1) Where the nature of use
of the water supplied a premises by the water and sewer department is such
that it is deemed:
(a) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation;
(b) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is
not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his
designated representative, that the water use and protective features of
18-79
the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability
of the water supply;
(c) That the nature and mode of operation within any premises
are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; or
(d) That there is a likelihood that protective measures may be
subverted, altered or disconnected;
the director of water and sewer services of the city, or his designated
representative, shall require the use of an unapproved protective device on the
service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may
originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective device
shall be a reduced-pressure-zone-type backflow preventer approved by the
Tennessee Department of Health and Environment as to manufacture, model
and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be
approved by said director prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria
set forth by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment. The
installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
(2) The water and sewer department shall have the right to inspect
and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary
by the director or his designated representative. Water service shall not be
disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the
premises.
(3) Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal
operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be
provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair
the protective device or devices. Where only one (1) unit is installed and the
continuance of service is critical, the director shall notify, in writing, the
occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for
a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water system
shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs, the costs of which
shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be
made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the director of water and sewer
services of the city. (1985 Code, § 24-48)
18-510. Notice of unsafe water. The potable water supply made
available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected
from possible contamination as specified in this chapter. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: "Water
unsafe for drinking." The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters, one
(1) inch high, located on a red background. (1985 Code, § 24-49)
18-80
CHAPTER 6
ADJUSTMENTS TO BILLS
SECTION
18-601. City manager authorized to make adjustments to water and sewer bills.
18-601. City manager authorized to make adjustments to water
and sewer bills. The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized, acting
in his or her sound discretion, to make or cause to be made adjustments to any
water and sewer service bill which may be owed to the aforesaid city or its
regional utility system, with said adjustments to be made in accordance with a
policy which shall be formulated in writing prior to any said adjustment, and
which policy shall be adopted by the board of commissioners by resolution.
(Ord. #3454, Jan. 1997)
18-81
CHAPTER 7
ILLICIT DISCHARGE ORDINANCE
SECTION
18-701. Purpose.
18-702. Definitions.
18-703. Illicit discharges.
18-704. Elimination of discharges or connections.
18-705. Notification of spills.
18-706. Enforcement.
18-701. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to:
(1) Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City of
Johnson City and the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's storm water
system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into
which the storm water outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
(2) Maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into
which storm water runoff flows, including without limitation, lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, and wetlands.
(3) Enable the City of Johnson City to comply with the National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable
regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for storm water discharges. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec.
2004)
18-702. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
The word "may" is permissive.
(1) "Best Management Practices (BMP)." Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage, or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
(2) "City." The City of Johnson City, TN.
(3) "Contaminant." Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter in water.
(4) "Director." The director of public works of the city or his/her
designee, who is responsible for the implementation of the provisions of this
ordinance.
18-82
(5) "Discharge." To dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump,
leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured,
injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct
or indirect entry of any non-storm water solid or liquid matter into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
(6) "Illicit connections." Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate storm water system whether or not such connections result
in discharges into that system.
(7) "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)." The conveyances
owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of
storm water, including but not limited to, the roads and streets and their
drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and
storm drains.
(8) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit." A permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342.
(9) "Pollutant." Sewage, industrial wastes, other wastes or materials
(liquids or solids).
(10) "Storm water runoff (also called storm water)." That portion of the
precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
(11) "Surface water." Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds
created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other
water courses, lakes and reservoirs.
(12) "TDEC." The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation.
(13) "Waters or Waters of the State." Any and all water, public or
private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within,
flow through or border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof except those
bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in
single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec. 2004)
18-703. Illicit discharges. (1) Applicability. This section shall apply
to any discharge entering the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
(2) Prohibition of illicit discharges. (a) No person shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system
any discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water. The
commencement, conduct, or continuance of any non-storm water
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
(i) Exceptions. Uncontaminated discharges from the following
sources are permitted:
(A) Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable
water or water from a natural surface water source;
18-83
(B) Diverted stream flows permitted by the State of
Tennessee;
(C) Rising ground water;
(D) Groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40
CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;
(E) Pumped ground water;
(F) Foundation or footing drains;
(G) Water discharged from crawl space pumps;
(H) Air conditioning condensate;
(I) Springs;
(J) Individual, residential washing of vehicles;
(K) Flows from natural riparian habitat or wetlands;
(L) Swimming pools (if dechlorinated--typically less than
one part per million chlorine);
(M) Street wash waters resulting from normal street
cleaning and de-icing operations;
(N) Discharges resulting from emergency fire fighting
activities;
(O) Discharges pursuant to a valid and effective NPDES
permit issued by the State of Tennessee;
(P) Discharges necessary to protect public health and
safety, as specified in writing by the city; and
(Q) Dye testing permitted by the city; and
(R) Emergency public utility repair activities for breaks
in water and sewer lines, discharges from water line flushing and
blow-offs.
(3) Prohibition of illicit connections. (a) The construction, use,
maintenance, continued existence of illicit connections to the separate
municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec. 2004)
18-704. Elimination of discharges or connections. (1) Any person
responsible for a property or premises, including but not limited to an owner,
operator, or occupant thereof, which is, or may be, the source of any illicit
discharge, may be required to implement, at that person's expense, the best
management practices necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, including but
not limited to an owner, operator, or occupant thereof, where an illicit
connection is located may be required, at that person's expense, to eliminate the
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
18-84
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to
the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec. 2004)
18-705. Notification of spills. (1) Notwithstanding any other
requirement of law, as soon as any person who is responsible for a facility or
operation (including the owner, occupant, or operator thereof), or is responsible
for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known
or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water and/or the municipal
separate storm water system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
(2) In the event of a release of hazardous materials, the person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. The person shall notify the director in person or
by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
(3) In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person
shall notify the director in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the
next business day.
(4) Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the director within three (3) business
days of the telephone notice.
(5) If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner, occupant, or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least five (5) years. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec. 2004)
18-706. Enforcement. (1) Authority. (a) The director or his/her
designee(s) shall have the authority to issue notices of violation and
citations.
(b) The director may require reports or records from the
permittee or person responsible for eliminating the illicit discharge or
illicit connection to insure compliance.
(2) Inspections by the city. (a) The director or his/her designee shall
have the right to enter onto private properties for the purposes of
investigating a suspected violation of this ordinance.
(b) The owner/operator of any facility, operation, or residence
where an illicit discharge or illicit connection is known or suspected shall
allow the director or his/her authorized representative to have access to
and copy at reasonable times, any applicable state or federal permits
related to the suspected or known discharge or connection, or any reports
or records kept as a condition of this ordinance.
18-85
(c) Failure on the part of an owner or operator to allow such
inspections by the director or his/her designee shall be cause for the
issuance of a stop work order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy,
and/or civil penalties.
(3) Enforcement, penalties and liability. (a) Any person in violation
of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty, a stop work order,
withholding of a certificate of occupancy, and civil damages.
(b) In order to gain compliance, the director may notify other
city departments to deny service to the property until the site, facility,
activity and/or residence has been brought into compliance with this
ordinance.
(c) Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance may
also be liable to the city in a civil action for damages.
(d) The remedies provided for in this ordinance are cumulative
and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided
by law.
(e) Neither the approval of a discharge under the provisions of
this ordinance nor compliance with the conditions of such approval shall
relieve any person of responsibility for damage to other persons or
property or impose any liability upon the city for damage to other persons
or property.
(f) The City of Johnson City, pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 68-221-1106, hereby declares that any person who violates
this ordinance is subject to a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) or more than five thousand dollars ($5000.00) per day for each
day of violations. Each day of violation constitutes a separate violation.
(g) In assessing a civil penalty, the following factors may be
considered:
(i) The harm done to the public health or the
environment;
(ii) Whether or not the civil penalty imposed will be a
substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(iii) The economic benefit gained by the violator from the
violation;
(iv) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to
remedy this violation;
(v) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs
incurred by the City of Johnson City;
(vi) Any equities of the situation which outweigh the
benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(h) The City of Johnson City may also assess damages
proximately caused by the violator to the city which may include any
reasonable expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing violations of
this ordinance or any actual damages caused by the violation.
18-86
(i) Appeal from any assessment of civil penalty or damages or
both shall be to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City.
A written petition for review of such damage assessment or civil penalty
shall be filed by the aggrieved party in the office of the City Manager of
the City of Johnson City within thirty (30) days after the damage
assessment or civil penalty is served upon the violator either personally
or by certified mail, or return receipt requested. Failure on part of the
violator to file a petition for appeal in the office of the City Manager of the
City of Johnson City shall be deemed consent to the damage assessment
or civil penalty and shall become final.
(j) Whenever any damage assessment or civil penalty has
become final because of a violator's failure to appeal the city's damage
assessment or civil penalty, the city may apply to the chancery court for
a judgment and seek execution of the same. (Ord. #4063-04, Dec. 2004)
18-87
CHAPTER 8
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE
SECTION
18-801. Purpose.
18-802. Definitions.
18-803. General requirements.
18-804. Erosion and sediment control design standards.
18-805. Erosion and sediment control plans.
18-806. Compliance.
18-801. Purpose. The purposes of this ordinance are to:
(1) Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City of
Johnson City and the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the city, by preventing soil erosion and sediment discharges and construction
related wastes that occur as a result of residential, commercial, industrial, and
other construction related activities from reaching the city's storm water system.
(2) Maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into
which storm water runoff flows, including without limitation, lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, and wetlands.
(3) Comply with the State of Tennessee National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) general permit for discharges from small
municipal separate storm sewer systems. (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as replaced
by Ord. #4603-16, June 2016)
18-802. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not
discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
(1) "Best Management Practices (BMP)." Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage, or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
(2) "City." The City of Johnson City, Tennessee.
(3) "Clearing." In the definition of discharges associated with
construction activity, clearing, grading, and excavation do not refer to clearing
of vegetation along existing or new roadways, highways, dams or power lines for
sight distance or other maintenance and/or safety concerns, or cold planing,
milling, and/or removal of concrete and/or bituminous asphalt roadway
pavement surfaces. Clearing typically refers to the removal of vegetation and
disturbance of soil prior to grading or excavation in anticipation of construction
18-88
activities. Clearing may also refer to wide area land disturbance in anticipation
of non-construction activities; for instance, cleared forested land in order to
convert forest land to pasture for wildlife management purposes.
(4) "Commencement of construction or commencement of land
disturbing activities." The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing,
grading or excavating activities or other construction activities.
(5) "Construction." Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such
facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used,
including preparation work at such premises.
(6) "Construction related wastes." Refuse or unused materials that
result from construction activities. Construction related wastes can include, but
are not limited to, unused building and landscaping materials, chemicals, litter,
sanitary waste, and concrete truck washout.
(7) "Construction support activities." Activities such as concrete or
asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material storage areas,
excavated material disposal areas, or borrow areas provided all of the following
are met:
(a) The support activity is primarily related to a construction
site that is covered under a grading permit;
(b) The operator of the support activity is the same as the
operator of the construction site;
(c) The support activity is not a commercial operation serving
multiple unrelated construction projects by different operators;
(d) The support activity does not operate beyond the completion
of the construction activity of the last construction project it supports;
and
(e) Support activities are identified in the erosion and sediment
control plan. The appropriate erosion prevention and sediment controls
and measures applicable to the support activity shall be described in a
comprehensive erosion and sediment control plan covering the discharges
from the support activity areas.
(8) "Development." Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved property including, but not limited to, construction of buildings or
other structures, clearing, dredging, drilling operations, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or storage of equipment or materials.
(9) "Director." The director of public works of the city or his/her
designee, who is responsible for the approval of development and redevelopment
plans, grading permits, and implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
(10) "Erosion." The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice or other agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with
or promoted by man-made activities or effects.
(11) "Erosion and sediment control plan." A written plan required by
this ordinance and prepared in accordance with the Tennessee Construction
General Permit, as amended, that includes, but not limited to, site map(s),
18-89
identification of construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in
the storm water, and a description of measures or practices to control these
pollutants.
(12) "Exceptional Tennessee waters." Surface waters of the State of
Tennessee that satisfy characteristics of exceptional Tennessee waters as listed
chapter 1200-4-3-.06 of the official compilation - Rules and Regulations of the
State of Tennessee.
(13) "Filling." Any deposit or stock-piling of dirt, rock, stumps, or other
natural or man-made solid waste material.
(14) "Grading." Any excavation, filling (including hydraulic fill), or
stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in
its excavated or filled condition.
(15) "Grading permit." A permit issued by the city authorizing the
commencement of land disturbing activities.
(16) "Land disturbing activity." Any activity on a property that results
in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) or the
existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited
to, development, re-development, demolition, construction, reconstruction,
clearing, grading, filling, land transporting, and excavation.
(17) "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)." A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is:
(a) Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county,
parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant
to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial
wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under
State law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian
tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency
under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the state;
(b) Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
(c) Which is not a combined sewer; and
(d) Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(POTW) as defined at 40 CFR §122.2, as amended from time to time.
(18) "Owner or operator." Any party associated with a construction
project that meets either of the following two (2) criteria:
(a) This person or entity has operational or design control over
construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make
modifications to those plans and specifications. This person or entity is
typically the owner or developer of the project or a portion of the project,
and is considered the primary permittee; or
(b) This person or entity has day-to-day operational control of
those activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance
with a storm water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit
18-90
conditions. This person or entity is typically a contractor or commercial
builder who is hired by the primary permittee, and is considered a
secondary permittee.
(19) "Plan." An erosion and sediment control plan, or a small lot erosion
and sediment control plan.
(20) "Priority construction activity." Construction activities that
discharge directly into or immediately upstream from waters the state
recognizes as impaired for siltation or those waters designated as exceptional
Tennessee waters. A property is considered to have a direct discharge if storm
water runoff from the property does not cross any other property before entering
the water of the state.
(21) "Sediment." Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
(22) "Small lot erosion and sediment control plan." A plan that is
designed to eliminate and/or reduce erosion and off-site sedimentation from a
site during construction activities, applicable to development and redevelopment
sites that disturb less than one (1) acre and are not part of a larger plan of
development.
(23) "Storm water pollution prevention plan." Document describing how
an owner or operator intends to provide storm water management during land
disturbing or construction activities.
(24) "Subdivision." The division, subdivision, or resubdivision of any lot
or parcel of land as defined in the Subdivision Regulations of the Johnson City
Regional Planning Commission and by the State of Tennessee.
(25) "TDEC." The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation.
(26) "Tennessee construction general permit." A permit issued and
amended by TDEC titled "General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Storm
Water Associated with Construction Activities." State of Tennessee General
Permit No. TNR 100000.
(27) "Transporting." Any moving of earth materials from one (1) place
to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, as authorized on
an approved plan.
(28) "Waters or waters of the state." Any and all water, public or
private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within,
flow through or border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof except those
bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in
single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters. (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as replaced by Ord.
#4603-16, June 2016)
18-803. General requirements. (1) Applicability. (a) Land disturbing,
construction or construction support activities that cause off-site
18-91
sedimentation or sediment discharges to waters of the state shall be in
violation of this ordinance.
(b) No owner or operator of any property within the city shall
commence land-disturbing activities unless he/she has obtained all
applicable permits from state and federal agencies and an erosion and
sediment control plan is submitted to and approved by the director.
(c) For construction resulting in less than one (1) acre of
disturbed area, excluding single family residential construction that is
part of an approved plan for a larger development or sale where best
management practices are continuing to be implemented on site, a small
lot erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to and approved
by the director prior to commencement of any land disturbing activity.
(d) The issuance of a grading permit shall be conditioned upon
the approval of the erosion and sediment control plan by the director. The
city shall serve as the plan approval agency only, and in no instance are
its regulations to be construed as designing erosion and sediment control
or other storm water systems.
(e) No building permit shall be issued until the owner or
operator has obtained a grading permit and is in compliance with the
grading permit, where the same is required by this ordinance.
(f) All land disturbing activities including activities exempted
from plans submittals shall employ adequate erosion and sediment
control best management practices.
(2) Exemptions from plans submittal. (a) The following activities shall
not require submittal and approval of an erosion and sediment control
plan, or small lot erosion and sediment control plan:
(i) Minor land disturbing activities such as home
gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs or maintenance
work;
(ii) Additions or modifications to existing, individual,
single family structures;
(iii) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and
emergency repairs, provided that the land area disturbed shall be
shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of this
regulation;
(iv) Nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use; and
(v) State and federal projects subject to the submission
requirements of TDEC.
(vi) Land disturbances comprising an area smaller than
the smallest lot allowed in the Zoning Code of the City of Johnson
City, Tennessee.
(b) All other provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the
exemptions noted in (2)(a) above. (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as replaced
by Ord. #4603-16, June 2016)
18-92
18-804. Erosion and sediment control design standards.
(1) Adoption of standards. (a) The design, installation, operation and
maintenance of construction site runoff control design standards and best
management practices intended for erosion prevention and the control of
sediment and other construction related wastes and/or pollutants shall
be performed in accordance with the requirements of the Tennessee
construction general permit effective at the time of erosion and sediment
control plan approval. This requirement also applies to erosion and
sediment control plan development and its contents, site inspection and
documentation and reporting. Where the provisions of this section conflict
or overlap with the Tennessee construction general permit, as amended,
and the TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended, the
regulation which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or
requirements shall prevail.
(b) The city adopts as its erosion and sediment control design
standards and best management practices manual the latest TDEC
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. This manual is
incorporated by reference into this ordinance. This manual includes a list
of acceptable BMPs, including the specific design performance criteria
and operation and maintenance requirements for each BMP.
(c) Requirements for BMP design, installation, operation and
maintenance, plan development and contents, site inspection,
documentation and reporting presented in the Tennessee construction
general permit, as amended, and/or the TDEC Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook, as amended, may be updated and expanded upon, at
the discretion of the director, based on improvements in engineering,
science, monitoring, and local maintenance experience.
(d) Erosion and sediment control BMPs that are designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Tennessee
construction general permit, as amended and the BMP criteria presented
in the TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Manual shall be presumed
to meet the minimum water quality performance standards required by
the city.
(e) Additional requirements for discharges into impaired or
exceptional Tennessee waters that are defined in the Tennessee
construction general permit, as amended, shall be implemented for all
priority construction activities. The director has the discretion to require
BMPs that conform to a higher than minimum standard for priority
construction activities, for exceptional Tennessee waters, or where
deemed necessary.
(2) Other guidelines. (a) No solid materials, including building
materials, shall be discharged to waters of the State, except as authorized
by a section 404 permit or Tennessee Aquatic Resource Alteration Permit.
(b) Off-site vehicle tracking of sediments is prohibited.
(c) Dust generation shall be minimized.
18-93
(d) For installation of any waste disposal systems on site, or
sanitary sewer or septic system, the plan shall provide for the necessary
sediment controls. Owners/operators must also comply with applicable
state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system
regulations for such systems to the extent that these are located within
the permitted area.
(e) Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and
functional before commencement of land disturbing activities, and must
be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period.
Temporary measures may be removed at the beginning of the work day,
but must be replaced at the end of the work day or prior to a rain event,
whichever is sooner.
(f) Temporary construction riparian buffer zones shall be
preserved in accordance with the Tennessee construction general permit,
as amended. (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as replaced by Ord. #4603-16,
June 2016)
18-805. Erosion and sediment control plans. (1) Requirements.
(a) The erosion and sediment control plan shall present in detail
the best management practices that will be employed to reduce erosion
and control sedimentation.
(b) The plan shall be sealed in accordance with the Tennessee
construction general permit, as amended.
(c) Best management practices presented in the plan shall
conform to the requirements found in the TDEC Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook, as amended, and shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the TDEC construction general permit.
(d) The plan shall include measures to protect legally protected
state or federally listed threatened or endangered aquatic fauna and/or
critical habitat (if applicable).
(e) The plan submitted shall comply with any additional
requirements set forth in the city's subdivision regulations, zoning
ordinance, or other city ordinances and regulations.
(f) Construction of the site in accordance with the approved
plan must commence within one (1) year from the issue date of the
grading permit, or the grading permit will become null and void and the
plan must be resubmitted for approval.
(2) Plan contents. Erosion and sediment control plans shall include the
components of a storm water pollution prevention plan, as required by the
Tennessee construction general permit, as amended and any other information
deemed necessary by the director.
(3) Small lot erosion and sediment control plan contents.
(a) Requirements:
(i) Land disturbing activities that affect less than one (1)
acre and are not part of a larger common plan of development with
18-94
an approved plan shall submit and obtain approval of a small lot
erosion and sediment control plan prior to obtaining a building
permit.
(ii) The plan shall include the following information:
(A) Address/location of land disturbing activity;
(B) Owner/operator name and contact information;
(C) Building permit application number (if
available);
(D) Locations of streams, wetlands, ponds,
sinkholes, easements, existing drainage structures with
respect to the site;
(E) A description of other construction related
waste controls that are expected to be implemented on-site.
Such details should include, but are not limited to: the
construction/location of vehicle wash pads; litter and waste
materials control; sanitary and chemical waste control, and
concrete truck washout areas.
(F) Approximate disturbed area limits; and
(G) Location of stabilized construction
entrance/egress.
(iii) The small site erosion and sediment control plan will
be included with the building permit and must be followed by the
building permit holder and the owner or operator.
(iv) The director has the discretion to require a fully
engineered erosion and sediment control plan as set forth in
subsection (2). (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as replaced by Ord.
#4603-16, June 2016)
18-806. Compliance. (1) Conformity to approved plan:
(a) The owner or operator is responsible for maintaining
compliance with the approved plan and grading permit.
(b) The approved erosion and sediment control plan shall be
followed during the entire duration of construction at the site;
(c) The director may require reports or records from the
permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan to ensure
compliance.
(d) No land disturbing activity shall be allowed to commence
without prior plan approval by the director.
(e) Priority construction activities shall not commence until the
owner/operator attends a pre-construction meeting with the director.
(2) Amendments to the approved plan: The permittee shall modify and
update the plan in accordance with the requirements of the Tennessee
construction general permit, as amended.
(3) Inspection and maintenance. (a) Maintenance, site assessments,
and inspections of the best management practices shall be implemented
18-95
in the manner specified by the Tennessee construction general permit, as
amended and the TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as
amended, by qualified personnel who are provided by the owner/operator
of the land disturbing activity.
(b) The owner/operator shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner/operator to
achieve compliance with this ordinance. Proper operation and
maintenance requires the operation of backup or auxiliary facilities or
similar systems, installed by an owner/operator only when necessary to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this ordinance.
(c) Any inadequate control measures or control measures in
disrepair shall be replaced or modified, or repaired as necessary, in
accordance with the inspection and maintenance timeframes stated in the
Tennessee general permit, as amended and the maintenance guidance
provided in the TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as
amended.
(d) If sediment escapes the permitted property, the permittee
shall remove off-site accumulations in accordance with the requirements
of the Tennessee construction general permit, as amended.
(e) Records shall be retained in accordance with the Tennessee
construction general permit, as amended.
(4) Inspections by the city. (a) The director or his/her designee shall
have the right to enter onto private properties for the purposes of
conducting unrestricted periodic inspections of all land disturbing
activities to verify compliance with the approved plan or to determine
whether such a plan is necessary.
(b) The director or his/her designee shall have the right to enter
onto private properties for the purposes of investigating a suspected
violation of this ordinance.
(c) Failure on the part of a owner or operator to allow such
inspections by the director or his/her designee shall be cause for the
issuance of a stop work order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy,
and/or civil penalties.
(5) Enforcement, penalties, and liability. (a) Any person failing to have
an approved erosion and sediment control plan prior to starting a land
disturbing activity violates this ordinance.
(b) Any owner or contractor who fails to follow an approved
erosion and sediment control plan shall have violated this ordinance and
shall be subject to a civil penalty, a stop work order, withholding of a
certificate of occupancy, and civil damages.
(c) If sediment escapes the permitted property, off-site
accumulations of sediment that have not reached a stream shall be
removed at a frequency sufficient to minimize offsite impacts. For
example, fugitive sediment that has escaped the construction site and has
18-96
collected in the street must be removed so that it is not subsequently
washed into storm sewers and streams by the next rain or so that it does
not pose a safety hazard to users of public streets. Removal of fugitive
sediments shall be done by the owner/operator at the owner/operator’s
expense. This ordinance does not authorize remediation/restoration of a
stream without consultation with TDEC, nor does it authorize access by
the owner/operator to other private property.
(d) The owner and/or contractor shall allow periodic inspections
by the city of all land disturbing activities. Failure to allow such
inspections shall be considered a failure to follow the approved plan, and
shall be subject to civil penalties, a stop work order, and withholding of
a certificate of occupancy.
(e) In order to gain compliance, the director may notify other
departments to deny service to the property until the site has been
brought into compliance with this ordinance.
(f) Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance may
also be liable to the city in a civil action for damages.
(g) The remedies provided for in this ordinance are cumulative
and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided
by law.
(h) Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this
ordinance nor compliance with the conditions of such plan shall relieve
any person of responsibility for damage to other persons or property or
impose any liability upon the city for damage to other persons or
property.
(i) The City of Johnson City, pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 68-221-1106, hereby declares that any person who violates
this ordinance is subject to a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) or more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each
day of violations. Civil penalties for any person who violates this
ordinance involving property used or to be used solely as a single family
residence, situated or to be situated on one (1) acre or less, shall be not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation
constitutes a separate violation.
(j) In assessing a civil penalty, the following factors may be
considered:
(i) The harm done to the public health or the
environment;
(ii) Whether or not the civil penalty imposed will be a
substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(iii) The economic benefit gained by the violator from the
violation;
(iv) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to
remedy this violation;
18-97
(v) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs
incurred by the City of Johnson City;
(vi) Any equities of the situation which outweigh the
benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(k) The City of Johnson City may also assess damages
proximately caused by the violator to the city which may include any
reasonable expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing violations of
this ordinance or any actual damages caused by the violation.
(l) Appeal from any assessment of civil penalty or damages or
both shall be to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Johnson City.
A written petition for review of such damage assessment or civil penalty
shall be filed by the aggrieved party in the office of the City Manager of
the City of Johnson City within thirty (30) days after the damage
assessment or civil penalty is served upon the violator either personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure on part of the
violator to file a petition for appeal in the office of the City Manager of the
City of Johnson City shall be deemed consent to the damage assessment
or civil penalty and shall become final.
(m) Whenever any damage assessment or civil penalty has
become final because of a violator’s failure to appeal the city's damage
assessment or civil penalty, the city may apply to the chancery court for
a judgment and seek execution of the same. (Ord. #4064-04, Dec. 2004, as
replaced by Ord. #4603-16, June 2016)
18-98
CHAPTER 9
STORMWATER USER FEE
SECTION
18-901. Definitions.
18-902. Establishment of enterprise service area.
18-903. User fee.
18-904. Billing.
18-905. User fee determination.
18-901. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply; words used in the singular shall include the plural, and
the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may"
is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning
given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's
Dictionary.
(1) "Billing period" means the period identified from the first day of the
month to the last day of the month. All bills rendered during a month are for
the period beginning on the first day of the same month and are valid for that
entire month unless otherwise identified. When city water service is
discontinued during a month, the stormwater user fee due for that account shall
be the pro rata portion of the month for which water services were active. When
a developed property that does not receive city water service changes ownership
during a billing period, the account existing on the first day of the billing period
shall be liable for the pro rata portion of the drainage fee for that billing period
from the first day of the billing period until the day the property transaction is
recorded with the Carter County, Sullivan County, or Washington County
register of deeds offices.
(2) "Bonds" means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt
obligations issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction.
(3) "Calendar year" means a twelve (12) month period commencing on
the first day of January of any year.
(4) "Costs of construction" means reasonable costs incurred in
connection with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion
thereof, including, but not limited to, the costs of (1) acquisition of all property,
real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all
rights-of-way and easements therefor, (2) physical construction, installation and
testing, including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and
construction services used in connection therewith, (3) architectural,
engineering, legal and other professional services, (4) insurance premiums taken
out and maintained during construction, to the extent not paid for by a
contractor for construction and installation, (5) any taxes or other charges which
become due during construction, (6) expenses incurred by the city or on its
18-99
behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor
or sub-contractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to
construction, (7) principal of and interest of any bonds, and (8) miscellaneous
expenses incidental thereto.
(5) "Debt service" means, with respect to any particular calendar year
and any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of (i) all interest
payable on such bonds during such calendar year, plus (ii) any principal
installments of such bonds during such calendar year.
(6) "Developed property" means real property other than undisturbed
property and vacant improved property.
(7) "Director" means the director of public works.
(8) "Dwelling unit" means a singular unit or apartment providing
complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
(9) "Exempt property" means public rights of way, public streets,
public alleys and public sidewalks.
(10) "Extension and replacement" means costs of extensions, additions
and capital improvements to, or the renewal and replacement of capital assets
of, or purchasing and installing new equipment for, the system, or land
acquisitions for the system and any related costs thereto, or paying
extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction, or
any other expenses which are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt
service.
(11) "Impervious area" means the number of square feet of hard
surfaced areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into soil
mantle, as it entered under natural conditions as undisturbed property, and/or
causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate
of flow from that present under natural conditions as undisturbed property,
including, but not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveway,
sidewalks, pavement and athletic courts.
(12) "Multi-family residential property" means property designed to
accommodate more than one residence, including multi-family residential
structures, townhouses/condominiums, mobile homes and high rise multi-family
structures.
(13) "Multi-family residential structure" means a residential structure
designed with two or more dwelling units to accommodate two or more families
or groups of individuals living separately and not sharing the same living space.
(14) "Nonresidential developed property" means developed property
that is not utilized for dwelling units within the city.
(15) "Operating budget" means the annual operating budget adopted by
the city for the succeeding fiscal year.
(16) "Operations and maintenance" means the current expenses, paid
or accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of the system, as
calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice, and includes, without
18-100
limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative
expenses, labor, executive compensation, and cost of materials and supplies used
for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves
for current expenses not annually incurred, but which are such as may
reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with sound accounting
practice.
(17) "Revenues" mean all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other
charges or other income received by the stormwater user fee fund, in connection
with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received
from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any
amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound
accounting practice.
(18) "Single family unit or SFU" means the average impervious area of
a single family detached residential dwelling unit located within the city as
periodically determined and established as provided in this article. The initial
average impervious area is calculated to be three thousand three hundred
fifteen (3,315) square feet.
(19) "SFU rate" means the dollar value periodically determined and
assigned to each SFU as a charge for stormwater services, and expressed as a
dollar value per SFU per month.
(20) "Stormwater management system" or "system" means the existing
stormwater management of the city and all improvements thereto which by this
chapter are constituted as the property and responsibility of the city, to be
operated as an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water, control
discharges necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect,
convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce
flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or
otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system.
(21) "Stormwater user fee" means a fee authorized by ordinance(s)
established topay operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and
debt service.
(22) "Stormwater user fee fund" means the enterprise fund created by
this chapter to operate, maintain and improve the system and for such other
purposes as stated in this chapter.
(23) "Undisturbed property" means real property which has not been
altered from its natural state by grading, dredging, filling, removal of trees and
vegetation or other activities which have disturbed or altered the topography or
soils on the property.
(24) "User fee district" means the area or property within the corporate
limits of Johnson City.
(25) "Vacant improved property" means vacant property which is, or
could reasonably be, served by any subdivision improvements that allow egress.
(as added by Ord. #4226-06, Jan. 2007)
18-101
18-902. Establishment of enterprise service area. The city finds,
determines, and declares it to be conducive to the health, welfare, safety and
convenience of the city and its residents that a stormwater service area be
established within the city. Consequently, pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 68-221-1101 through 68-221-1113, a stormwater enterprise fund,
to be known as the Johnson City Stormwater Enterprise Fund, is established,
and it is ordained and declared that the city limits shall be and constitute the
stormwater enterprise fund service area, and that the enterprise shall comprise
and include elements of the city's stormwater drainage and flood protection
systems which provide for the collection, treatment and disposal of stormwater,
surface water, and groundwater. It is further found, determined, and declared
that the elements of the stormwater enterprise fund are of benefit and provide
services to all real properties within the incorporated city limits, including
property not directly served by the stormwater drainage system, and that such
benefits and services may include but are not limited to the provision of
adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of
stormwater; the reduction of hazard to property and life resulting from
stormwater runoff and flooding; improvement in general health and welfare
through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions and flooding; and
improvement to the water quality in the stormwater and surface water system
and its receiving waters.
It is further determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, welfare, safety and convenience of the city and
its residents that charges to be levied upon and collected from the owners or
occupants of all lots, parcels of real estate, and buildings that discharge
stormwater (surface or subsurface waters), directly or indirectly, to the city
stormwater drainage system, and that the proceeds of such charges so derived
be used for the purposes of operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and
debt service for construction of stormwater drainage and flood protection
improvements comprising the stormwater enterprise fund. (as added by
Ord. #4226-06, Jan. 2007)
18-903. User fee. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, each and
every residential developed property and nonresidential developed property,
other than exempt property, within the corporate limits of the city, and the
owners and non-owner users thereof, have imposed upon them a stormwater
user fee. In the event the owner and non-owner users of a particular property
are not the same, the liability for each the owner and non-owner user for the
user fee attributable to that property shall be joint and several. The stormwater
user fee shall be a monthly or a regular interval service charge and shall be
determined by the provisions of this chapter and the SFU and SFU rate which
shall be established and changed from time to time by the board of
commissioners.
18-102
(1) Single family detached residential property. The stormwater fee
for a single family detached residential property shall be the following
percentage of the SFU rate:
Impervious Area of the Property Percentage of SFU Rate
(square feet)
1690 or less 51 percent
1691 to 5574 100 percent
5575 or more 168 percent
(2) Multi-family residential property. The stormwater fee for a
non-single family detached residential property shall be seventy-one (71) percent
of the SFU rate multiplied by the number of dwelling units on the property:
(3) Non-residential property. The stormwater fee for nonresidential
properties shall be the SFU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by
dividing the total impervious area of a nonresidential property by the number
of square feet associated with 1 SFU, or three thousand three hundred fifteen
(3315) square feet. The minimum fee for any developed nonresidential property
will be equal to 1 SFU rate. (as added by Ord. #4226-06, Jan. 2007)
18-904. Billing. The stormwater user fee for all metered property shall
be billed and collected monthly with the monthly city's services utility bill for
properties within the corporate limits of the city utilizing city utilities. For all
properties not utilizing other city utilities, the stormwater user fee shall be
billed and collected separately. All such bills for stormwater user fees shall be
rendered monthly by Johnson City. The stormwater user fee for those
properties utilizing city utilities is part of a consolidated statement for utility
customers which are generally paid by a single payment. The stormwater user
fee for unmetered property shall be billed at regular intervals. All bills for
stormwater user fees shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules
and regulations of Johnson City pertaining to the collection of the stormwater
user fees. (as added by Ord. #4226-06, Jan. 2007)
18-905. User fee determination. There is hereby established the
following uniform schedule of rates for the services and use of facilities of the
stormwater management system by the owner, tenant, or occupant of the
premises using the services and facilities of said system:
(1) Periodically, the board of commissioners, upon recommendation of
the director, shall, by resolution, establish reasonable rates for stormwater
management systems for each single family unit (SFU): Each single family unit
shall be billed at a flat fee established by the board of commissioners for an
SFU. A single family unit is hereby defined as the statistical average horizontal
impervious area of detached single family residential units in Johnson City.
18-103
(2) Parcels which are undeveloped may be assessed a stormwater user
fee. The bill shall be determined by dividing the total land area of the property,
in square feet, by the area of an equivalent residential unit times a correction
factor. The correction factor shall be based on the relative volume of runoff from
an undeveloped property and that of a typical single family residence, under
typical hydrologic conditions.
(3) For all nonresidential properties, that are enterprise, business
establishment, building, or other occupancy not covered by subsection (1) and
(2) of this section, the rate shall be computed based on the total impervious area
of the property divided by the average impervious area of a single family
detached residential property times the rate established for a single family unit.
The billing amount shall be updated by the director based on any additions to
the impervious areas as approved through the building permit process.
(4) Any owner or occupant of a property aggrieved by the director's
calculation of the storm water fee or allocation among users as provided in this
section may appeal such determination to the director.
(5) Procedures and policies associated with credits and/or adjustments
to the storm water fee are set forth in the document entitled Stormwater
Management Utility Adjustment and Credit Manual - City of Johnson City,
Tennessee, as may be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners
by resolution. (as added by Ord. #4226-06, Jan. 2007)
18-104
CHAPTER 10
UTILITY DEPOSIT POLICY
SECTION
18-1001. Policy statement.
18-1002. Single family residential customer deposits.
18-1003. Multi-unit residential and non-residential.
18-1004. Refund of deposits.
18-1001. Policy statement. A security deposit for utility services -
water, sewer, solid waste, and stormwater - will be collected to ensure that all
bills are paid in full by the due date. The city seeks to protect customers with
good payment histories from the consequences of uncollectible accounts by other
customers. Deposits may be reduced or waived based on credit rating or
payment history with the utility. Security deposits are non-transferable to
another person and cannot be used to pay regular bills. (as added by Ord.
#4558-14, Nov. 2014)
18-1002. Single family residential customer deposits. New and
current residential customers who move within the utilities' service areas will
be subject to this policy as of the time its adoption. Also, customers receiving
service before the implementation of this policy who are cut off for non-payment,
meter tampering, or any other reason will be required to pay the standard
deposit and all appropriate fees for each account before service is restored. The
standard deposit will be approximately double the average monthly bill of
services provided. The reduced deposit will be half the standard deposit (the
equivalent of an average monthly bill). Deposits, if required, will be collected
for each separate account opened by a customer.
(1) Determining the deposit amount. Deposit amounts are based on
charges and rates for the fiscal year in which deposit is made. The full
residential solid waste rate will determine the solid waste component of the
utility deposit. The average residential stormwater rate will determine the
stormwater component of the utility deposit. An average of four thousand eight
hundred (4,800) water/sewer gallons billed per month will be the standard for
determining the water and sewer component of the utility deposit. Current
deposit requirements are published as part of the rates and charges schedule.
(2) Credit rating. The deposit amount (standard, reduced, zero)
collected from new customers is determined by the customer's credit rating from
a contracted rating agency. The rating scale to determine the standard,
reduced, or zero deposit is established by the city. Applicants for service with
rating presenting no credit risk will not be required to pay a deposit. Applicants
with ratings presenting moderate credit risk will be charged the reduced
deposit. Applicants with ratings presenting high credit risk will be charged the
18-105
standard deposit. New applicants for service who decline the option of using a
credit rating to determine the deposit amount will be charged the standard
deposit.
(3) Payment history with the utility. The city reserves the right to
evaluate the payment histories of customers to assess risks. The city's current
billing software provides a credit rating code for each customer based on
payment history:
Credit Rating Codes (The Rating Code)
Code Description
2 Balance paid before or on due date
3 Penalty applied to current bill if not
paid by or on due date
4 Next bill printed with current amount
plus previous bill with penalty
5 Penalty applied to current bill. Total
bill includes current bill plus penalty
and previous bill plus penalty
6 Appeared on cut off list for nonpayment
of previous two bills
including penalties
7 Next bill printed with current amount
plus previous two bills with penalties
(It is very rare that a customer will get
a third bill without having paid the
previous two bills, for example,
customers who have set up pay plans.)
8 Appeared on cut off list for nonpayment
of three previous bills (very
rare)
9 Bad check returned (entered through
returned check option in cash receipts)
Current customers who move within the service area, or seek new or additional
utility services, will be subject to this policy. The rating code will determine the
deposit amount to be collected from the customer. Current customers will not
have their credit checked through the contracted credit rating service.
Customers with credit rating code "2" will not be charged a deposit. Customers
18-106
with credit rating code "3" or "4" will be charged the reduced deposit. Customers
with credit rating code "5" and higher will be charged the standard deposit.
Current customers must be established for twelve (12) months for consideration
of payment history. Current customers established for less than twelve (12)
months will be considered new customers and subject to the provisions set for
tin subsection (2) above.
(4) Future payment of deposits. Although deposits may be reduced or
waived during the application process due to good credit or good payment
history, the city shall require the customer to make a deposit or deposits in such
amounts that will bring the deposit(s) to the standard deposit level should the
customer's utility account become delinquent and cut off for non-payment. (as
added by Ord. #4558-14, Nov. 2014)
18-1003. Multi-unit residential and non-residential. Deposits may
be required for multi-unit residential (master metered) and non-residential
customers who have a history of being disconnected. Deposit amounts will be
determined on an individual basis based on customer history and usage
patterns. (as added by Ord. #4558-14, Nov. 2014)
18-1004. Refund of deposits. When service is terminated, unused
security deposits will be refunded with interest at the same rate applicable to
the city's account in which the security deposit is held. The city may deduct
such amount from the deposit(s) to offset any outstanding balance prior to the
refund of the deposit. A deposit will not be refunded if a customer has another
utility account with a balance owed to the city. (as added by Ord. #4558-14,
Nov. 2014)
19-1
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS1
CHAPTER
1. GAS.
CHAPTER 1
GAS
SECTION
19-101. To be furnished under franchise.
19-101. To be furnished under franchise. Gas service shall be
furnished for the municipality and its inhabitants under such franchise as the
governing body shall grant. The rights, powers, duties, and obligations of the
municipality, its inhabitants, and the grantee of the franchise shall be clearly
stated in the written franchise agreement which shall be binding on all parties
concerned.2
1Municipal code reference
Electrical code: title 12.
Gas code: title 12.
2See Ord. #2726, July 1988, and Ord. #3511, Aug. 1997, of record in
the office of the city recorder.
20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. HELICOPTERS.
2. PARKS AND RECREATION--MISCELLANEOUS.
3. PARKS AND RECREATION--PERMITS.
4. PARKS AND RECREATION--REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
5. PARKS AND RECREATION-- PICNIC AREAS.
6. PARKS AND RECREATION--TRAFFIC.
7. PARKS AND RECREATION--RESERVATIONS FOR FACILITIES.
CHAPTER 1
HELICOPTERS1
SECTION
20-101. Definitions.
20-102. Effect on zoning ordinance.
20-103. Landing in unauthorized places.
20-104. Designation of heliports or helistops.
20-101. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Helicopter." Any rotorcraft which depends principally for its
support and motion in the air upon the lift generated by one (1) or more powerdriven
rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis.
(2) "Heliport." An area of land, water or structural surface which is
designed, used or intended to be used for landing and take-off of helicopters, and
any appurtenant areas, including buildings and other facilities such as
refueling, parking, maintenance and repair facilities. The term "heliport"
applies to all such facilities whether public or private.
(3) "Helistop." A minimum facility without the logistical support
provided at a heliport at which helicopters land and take off, including the
touchdown area. Helistops may be at ground level or elevated on a structure.
The term "helistop" applies to all such minimum facilities whether public or
private. (1985 Code, § 6-16)
1State law reference
Heliports: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-8-101, et seq.
20-2
20-102. Effect on zoning ordinance. No provisions of this chapter
shall be construed to alter or amend any provisions of the city's zoning
ordinance, and no use prohibited by the terms of said ordinance shall be deemed
permitted by the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 6-17)
20-103. Landing in unauthorized places. No person, except in an
emergency, or persons involved in the conduct of official business for any law
enforcement agency or military unit of any branch of the armed forces of the
United States of America or the Tennessee National Guard, shall land a
helicopter at any place within the city other than at landing facilities duly
licensed or approved as required by appropriate statute or regulation by the
state and the federal aviation agencies; provided, however, the city manager
may approve temporary landing sites for special purposes so long as said
landing sites are considered safe by the city and the helicopter operator and that
said temporary landing sites are approved in writing. (1985 Code, § 6-18)
20-104. Designation of heliports or helistops. All heliports or
helistops shall comply, where applicable, with the Heliport Design Guide
Advisory Circular dated August 22, 1977, published by the federal aviation
administration, or any authorized amendment or supplement thereto, as well
as any rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of
transportation with respect to minimum standards for heliports or helistops.
If a heliport or helistop shall be located on a building or other structure, it shall
further comply with the building code of the city. (1985 Code, § 6-19)
20-3
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION--MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
20-201. Definitions.
20-202. Purposes.
20-203. Enforcement authority.
20-204. Hours.
20-205. Closed areas.
20-206. Preservation of buildings and other property.
20-207. Protection and preservation of wildlife.
20-201. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in chapters 5-10 of this title shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Director" shall mean the director of the parks and recreation
department.
(2) "Driver" shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle in or on park property, or who is exercising control of a
vehicle or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.
(3) "Motor vehicle" shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled by
means of an internal combustion engine or by electrical power, including but not
limited to, automobiles, buses, emergency vehicles, motorcycles, motorbikes,
motorscooters, school buses, trucks, and tractors.
(4) "Nonresident" shall mean any person not residing within the
boundaries of the city.
(5) "Parking" shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except for the temporary purpose of loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers.
(6) "Park" or "park area" shall mean all parks, playgrounds, recreation
fields and areas, waterways, water areas, marinas, lakes, streams, canals,
lagoons, beaches, and the parking areas, roadways, walkways, paths, and trails
which are provided in connection therewith, and other improvements thereto,
which are owned by the city, and which are under the control of the city for
operation, maintenance, or upkeep.
(7) "Traffic-control devices" shall mean all signs, signals, markings,
and devices placed or erected by authority of the city for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-202. Purposes. The purposes of chapters 5-10 of this title are to
establish rules and regulations governing the operation and use of municipal
park and recreation facilities, including established and designated picnic areas,
public buildings, and shelters devoted to recreation purposes, athletic fields,
20-4
tennis courts, swimming areas, and other similar recreation areas and facilities,
and the parking areas provided in connection therewith, which are owned or
leased by the city, for the end and purpose that the public may obtain the
maximum enjoyment and utilization thereof in accordance with the purposes
intended and that the facilities may be conserved and protected for the public
good. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-203. Enforcement authority. (1) The police bureau or parks and
recreation employees are authorized to enforce the provisions of chapters 5-10
of this title.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required by chapters 5-10 of this title or for any person to fail
to comply with any lawful order given by the police bureau.
(3) Continuous violation of chapters 5-10 of this title shall result in
permanent expulsion from the City of Johnson City's park system and recreation
facilities. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-204. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks
shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information. All park visitors shall vacate the park premises during
posted hours of closing to the public, or as directed by the parks and recreation
director. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-205. Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared
closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval or at regular
or stated intervals (daily or otherwise) or entirely or merely restricted to certain
uses as the director shall find reasonably necessary. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-206. Preservation of buildings and other property. (1) No
person in a park building or upon park grounds shall willfully mark, deface,
disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace, or remove any buildings, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines,
other public utilities or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, placards (whether
temporary or permanent), monuments, stakes, posts, other boundary markers,
or other structures, equipment, facilities, park property or appurtenances
whatsoever.
(2) All persons using restrooms and washrooms shall cooperate in
keeping them in a neat and sanitary condition.
(3) No person shall damage or remove plants, plant materials, trees
or parts thereof, flowers, nuts, or seeds, except that park personnel may be
empowered to make such removals. Scientists and students of botany may be
given special written specimen-collecting permits at the discretion of the parks
and recreation director.
20-5
(4) No person or agency shall make any excavations by tool,
equipment, blasting, or other means, nor shall any person construct or erect any
building or structure of whatever kind, either permanent or temporary, or run
or string any public utilities into, upon, across, or over any park or recreation
lands, unless authorized by permit or easement.
(5) No fires shall be built in any area of any park, except in such areas
as are specifically designed for fire building, nor shall any person dump, throw,
or permit to be scattered, by any means, lighted matches, burning tobacco
products, or any other flammable material within any park area, or any
highway, road, or street abutting thereto.
(6) No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing fences, or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-207. Protection and preservation of wildlife. (1) No person shall
molest, harm, frighten, kill, net, trap, snare, hunt, chase, shoot, throw or propel
by any means missiles at any wildlife creature, be it animal, bird, or reptile
roaming free within a park or in captivity in a zoo cage with the exception of
police bureau personnel acting to protect the general public using a park facility;
nor shall any person remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the nest
or eggs of any reptile or bird, or collect, remove, possess, give away, sell, offer to
sell, buy, offer to buy, or accept as a gift any park wildlife specimen, dead or
alive.
(2) No person shall bring any unleashed animal, reptile, or bird (either
wild or domestic) onto the grounds of any park. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-6
CHAPTER 3
PARKS AND RECREATION--PERMITS
SECTION
20-301. Picnic shelters.
20-302. Overnight camping.
20-303. Special photography.
20-304. Public demonstrations.
20-305. Application.
20-306. Standards for issuance.
20-307. Decision on application; appeals from denial.
20-308. Conditions of permit.
20-301. Picnic shelters. Reservations for picnic shelters and the
appurtenances thereto shall be obtained in advance for a specific time and
duration for each such facility, subject to the conditions and provisions
contained in the picnic shelter permit. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-302. Overnight camping. (1) Organized groups may receive
permission for an overnight camping permit at a specified site in an area of a
park where such designated facilities are available. Permits for overnight
camping will be issued in writing by the director upon request. Permits will be
issued under such special regulations and instructions as may be prescribed by
the director.
(2) Bringing into a park and using for overnight occupancy any house,
trailer, camp trailer, recreation vehicle, camp wagon or any other form of
moveable structure or special vehicle is prohibited, unless written permission
is given by the director. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-303. Special photography. Prior written permission shall be
obtained from the director for the making of still or moving pictures involving
the use of special settings, structures, or the performance of a cast of persons,
whether amateur or professional, or involving the posing of amateur or
professional models. Permission shall be granted only when such activities will
be in full compliance with all laws and regulations of the United States, the
state, the county and the city, and will in no way interfere with the normal use
of park facilities by the general public, unless otherwise permitted by the
department director. The provisions of this section do not in any way restrict
the use of cameras, whether by amateur photographers or professionals, who are
not using such settings, structures, apparatus, casts, or models. (Ord. #3839,
Sept. 2001)
20-304. Public demonstrations. (1) No band procession, military
company, or any company or group with flags, banners, signs (professionally
20-7
made or handmade) and transparencies shall be allowed upon any park or
within any park without written permission of the director. Such permits shall
clearly define the nature of the activity, the limit of its scope and time, and shall
set forth such other restrictions and requirements as the director may deem
necessary.
(2) No entertainment, musical rendition, or exhibition shall be given
in any park or recreation area, and no electronic microphones or amplifying
devices shall be used in connection therewith, except under the direction and
authority of the director, or in the performance of duty by police bureau
personnel.
(3) No person shall initiate, sponsor, organize, promote, conduct, or
advertise a public assembly to be gathered in a park or recreation area, unless
a permit has been obtained from the director. A separate permit shall be
required for each such assembly and the period of time for which the permit is
applicable shall be clearly stated. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-305. Application. All requests for permits required hereunder shall
be made in writing upon an application form, to be furnished by the parks and
recreation department, which shall require the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant proposing or sponsoring the
activity involved;
(2) The type of permit requested and the purposes or activity proposed
thereunder;
(3) The date and hours for which the permit is desired;
(4) The specific park area or recreation facility for which the permit is
requested;
(5) The proposed number of persons who will attend or participate in
the activity involved;
(6) A statement of any special circumstances which are material to the
permit requested;
(7) A detailed description of all equipment to be brought into the park;
(8) Such other relevant information as the director may reasonably
require in regard to the application. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-306. Standards for issuance. If the park area or recreation facility
will be available for use on the date and time requested and is not subject to a
prior reservation, the director may issue a permit under this chapter when the
park use applied for is in accordance with the purpose for which such park
property is designed or intended, and provided that the proposed activity will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the remaining park area or interfere with or endanger public health, welfare, or
safety. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-8
20-307. Decision on application; appeals from denial. (1) Within
five (5) business days after receipt of an application for permit hereunder, the
director shall either approve or deny same and advise the applicant accordingly,
either in person or by mail.
(2) If an applicant is denied, the director at the time of notification
shall apprise the application in writing of the reasons for such refusal. Any
persons aggrieved thereby shall have the right to appeal such adverse decision
in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of such refusal to the city manager,
who shall consider the application under the standards hereinabove set forth,
and without undue delay, sustain, overrule or modify the director's decision.
(Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-308. Conditions of permit. Permits will be issued subject to such
special regulations and instructions as may be prescribed by the director.
Permittees shall be bound by all park rules, regulations, and all applicable law
and ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in the permits.
Permittees shall hold the city harmless from any claims for loss, injury, or
damage to any persons or property whatsoever caused by the negligence of
permittees in the exercise of such permit. The director shall have the authority
to revoke a permit upon finding a violation of any rule, law, or ordinance. (Ord.
#3839, Sept. 2001)
20-9
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION--REGULATIONS GENERALLY
SECTION
20-401. Alcoholic beverages.
20-402. Drunkenness.
20-403. Vending or selling in park areas.
20-404. Domestic animals.
20-405. Bathing, swimming.
20-406. Unattended children upon designated recreation beach areas and pools.
20-407. Shelters.
20-408. Boating.
20-409. Hunting, firearms, toy guns.
20-410. Game and sport activity.
20-401. Alcoholic beverages. See title 8, alcoholic beverages, § 8-101
for the regulation of alcoholic beverages, wine, high alcohol content beer, and
beer in parks. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001, as replaced by Ord. #4596-15, March
2016)
20-402. Drunkenness. No intoxicated person will be permitted entry
to parks and recreation areas, and if discovered therein, that person or persons
shall be subject to arrest by law enforcement personnel. (Ord. #3839, Sept.
2001)
20-403. Vending or selling in park areas. No person, other than the
parks and recreation department or its licensed concessionaires acting by and
under the authority of the city, will offer for sale, rent, or trade any article or
thing, or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transport, sale or display of any
food, drink, article, or merchandise, or engage in any commercial activity for
compensation, or solicit any business within the limits of any park or recreation
area. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-404. Domestic animals. No person shall bring into, or allow to
remain in any park or park area, any unleashed dogs, cats, or other animals
belonging to that person or in his/her possession, or custody. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. The
owner or custodian of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of
excreta deposited by such animal within park areas. By prior written approval
by the parks and recreation director, unleashed animals may be permitted in
any park or park area. Provided that animal remains under the control of the
person bringing that animal into any park or park area for a special event.
(Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-10
20-405. Bathing, swimming. (1) No person, regardless of age, sex, or
manner of dress, shall swim, scuba dive, wade or bathe in waters or waterways
in or adjacent to any park, other than such places as are provided for such
activities, and in compliance with the rules of these areas, as to hours of the day
and safety limitations for such use.
(2) Parks and recreation personnel, police department officer(s), and
other appropriately designated personnel shall have the authority to order
persons in and out of the water as conditions permit relative to the welfare,
health, and safety of the public. All orders issued by any parks and recreation
personnel and police bureau officer(s) shall be obeyed. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-406. Unattended children upon designated recreation beach
areas and pools. It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian, or other
person having the care and custody of a child twelve (12) years of age or under
to permit such child at any time to be in or upon the premises of the designated
recreation beach areas or pool, unless the child is accompanied by his/her
parent, legal guardian, or other person 16 years of age or over having the care
and custody of the child. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-407. Shelters. No person shall erect, or cause to be erected, any tent,
shelter, or structure on or in any designated recreation, bathing, or wading area
in such a manner that a guy wire, rope, extension, brace or support is connected
or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock, earth,
or other object, unless permitted by the department director. (Ord. #3839, Sept.
2001)
20-408. Boating. (1) No person shall bring into or operate in any park
property, waterway, bay, lagoon, lake, canal, river, pond or slough, other than
those in place designated for such use or purposes in accordance with Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-10-209, Rules and Regulations. This references uniform
regulations governing the numbering, the safety equipment, and the operation
of vessels subject to this chapter so that any such vessel complying therein may
be operated with equal freedom, or under similar requirements, upon all the
waters of Tennessee. This section is held in strict conformity with city, state,
and federal law, any boat, yacht, cruiser, canoe, raft, or other watercraft, except
toys too small for human occupancy.
(2) No motor boats shall be operated on park waters, unless equipped
in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-10-209, Rules and
Regulations. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-409. Hunting, firearms, toy guns. (1) No person shall carry, use,
or possess firearms of any description, air rifles or pistols, spear guns, spring
guns, bows and arrows, or any other form of weapon whether real or merely
20-11
replicas or toys in a park area, with the exception of personnel of the Johnson
City Police Bureau acting or performing in the line of duty.
(2) No hunting, trapping, or pursuit of wildlife by any means or
methods whatsoever shall be permitted on or in any park area, unless
specifically designated from time to time by the city manager.
(3) The following verbiage must be posted at all park entrances:
Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-17-1359, the owner/operator of this
property has banned weapons on this property, or within this building or this
portion of this building. Failure to comply with this prohibition is punishable
as a criminal act under state law and may subject the violator to a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The exception to this posting is law
enforcement personnel performing their duties. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-410. Game and sport activity. No person shall play or engage or
participate in any game, sport, or recreation activity upon property used,
maintained, or occupied by the city at any time, when there is posted on such
property in a reasonably conspicuous place and manner, an appropriately
worded sign prohibiting any such game, sport, or recreation activity. (Ord.
#3839, Sept. 2001)
20-12
CHAPTER 5
PARKS AND RECREATION--PICNIC AREAS
SECTION
20-501. Food preparation and cooking.
20-502. Regulation and control.
20-503. Financial arrangements for picnics.
20-501. Food preparation and cooking. (1) No person shall build,
light or cause to be lighted any fire upon the ground or upon any other surface
in any area except as specifically designated in an approved grill, stove,
fireplace, or other suitable container, nor shall any person tending or starting
a fire leave the area without completely extinguishing the fire.
(2) No person shall use a grill or other device in such a manner as to
burn, char, mar, or blemish any bench, table, or any other object of park
property. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-502. Regulation and control. The director and the parks and
recreation department employees will regulate activities in picnic areas when
necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort
and convenience of all. If the facilities are crowded, persons holding activities
in any park picnic area, building or structure shall avoid using same to the
exclusion of others for an unreasonable time, as determined in the sole
discretion of parks and recreation management. Use of individual fireplaces,
grills, tables, and benches shall be on a first come, first served basis. (Ord.
#3839, Sept. 2001)
20-503. Financial arrangements for picnics. Financial
arrangements for payment for any picnics which are held in a park, on a
reserved basis or otherwise, shall be made in advance through the department's
administrative office. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-13
CHAPTER 6
PARKS AND RECREATION--TRAFFIC
SECTION
20-601. State and local traffic regulations apply.
20-602. Obedience to traffic signs.
20-603. Enforcement of traffic regulations.
20-604. Use of vehicles.
20-605. Speed of vehicles.
20-606. Vehicles confined to designated areas.
20-607. Parking regulations.
20-608. Parking during authorized hours.
20-601. State and local traffic regulations apply. The provisions of
the state statutes governing and regulating the operation, maintenance, and
control of motor vehicles and the traffic ordinances already contained in the city
code are adopted by reference into this chapter and shall apply uniformly to and
within the confines of all parks and recreation facility areas, roadways, drives,
and parking areas appurtenant thereto. All persons within the confines of park
and recreation facility areas shall at all times fully comply with all such motor
vehicle statutes and ordinances. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-602. Obedience to traffic signs. All persons shall obey all traffic
signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking and all other
signs posted for proper control of traffic or for the safety of persons and property.
(Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-603. Enforcement of traffic regulations. All persons shall obey
all traffic officers and parks and recreation employees, who are authorized to
direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks or in the highways,
streets, or roads immediately adjacent thereto. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-604. Use of vehicles. (1) No operator of a vehicle shall tow another
vehicle on park roads, except when the towing vehicle is used in transporting a
boat into a marina/dock areas or other designated area, or when necessary to
remove a disabled vehicle, or in the towing of motorized bikes or special event
trailers, or as otherwise permitted by the director, or by the chief of police.
(2) No person shall change any parts of or repair, wash, or grease a
vehicle on any park roadway, parkway, driveway, parking lot or other park
property, except as necessary to remove a disabled vehicle.
(3) All disabled vehicles not removed from park property within
twenty-four (24) hours shall be subject to citation and removal by the city and
20-14
impounded until such time as redeemed at the owner's expense. (Ord. #3839,
Sept. 2001)
20-605. Speed of vehicles. No person shall operate or drive a vehicle
in any park area at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour, except upon
such road as the city manager may designate by posted signs for speedier travel.
(Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-606. Vehicles confined to designated areas. No person shall drive
any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads, designated parking areas,
or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as travel or
parking areas by the director, or in cooperation with the police bureau
operations or as directed by the chief of police. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-607. Parking regulations. No person shall park a vehicle in other
than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in
accordance with the posted directions and with the instructions of any attendant
who may be present. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-608. Parking during authorized hours. No vehicles shall park or
remain in a parking area established in conjunction with a park and recreation
facility beyond the hours of operation established for the facility unless
otherwise posted. Operators of vehicles having mechanical breakdowns or
operational failures shall immediately advise the traffic officers or appropriate
parks and recreation employees of such circumstances and shall take further
appropriate action necessary to insure that the vehicle will be removed from the
parking area within twenty-four (24) hours. No vehicle shall be permitted to
remain in the parking areas after the closing hours thereof, unless the express
permission of the director is first obtained. Vehicles in violation hereof shall be
subject to citation and removal by the city and impounded until such time as
redeemed at the owner's expense. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-15
CHAPTER 7
PARKS AND RECREATION--RESERVATIONS FOR FACILITIES
SECTION
20-701. Definitions.
20-702. Use of community facilities.
20-703. Applications.
20-704. Penalty.
20-701. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Civic, educational, or community service" shall mean any group
primarily devoted to the advancement of civic, educational or community service
purposes.
(2) "Nonresident civic, educational, or community service group" shall
mean a group primarily devoted to the advancement of civic, educational, or
community service purposes whose current membership as of thirty (30) days
prior to the date on which facility is requested to be used is comprised of less
than seventy (70) percent of citizens of the city.
(3) "Resident civic, educational or community service group" shall
mean a group primarily devoted to the advancement of civic, educational, or
community service purposes, whose current membership as of thirty (30) days
prior to the date on which the facility is requested to be used is comprised of
more than seventy (70) percent of citizens of the city. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-702. Use of community facilities. The director may permit the use
of community facilities on a priority basis by civic, educational, or community
service groups, provided that such activities will not interfere with the
utilization of such facilities by the city for its own programs. The priority for
such uses shall be as set forth in this section. In the event of a conflict between
priorities, the final determination shall be made by the city manager.
First priority shall be given, on a space-available basis, to the activities
of resident(s) and resident civic, educational, or community service groups
providing recreation activities that complement the recreation program of the
city as determined or permitted by the department director.
Second priority will be given, on a space-available basis, to the activities
of nonresident and nonresidents civic, educational, or community service groups,
providing recreational activities, that complement the recreation program of the
city as determined or permitted by the department director. (Ord. #3839, Sept.
2001)
20-703. Applications. Facilities may be reserved and used upon an
application for use on a specific date. Such application shall be filed with the
20-16
director and signed by the president or chairperson of the organization. The
application shall state the purpose for which use of the park facility is
requested, whether admission fees and charges shall be made, and state the
name of the organization's current president, which shall show on its face the
number of members who reside within the city and the number of residents who
do not reside within the city. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)
20-704. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of chapters
5-10 of this title, upon being found guilty, shall be punished according to law,
pursuant to the general penalty provisions of the code of the City of Johnson
City. (Ord. #3839, Sept. 2001)


ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF JOHNSON CITY, TENNESSEE 
Title 14 Chapter 2  
of the Johnson City Municipal Code 
? 
? 
? 
? 
Published by Authority of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee 
(Republished 2018) 
? 
? 
? 
? 
Adopted by Ordinance No. 1925  
April 20, 1972 
? 
? 
 


CURRENT OFFICIALS 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF JOHNSON CITY, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
Jenny Brock, Mayor 
Joe Wise, Vice Mayor 
Larry Calhoun 
Todd Fowler 
John Hunter 
____________ 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
Dr. Tim Zajonc, Chairman 
Bob Cooper, Vice-Chairman 
Col. Paul Williamson, Secretary 
Dr. Stacy Wild, Assistant Secretary 
Gen. Gary Harrell 
Dr. Mike Marchioni 
Jacobus Louw 
Jamie Polvich 
Larry Calhoun 
Clay Hixson 
____________ 
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
Dr. Stacy Wild, Chairman 
Dr. Mike Marchioni, Vice-Chairman 
Marcy Walker 
Robert Thomas 
Jenny Lockmiller 
____________ 
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 
M. Denis Peterson, City Manager 
Preston Mitchell, Development Services Director 
Asongayi Venard, Development Coordinator 
Matt Manley, Senior Planner 
Will Righter, Planner 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the Zoning Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. 
    Source material used in the preparation of the Code was the existing Zoning Code, as adopted by 
the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing 
in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was 
adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the 
back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent 
ordinance included herein. 
Article and Section Numbering System 
    The article and section numbering system used in this Zoning Code is identical to the original Zoning 
Code. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a period. The figure before the period 
refers to the article number, and the figure after the period refers to the position of the section within the 
article. Thus, the second section of Article I is numbered 1.2, and the first section of Article 6 is 6.1. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of an article of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the article. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 
RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 
SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
SACT:1 
ZONING CODE 
ZC1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 
ZCA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
ZCCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 
CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 
ZCDi:1 
 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under 
several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still 
others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item 
in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Michal Ford, Editor, of the Municipal Code 
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff 
for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Wendy Graham for her cooperation and assistance during the 
progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have 
resulted in a Zoning Code which will make the active zoning law of the City of Johnson City readily 
accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's 
affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City 
of Johnson City, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of 
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law 
references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such 
material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. 
©?Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Johnson City, Tennessee. 2018. 


ARTICLE I - TITLE, PURPOSE, AND ENACTMENT 


1.1 - TITLE 
A code, in pursuance of the authority granted by the Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the purpose of 
promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare; to 
provide for the establishment of districts within the corporate limits; to regulate, within such districts, the 
location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot 
occupancy, the required open space, the density of population and the uses of land, buildings and other 
structures; to provide methods of administration of this Code and to prescribe penalties for the violation 
thereof. 
Be it ordained by the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, as follows: 


1.2 - SHORT TITLE 
This Code shall be known as the "Zoning Code of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee." The map herein 
referred to which is identified by the title "Zoning Map of Johnson City, Tennessee," dated January 11, 
1972 and explanatory matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code. 


1.3 - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or general 
welfare of Johnson City; and to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and 
other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue 
concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, 
schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained 
stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in 
governmental expenditure, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use 
of lands, buildings, and other structures throughout the municipality, all in accordance with a 
comprehensive plan, the City Commission of Johnson City, Tennessee, does hereby ordain and enact 
into law the following articles and sections: 


ARTICLE II - DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THE CODE 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in the Code have their customary dictionary 
definition to give this Ordinance it's most reasonable application given its stated purpose and objectives. 
For the purpose of this Code, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: words used 
in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural, and 
words used in the plural include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, co-partnership, company, 
organization, trust, association, corporation, as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word 
"plot" or "parcel", and the word "building" includes the word "structure". 
The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as 
applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the word "intended", arranged, or designed to 
be used or occupied. 
Accessory building, height of means the vertical distance measured from the average ground 
elevation to the highest point of the roof. 
Accessory structure. (This definition is for the exclusive purpose of Article VIII, Floodplain 
Regulations). Any structure shall represent a subordinate structure to the principal structure and, for 
the purpose of this section, shall conform to the following: accessory structures shall not be used for 
human habitation; accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum 
resistance to the flow of flood waters; accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent 
flotation which may result in damage to other structures; and service facilities such as electrical and 
heating equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed. 
Accessory structure or use means a detached structure or use customarily incidental and 
subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or 
building. 
Act means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that are incorporated in 42 
U.S.C. 4001-4128. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a 
building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any 
walled and roofed addition, which is by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-
bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
Adult day-care center means a place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, 
or other group that receives payment for the care of persons over 18 years of age for less than 24 
hours per day in an approved community-based facility. The adult day-care center shall provide a 
structured program of personalized care for adults who are not capable of full independent living as a 
result of physical disability, developmental disabilities, emotional impairment, or frailty resulting from 
advanced age. 
Adult-oriented businesses shall include: 
A. ?Adult arcade means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion 
picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons 
each are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slide or other photographic 
reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of 
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
B. ?Adult bookstore means an establishment that restricts or purports to restrict admission to adults 
or to any class of adults and which has as a substantial portion of its stock-in- trade and offers 
for sale for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1. ?Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion 
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by 
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified 
anatomical areas", or 
2. ?Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with 
"specified sexual activities." 
C. ?Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which regularly 
features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical 
areas" or by "specified sexual activities," or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or 
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or 
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
D. ?Adult motel means a motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any 
form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, 
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are 
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" 
or "specified anatomical areas." 
E. ?Adult motion picture theater means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, 
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, 
and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of 
material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified 
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
F. ?Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any 
form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by an 
emphasis upon the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
G. ?Characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object 
referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are characterized by emphasis 
upon the depiction or description of 'specified sexual activities' or 'specified anatomical areas," 
the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the 
exhibition or display of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
H. ?Massage parlor means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, 
alcohol rub fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of 
the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a 
medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional 
person licensed by the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, 
school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar 
manipulation of the human body is offered as in incidental or accessory service. 
I. ?Semi-nude means the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its 
highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the 
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the 
cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, 
or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
J. ?Semi-nude model studio means an establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) 
who appears semi-nude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, 
or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not 
include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Tennessee or a college, junior college, 
community college, or university supported entirely or partly by public taxation; a private college 
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are 
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
K. ?Sexual encounter establishment means an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar 
establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a 
place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with 
"specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas." This definition does 
not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar 
professional person licensed by the state engages in sexual therapy. 
L. ?Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
1. ?Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus 
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
2. ?Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely 
covered. 
M. ?Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
1. ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2. ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 
3. ?Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female 
breasts; 
4. ?Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; 
5. ?Masochism, erotic, or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
6. ?Erotic touching, fondling, or other such contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7. ?Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in 
connection with any of the activities set forth in 1. through 6. above. 
N. ?Substantial portion means over 20 percent of floor area, or over 20 percent of inventory by units 
or value, or over 20 percent of revenues, or an inventory of 200 or more units of the items set 
forth and enumerated in the definition of "adult book store" above, specifically being the books, 
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video 
cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon 
the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or the 
instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified 
sexual activities". 
Alley means a minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of 
vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be 
used for public utility purposes. 
Alternative tower structure means a type of monopole tower structure camouflaged to appear as a 
tree, clock tower, light pole, flag pole, farm silo, or similar man-made structure to conceal the 
presence of antennas or towers. 
Animal hospital means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and 
are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as an indoor kennel shall be limited to short-
term boarding and medical care and shall be incidental to the hospital use. 
Angle of incidence means the angle at which a light ray strikes the surface, measured between the 
ray and a line perpendicular to the surface. 
Antenna array means devices such as poles, rods, panels, reflecting dishes, and whip antennas 
used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Chief Building Official's interpretation of any provision of 
this Ordinance or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map 
(FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three 
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and 
indeterminate; and where flood water velocity may or may not be evident. Such flooding is 
characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood-related erosion hazard means the land within a community which is most likely 
to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related 
erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined. 
Area of special flood hazard (also referred to as a special flood hazard area—SFHA) means the land 
in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any 
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed rate making has 
been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A is usually refined into: 
Zone A means the special flood hazard area that is subject to being inundated by the water of 
the base flood. No detailed hydraulic analyses have been performed, so base flood elevations 
or depths are not shown on the FHBM or the FIRM. 
Zones AE and A1-30 means the special flood hazard area that is subject to inundation by the 
base flood. Detailed hydraulic analyses have been performed, and base flood elevations are 
shown on the FIRM. Zone AE is used on new and revised maps in place of Zone A1-30. 
Zone AH means the special flood hazard area that is subject to inundation by the base flood, 
but with shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding). Average flood water depths are between 
one and three feet. Base flood elevations derived from detailed hydraulic analysis are shown in 
this zone. 
Zone AO: The special flood hazard area that is subject to inundation by the base flood, but with 
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Average flood water depths are between 
one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analysis are shown in 
this zone. For areas of alluvial fan flooding, velocities are also determined. 
Zone A99 means the special flood hazard area that is subject to inundation by the base flood, 
and which will be protected by a federal flood protection system when construction has reached 
specified statutory progress toward completion. No detailed hydraulic analyses have been 
performed, so no base flood elevations are shown. 
Zones B, C, and X mean the special flood hazard areas which have been identified as areas of 
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. Specifically, the area 
inundated by a flood with a 0.2 percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any 
given year (500 year flood); the area inundated by the base flood with average depths of less 
than one foot or with drainage basin areas of less than one square mile; and areas protected by 
levees from the waters of the base flood. Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of 
Zones B and C. 
Zone D means the unstudied areas where flood hazards are possible but undetermined. 
Arterial street means a roadway that provides for traffic movement between areas and across 
portions of the city and secondarily for direct access for abutting land, as indicated on the Zoning 
Map of the City of Johnson City. 
Auction house means a facility principally devoted to the temporary storage and sale of new and 
used goods which are sold to the highest bidder. 
Baffle means an opaque or translucent element used to shield a light source from direct view at 
certain angles, to absorb or block obtrusive light, or to reflect and redirect light. 
Bare lamp means a light source with no shielding. The bare lamp of a luminaire is assumed to be the 
arc tube or filament in a clear lamp or the first sight of a lamp in the case of frosted lamps. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given 
year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
Beam angle means the angle between the two directions for which the intensity is 50 percent of the 
maximum intensity as measured in a plane through the nominal beam centerline. For beams that do 
not have rotational symmetry, the beam angle is generally given for two planes at 90 degrees, 
typically the maximum and minimum angles. 
Bed-and-breakfast home means a residential unit in which between one and three guest rooms are 
available for overnight accommodations and breakfast for the registered guests is provided. The 
owner shall have primary residence on the premises and the use shall be subordinate and incidental 
to the main residential use of the building. 
Bed-and-breakfast inn means a residential unit in which between one and six guest rooms are 
available for overnight accommodations and breakfast for the registered guests is provided. 
Beer serving/sales establishments means any business authorized to sell beer with an alcoholic 
content of not more than five percent by weight, and any beverage of like alcohol content. 
Bicycle locker means a totally enclosed lockable storage area for bicycles located within 100 feet of 
the entrance to a building. 
Bicycle rack means a ribbon rack able to contain a minimum of four bicycles located within 100 feet 
of the entrance to a building. 
Breakaway wall means a wall not part of the structural support of the building and which is intended 
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing 
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Buffer tree means any tree which will achieve adequate height, width, and density to provide 
screening between incompatible land uses. A list of acceptable buffer trees is maintained by the 
Johnson City Planning Department. 
Buffer yard means a landscaped area composed of planted vegetation, including walls, fencing, 
bikeways, or walkways affording visual privacy and noise relief between uses of differing impact. 
Building means any structure built for support having a roof supported by columns or by walls and 
intended for the shelter, housing, storage, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel (see 
structure). 
Business services means an establishment providing services to places of business including, but 
not limited to: repair and maintenance of equipment, temporary personnel services, printing and 
copying, cleaning, rental and leasing, credit reporting and collection, mailing and advertising and 
other similar services not specifically allowed as a permitted use or special exception and where the 
primary purpose does not involve retail trade. 
Center line of the street means that line surveyed and monumented by the governing body shall be 
the center line of the street; or if such center line has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running 
midway between the outside curbs or ditches of such street. 
Chief building official means the administrator appointed to implement the provisions of this Code, 
see Article XVI, Subsection 16.1. 
City-owned utility tower means a tower structure which is accessory to the public utility use. The 
purpose is to provide communications to remote public utilities such as electric power substations or 
water/sewer pump stations. It is not for the purpose of providing cellular telephone service. 
Clinic means a building or portion of a building, other than a hospital, as herein defined, containing 
facilities providing outpatient medical, dental, chiropractic, optical, osteopathic diagnostic, and similar 
services, for humans, by physicians, dentists, and other health care specialists. The term clinic 
includes offices as a separate use for the above, but does not include substance abuse treatment 
facility, or non-residential substance abuse treatment facilities. 
Collector street means a street providing for traffic movement within such areas of the city and 
between major streets and local streets for direct access to abutting property, as indicated on the 
Zoning Map of the City of Johnson City. 
Community recreational facility means a recreational area (swimming pool, tennis courts, 
playground, or golf course) designed to serve several neighborhoods or subdivisions. No set service 
area is defined. 
Construction means the erection of construction materials in a permanent position and fasten in a 
permanent manner. Where excavation, demolition, or removal of an existing building has been 
substantially begun prior to rebuilding, such excavation, demolition, or removal shall be deemed to 
be construction: provided, that work shall be carried on diligently and complies will applicable 
requirements. 
Construction field office/real estate office means a mobile home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or 
other movable structure used as a temporary office in conjunction with a construction project or in 
conjunction with the sale or rental of units within the project and only that project. At the time the use 
is discontinued, it shall be removed from site. 
Cosine law means the law that the illuminance on any surface varies as the cosine of the angle of 
incidence (see horizontal illuminance). 
Cut-off angle means the angle, measured up from nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of 
sight at which the bare source is not visible. 
Day-care center means an operation or establishment licensed by the state, that receives pay for the 
care of five or more children under 17 years of age for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of 
custody. 
DBH means diameter breast height. The diameter of a tree measured four and one-half feet above 
ground level. 
Deck means an uncovered structure which exceeds 30 inches in height. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre including those areas set aside for required 
open space, stormwater management, and public or private streets. For detached single-family units, 
the maximum density shall be dictated by the minimum lot size of the district. 
Design deviation means any adjustment, change, or modification to the standards for sidewalk 
construction contained in General Requirements & Standards of Design resulting from unusual or 
exceptional topographic, physical, or natural conditions of the site. 
Developer means a landowner or any party, representative, agent, successor, or heirs of the 
landowner of developer. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but 
not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, drilling operations, excavation, filling, 
grading, paving, the removal of healthy trees over six inches dbh, or storage of equipment or 
materials. 
Direct lighting means lighting by luminaires distributing 90 percent to 100 percent of the emitted light 
in the general direction of the surface to be illuminated. 
Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outer edge of the canopy of a tree to the ground. 
Dwelling, multi-family means a building designed, constructed, or reconstructed and used for more 
than two dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common structural or load-bearing wall of at 
least ten lineal feet with any other dwelling unit on the same floor or building level. 
Dwelling, single-family means a building designed, constructed, and used for one dwelling unit. 
A. ?Detached means a one-family dwelling which is completely surrounded by open spaces. 
B. ?Semi-detached means a one-family dwelling that is connected on one side by means of a 
common dividing structural or load-bearing wall of at least ten lineal feet to another one-family 
dwelling, each dwelling on its own individual lot. 
C. ?Attached means a one-family dwelling that is connected on two sides by means of a common 
dividing structural or load bearing wall of at least ten lineal feet of two or more other one-family 
dwellings, or the end dwelling of a series of such dwellings, each dwelling unit on its own 
individual lot. 
D. ?Dwelling group, one-family attached means a line of one-family attached dwellings, joined at the 
sides by means of common structural or load bearing walls, comprising an architectural whole. 
Dwelling, two-family or duplex means a building designed, constructed, or reconstructed and used 
for two dwelling units on a single lot. 
Dwelling unit means one room, or rooms, connected together, constituting a separate, independent 
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental, or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer 
basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same 
structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities for permanent residential 
occupancy by one family. 
Elderly housing including: assisted living; congregate care; and retirement housing means a building, 
establishment, complex or distinct part thereof providing elderly congregate group housing, 
containing individual dwelling units which may consist of one or more bedrooms, dining area, bathing 
and cooking facilities, or a combination thereof, provided that 24-hour medical care and medical 
staffing is not required, and provided that limited medical care, meals and other services may be 
offered as a matter of convenience and not necessity. A residential home for the aged is not a 
nursing home. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building: 
1. ?Built to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated 
above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls, and 
2. ?Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of 
up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
In the case of Flood Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, elevated building also includes 
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to 
facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Eligible support structure means any tower or support building and equipment as defined in this 
section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city. 
Emergency flood insurance program or emergency program means the program as implemented on 
an emergency basis in accordance with Section 1336 of the National Flood Insurance Program. It is 
intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before 
the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
Emergency or temporary shelter means a residential facility which offers emergency shelter to 
persons on a temporary basis. 
Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril is not per se 
covered under the program. 
Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this Code which relieves the applicant from the 
requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this 
Code. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the 
effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a 
basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final 
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first 
floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that 
community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
Existing structures. See existing construction. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional 
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or 
the pouring of concrete pads). 
Exterior lighting fixture means an electrically-powered illuminating device containing a light source in 
excess of 50 watts per fixture (except for incandescent light sources in excess of 160 watts per 
fixture), which is temporarily or permanently installed outdoors, including, but not limited to, search, 
spot, flood, and area lighting. 
Family means one or more related persons or a group of not more than three persons who are 
mutually unrelated by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or legal guardianship. In multi-family dwellings 
in the R-6 district, the number of unrelated persons may increase to four persons provided that the 
allowable density is reduced to 18.75 units per acre. Domestic workers employed on the premises 
are not counted as part of the family. 
Farm animal means animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to, where permitted, 
be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/or family food production, education, 
or recreation such as but is not limited to: horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, rabbits, chinchillas, 
chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks, pigeons, other birds, and bees. 
Field angle means the angle between the two directions for which the intensity is ten percent of the 
maximum intensity measured in a plane through the nominal beam centerline. For beams without 
rotational symmetry, the field angle is generally given for two planes at 90 degrees, typically the 
maximum and minimum angles. 
500-year flood does not refer to a flood that occurs once every 500 years, but refers to a flood level 
with a 0.20 percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of 
normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid 
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation determination means a determination by the FEMA Administrator or consultant work 
approved by the Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood 
level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if 
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and 
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the FEMA, 
where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the FEMA has 
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium flood zones applicable to the 
community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the FEMA, evaluating flood hazards and 
containing flood profiles the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from 
any source. 
Flood protection system means physical structural works which funds have been authorized, 
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order 
to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent 
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, 
reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in 
conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or 
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real 
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other 
body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated 
cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, 
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an 
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in 
flooding. 
Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area means a land area adjoining the 
shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and 
high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
Flood-related erosion area management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and 
preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to 
emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and flood plain management 
regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive 
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, 
flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must 
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface 
elevation more than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Floor means the top of the lowest interior surface of an enclosed area in a building (including 
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame 
construction. Except for the purposes of the flood regulations, the term does not include the floor of a 
garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Flush-mounted or recessed luminaire means a luminaire, which is mounted above the ceiling (or 
behind a wall or other surface) with the opening of the luminaire level with the surface. 
Footcandle means a unit of illuminance, equal to one lumen/ft 2 , abbreviated as fc. 
Fraternal organization means a group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually 
cultural, religious, or entertainment, with regular meetings and formal written membership 
requirements excluding college related fraternities or sororities. 
Fraternity or sorority house means a building rented, occupied, or owned by a general or social 
chapter of some regularly organized college fraternity or sorority, or by or on its behalf by a building 
corporation or association composed of members of alumni thereof, and occupied by members of 
the local chapter of such fraternity or sorority, as a place of residence. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of 
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could 
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway 
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the 
watershed. 
Full cut-off fixture means a luminaire that allows no direct light from the luminaire above a horizontal 
plane through the luminaire's lowest light-emitting part in its mounted form. Also known as a fully-
shielded fixture. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is 
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, and port 
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building 
and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Gasoline service station means buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, 
and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. However, uses permissible at 
a gasoline service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body 
parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving 
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in 
service stations. A gasoline service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop. 
Glare means the sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater 
than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in 
visual performance and visibility. 
Grandfathered describes the status accorded certain properties, uses, and activities that legally exist 
prior to the date of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance or amendments to the Zoning Ordinance. 
Group home means a residential facility which offers a home-like environment for mentally retarded, 
mentally handicapped, or physically handicapped residents, on either a permanent or temporary 
basis and that is licensed by the appropriate state agency. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to 
construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1. ?Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the 
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National 
Register; 
2. ?Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the 
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the 
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3. ?Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; or 
4. ?Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by 
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: A) by an 
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or B) directly by the 
Secretary of the Interior. 
Home occupation means any business, occupation, or activity undertaken for profit within a 
residential structure or one accessory building that is incidental and secondary to the use of that 
structure as a dwelling unit. Home occupation as defined does not include telecommuting. 
Horizontal illuminance means the measurement of brightness from a light source, measured in 
footcandles, which is taken through a light meter's sensor at a horizontal position at the surface 
being lighted. Horizontal illuminance measurements incorporate the inverse square law and cosine 
law into their readings, and can be calculated as E=(I)(cos angle of incidence)/d 2 . See inverse 
square law definition. 
Hospital means an institution licensed by the state health department providing primary health 
services and medical or surgical services to persons, primarily in-patients suffering from illness, 
disease, injury, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of 
the institution related facilities and services such as laboratories, surgical care, testing, and 
outpatient and emergency services. 
Illuminance means the quantity of light, or luminous flux, arriving at a surface divided by the area of 
the illuminated surface, measured in footcandles. 
Impervious surface means an area covered by any material or compacted in a way so that it is highly 
resistant to infiltration by water. 
Initial footcandles means the calculated or measured illumination level when a luminaire is new and 
is void of light-reducing elements. The difference between initial footcandle and measured footcandle 
levels constitutes the light loss factor. 
Inverse square law means the law stating that the illuminance (E) at a point on a surface varies 
directly with the intensity (I) of a point source, and inversely as the square of the distance (d) 
between the source and the point, expressed as E=I/d 2 if the surface at the point is perpendicular to 
the direction of the incident light. 
Isofootcandle line or diagram means a line plotted on any appropriate set of coordinates to show all 
points on a surface where the illuminance is the same. A series of such lines is called an 
isofootcandle diagram. For the purposes of the site plan requirements of this Code, point calculations 
(or measurements) of footcandle levels at intervals of 30 feet or less are considered comparable. 
Junk yards mean any open or uncovered land on which dilapidated automobiles, machines or 
machine parts, scrap metal, rags, plastics, boxes, barrels, old papers, or tires, and the like are 
assembled for purposes of trade. 
Karst system means irregular terrain characterized by a subsurface drainage system and consisting 
of solution channels, closed depressions, subterranean drainage through sinkholes, and caves. 
Kennel means the boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of two or more dogs, cats, or 
other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, and/or for 
commercial gain. 
Landscape yard means a landscaped area located at the perimeter of the lot along all abutting 
streets. 
Landscaped area means an area of landscaping planted with growing plant materials (trees, vines, 
shrubs, grass, flowers, and/or growing ground cover) with up to 25 percent mulch. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in 
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water to provide 
protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated 
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance 
with sound engineering practices. 
Light loss factors means the ratio of measured illuminance to the value that would occur if lamps 
operated at their (initial) rated lumen output and if no system variation or depreciation had occurred. 
Light trespass means light emitted by a lighting installation that falls outside the boundaries of the 
property on which the installation is sited. 
Liquor store means the building or part of a building where a licensee conducts any of the business 
authorized by the license from the State of Tennessee to sell for off-premises consumption alcohol, 
spirits, liquor, wine and every other liquid containing alcohol, spirits and wine, and capable of being 
consumed by a human being, other than patented medicine or beer, where the latter contains an 
alcoholic content of five percent weight or less. 
Lot means a parcel of land which fronts on and has ingress and egress by means of a public or 
private right-of-way and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or groups of 
buildings as provided herein with the customary accessories and open spaces. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot, corner means a lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut for their full lengths on a street, 
provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two such sides is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot coverage means the total percent of a parcel covered by principal and accessory buildings or 
structures. 
Lot depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the 
general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot which runs through a block from street to street or which has two 
non-intersecting sides abutting on two or more streets. 
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side 
dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
A. ?Lot line, front means, in the case of an interior lot, the line separating said lot from the street. In 
the case of a corner or double frontage lot, the line separating said lot from that street which is 
designated as the front street. 
B. ?Lot line, rear means the lot boundary opposite and most distance from the front lot line. In the 
case of a pointed or irregular lot, it shall be an imaginary line parallel to and farthest from the 
front lot line, not less than 30 feet long and wholly within the lot. 
C. ?Lot line, side means a side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or rear lot line. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the appropriate 
county registrar, or a lot legally created prior to the adoption of this Code, the description of which 
has been recorded. 
Lot width means the width of a lot at the required building setback line measured at right angles to its 
depth. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement and crawl 
space. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, including a crawl space and areas usable solely 
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage is also considered a building's lowest floor; 
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable 
non-elevation design requirements of the Floodplain Regulations. 
Lumen means a unit of light energy used to specify the light output of sources, calculated as the rate 
at which light falls on one square foot of surface area one foot from a source of one candela. 
Luminaire means a complete lighting fixture including one or more lamps and ballasting (when 
applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps 
and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Manufactured home means a detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation, after 
fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailer, and arriving at 
the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor 
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or 
permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. The following shall not be included in 
this definition: 
A. ?Travel trailers, pickup campers, motor homes, camping trailers, or other recreational vehicles. 
B. ?Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a permanent foundation, and 
which meets the Standard Building Code Congress International. 
Manufactured home park means a parcel or tract of land under single ownership which has been 
planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for dwelling purposes; provided 
that all manufactured home parks existing at the time of passage of this Code not meeting the 
minimum requirements established in Article VI, Section 6.11, shall be considered a nonconforming 
use, and further provided that one manufactured home on a separate lot, shall not be considered a 
nonconforming manufactured home park. 
Map means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a 
community issued by the Agency. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a 
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the Floodplain 
Regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, 
to which base flood elevations shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
Medical clinic means medical services for out-patients only. 
Mounting height means the vertical distance between the surface to be lighted and the center of the 
apparent light source of a luminaire. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a 
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Neighborhood convenience center means a retail store selling a limited variety of food, beverages, 
and sundry items; with or without motor fuel facilities; and catering primarily to motorists making 
quick stops, and/or neighborhood customers. 
Neighborhood recreational facility means a recreational facility (such as a swimming pool, tennis 
courts, or playgrounds) designed to serve a designated neighborhood or subdivision. Membership 
shall be limited to 200 families. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the 
effective date of the Floodplain Regulations. The term also includes any subsequent improvements 
to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final 
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the adopted date of the 
Floodplain Regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
No-build line means a flood elevation line that delineates an area within which no development shall 
be allowed to occur. 
Non-residential substance abuse treatment facility (scheduled drugs dispensed on-site) means a 
building or portion of a building, other than a clinic containing offices, facilities or designated space 
with the predominant, substantial, or significant purpose of providing outpatient treatment, 
distributing or dispensing scheduled drug(s) on-site to individuals who are dependent or addicted to 
legal or illegal drugs, opiates, alcohol or other similar substances. The obligation of the operations of 
such a facility to obtain a CON and license from the State of Tennessee shall create a presumption 
that the intended use is a non-residential substance abuse treatment facility (scheduled drugs 
dispensed on-site). 
Normal flow elevation means the elevation of the surface of water flowing in a stream, measured 
when the surface of the water flowing in a stream is not elevated due to a recent rainfall or lowered 
by drought conditions. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, means a vertical control used as a 
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Nursing homes, rest homes, and convalescent homes mean a building, establishment, complex or 
distinct part thereof providing elderly care and housing, containing single rooms or other dwelling 
units which may consist of no more than bedroom and bathroom facilities, provided that 24-hour 
medical care and medical staffing and other services are required or provided, regardless of the 
ambulatory status of the residents; and, provided further that one or more regular meals is required 
by state law, and/or as a condition of residency. For the purpose of this Code, these type facilities 
shall include short term care facilities, nursing, convalescent and rest homes, and rehabilitation 
centers. 
Obtrusive light means light trespass which, because of quantitative, directional, or spectral context, 
gives rise to annoyance, discomfort, distraction, or a reduction in the ability to see essential 
information. 
Open space means an open space within a residential development reserved for the use of the 
residents of the development and their guests. Open space does not includes areas within the 
building setbacks or areas reserved for stormwater detention. 
100 year flood. See base flood. The term 100 year flood does not refer to a flood that occurs once 
every 100 years, but refers to a flood level with a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or 
exceeded in any given year. 
Personal services means an establishment providing services to individuals such as barber and 
beauty shops, shoe repair, dressmaking, tailoring, and laundry and other similar services not 
specifically allowed as a permitted use or special exception and where the primary purpose of the 
business does not involve retail trade. 
Pervious (permeable) surface means surface which allows for the infiltration of stormwater through 
the surface into the ground. Such surfaces may include, but are not limited to, porous concrete, 
porous asphalt, and concrete pavers. 
Photometer means an instrument for measuring photometric quantities such as illuminance or 
luminance. 
Point method means a lighting design procedure for predetermining the illuminance at various 
locations in lighting installations, by the use of luminaire photometric data. The point method utilizes 
the angle of incidence and inverse square law in its calculations. 
Principal building, height of means the vertical distance measured from the average ground elevation 
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height 
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
Principal use means the primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is intended to serve. 
Professional services means an establishment providing a service by established professions such 
as legal services, engineering and architectural services, accounting services, and other similar 
services not specifically allowed as a permitted use or special exception and where the primary 
purpose does not involve retail trade. 
Protective screening means a continuous screen composed of planted vegetation, fencing, or walls 
affording visual relief from areas producing adverse visual effects. 
Public utility facilities include any public or private building or structure used for the production, 
storage, transmission, distribution, and recovery of communications, water, sewage, gas, energy, 
and other similar utilities. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less 
when measured at the largest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently 
towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as 
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas 
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water 
surface elevation more than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Residential homes for the aged means a home represented and held out to the general public as a 
home which accepts aged persons for relatively permanent, domiciliary care. A home for the aged 
provides room, board, and personal services to one or more unrelated persons. A residential home 
for the aged is not a nursing home. 
Retail sales—general means an establishment having its primary function (a minimum of 80 
percent), the retail sales of any article, substance, merchandise, or commodity to the end consumer. 
Retail sales—specialty means retail operations under 10,000 square feet that specialize in one type 
or line of merchandize including but not limited to: jewelry; bookstore; shoe store; antique store; card 
and gift; and similar establishment. 
Retail sales—bulk means an establishment engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise to the 
general public, other retailers, contractors, or businesses. Bulk retail involves providing services 
incidental to the sale of such goods generally in a warehouse setting. Bulk retail is differentiated from 
general retail by the following characteristic items for sale including large categorized products (e.g., 
lumber, appliances, household furnishing, electrical and heating fixtures and supplies, wholesale and 
retail nursery stock, etc.). 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, 
etc. 
Rooming or boarding house means a building containing a single dwelling unit and not more than 
five guest rooms where lodging is provided for not more than five guests with or without meals for 
compensation. 
Self-service storage means a building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments each 
with a separate exterior entrance used to meet the temporary storage needs of business and 
residential uses. 
Shade tree means any tree whose mature height is expected to exceed 30 feet with an expected 
crown spread of 30 feet or more, with a trunk that can be maintained in a clear condition (no 
branches) at least five feet above ground level, and is considered a shade tree in accordance with 
the American Standards of Nursery Stock, set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. A 
list of acceptable shade trees is maintained by the Johnson City Planning Department. 
Shielded light fixture means outdoor lighting fixtures constructed so that no light rays are emitted at 
an angle above the horizontal plane, excluding architectural or sign floodlighting where the bare lamp 
is fully hidden from public view. 
Sinkholes means shallow, bowl-like depressions found in karst terrain systems, that occur with the 
development of effective, underground conduit drainage. 
Site preparation means excavation, grading, demolition, removing excess debris to allow for proper 
grading, or providing a surface for a proper foundation, drainage, and settling for a development 
project, and physical improvements including, but not limited to, water and sewer lines, footings, or 
foundation installed on the site for which construction permits are required. 
Sorority houses. See fraternity houses. 
Special exception means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction 
throughout the zoning division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or 
relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, 
comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in 
such zoning division or district as special exceptions, if specific provision for such special exceptions 
is made in this Zoning Code and only after approval has been granted by the Board of Zoning 
Appeals. 
Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-
related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Flood Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or 
AH. 
Specimen tree means any healthy tree with a diameter of 18 inches dbh or greater. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was 
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, 
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means 
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) 
on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of 
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on 
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading 
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include 
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor 
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not 
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the 
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part 
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State coordinating agency means the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community 
Development is designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of the 
Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program for the state. 
Story means that part of a building or structure above ground level between a floor and the floor or 
roof next above. A mezzanine shall be considered a story if it exceeds one-third of the area of the 
floor immediately below. A penthouse shall be considered a story if it exceeds one-third of the area 
of the roof. A basement shall be considered a story when more than one-half of its height is above 
the average ground elevation. 
Street means a public right-of-way set aside for public travel not less than 30 feet in width which: 
1. ?Has been accepted for maintenance by the city of Johnson City; 
2. ?Has been established as a public street prior to the date of adoption of this Code; or 
3. ?Has been dedicated to the city of Johnson City for public travel by the recording of a plat of a 
subdivision which has been approved by the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, 
or attachment to something having location on the ground, which includes a manufactured home, a 
gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Student oriented housing means apartments designed for students, oriented so that each bedroom 
can be rented out individually with one shared living area. 
Subdivision site plan means a site plan required for commercial subdivisions within the B-4, B-5, and 
PB districts. 
Substance abuse treatment facility means a building or portion of a building, other than a clinic 
containing offices, facilities or designated space with the predominant, substantial, or significant 
purpose of providing outpatient treatment, counseling or similar services to individuals who are 
dependent on legal and illegal drugs, opiates, alcohol or other similar substances. Staffing by 
physicians who have received a waiver or have been certified or should have received a waiver or be 
certified by the Substance Abuse Treatment Act of 2000 and subsequent amendments or 
enactments shall create a presumption that the building or portion of a building should be designated 
a substance abuse treatment facility. 
Substanial change means a modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of a eligible 
support structures if it meets any of the following criteria: 
A. ?Increase in height. For towers structures other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it 
increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional 
antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, 
whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure 
by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height should 
be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be 
separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height 
should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally 
approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the 
Spectrum Act. 
B. ?Increase in width. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an 
appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 
20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, 
whichever is greater; for other eligible support. 
C. ?Excessive equipment cabinets. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more 
than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to 
exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves 
installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground 
cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are 
more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets 
associated with the structure; 
D. ?Expands tower site. It involved any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
E. ?Buffers. It would not violate any buffer requirements; or 
F. ?It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or 
modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that 
this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that 
would not exceed the thresholds identified above. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of 
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the 
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repairs, reconstructions, rehabilitations, additions, alterations or 
other improvements to a structure taking place during a five-year period in which the cumulative 
costs equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of 
construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised 
value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of 
damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures 
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first 
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not 
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include 
either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local 
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code 
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions and not 
solely triggered by an improvement or repair project or; (2) any alteration of a historic structure, 
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic 
structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds 50 
percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or 
improvement commenced. 
Tearoom means a small limited service restaurant with no more than 500 square feet of dining area 
in a residential structure. An area for outside dining may be added with seating limited to 16 patrons. 
Carry-out service is permitted, but not including drive-thru facilities. 
Temporary recreational vehicle means a trailer, tent, modular unit, or other moveable prefabricated 
structure. No temporary recreational vehicle shall be occupied for residential purposes anywhere in 
the city of Johnson City and location in an RV campground site shall not exceed 90 cumulative days 
within a calendar year. 
Temporary use means a land use or structure that is in place for only short periods of time not to 
exceed 90 consecutive days unless an extension is granted. 
Tower structure means a wireless transmission facility constructed as a lattice tower with or without 
guy wires, as an alternative tower structure, or as a monopole tower; primarily for the purpose of 
supporting an antenna array; and support buildings and equipment; excluding equipment under 30 
feet in height used for amateur radio communication. 
Uniformity ratio describes the maximum level of illumination in relation to the minimum level for a 
given area, expressed as a ratio. 
Value-oriented housing means the maximum value of a single-family house shall be derived by using 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development's latest Low and Moderate Income Table for a 
family of four and multiplying it by two and one-half. 
Variance means a variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Code, but only where by reason 
of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property or other 
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a piece of property, the strict application of the 
provisions of this Code would result in practical difficulties to or undue hardship upon the owner of 
such property. 
Vertical illuminance means the measurement of brightness from a light source, measured in foot 
candles, which is taken through a light meter's sensor at a vertical position at a five foot height for 
the area being lighted, used in this Code primarily for measurements of light trespass at the property 
line. The use of vertical illuminance measurements tend to ignore the influence of off-site sources 
such as street lighting. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the 
community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the 
elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this Ordinance is 
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Warehouse means a use involving a structure engaged in storage of products, supplies, and 
equipment, excluding self-service storage facilities. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 
(NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies 
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Waterway means any portion of land of a natural stream carrying surface water having a bed and 
defined banks or side elevations which contain said surface water. 
Wet weather conveyances are defined in the Tennessee Water Quality Control Act of 1977 (Act) 
(T.C.A. 69-3-103(43)) as "man-made or natural watercourses, including natural watercourses that 
have been modified by channelization, that flow only in direct response to precipitation runoff in their 
immediate locality, whose channels are above the groundwater table, and in which hydrological and 
biological analyses indicate that, under normal weather conditions, due to naturally occurring 
ephemeral or low flow there is not sufficient water to support fish, or multiple populations of lotic 
aquatic organisms whose life cycle includes adequate phase of at least two months." 
Yard means a required open space that lies between the principal or accessory structure or use and 
the nearest lot line which is unoccupied and unobstructed from 30 inches above ground level upward 
except as herein permitted: 
A. ?Yard, front means the yard fronting a street extending along the front of the lot between the side 
lot lines. 
B. ?Yard, rear means the yard extending along the rear of the lot, opposite of the front yard and 
between the side lot lines, excluding double frontage lots which have no rear yard. 
C. ?Yard, side means the yard extending along the side lot lines from the front lot line to the rear lot 
line. A lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line shall be deemed a side lot line. 
 


ARTICLE III - NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS 


3.1 - PURPOSE 
Within the districts established by this Code or amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, 
structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this Code was 
passed or amended, but which would be prohibited or restricted under the terms of this Code or future 
amendment. It is the purpose of this Code to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are 
removed, discontinued, or abandoned. It is further the purpose of this Code that nonconformities shall not 
be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses 
prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except as permitted by the Code of Tennessee. 


3.2 - APPLICABLILITY 
A use, otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this Code, shall not be deemed a nonconforming 
use for a failure to comply with the provisions of this Code relating to any of the following: 
3.2.1 ?Changes in review procedures or setback requirements applicable to the establishment of the 
use; 
3.2.2 ?Permitted signs; 
3.2.3 ?Off-street parking requirements; or 
3.2.4 ?A lawfully permitted use shall not become a nonconforming use solely because it subsequently 
violates any use limitation or distance requirement, whether through changes to this Code or 
because new uses are established closer than what is lawfully permitted under this Code. 


3.3 - NONCONFORMING USES 
A nonconforming use is declared by this Code to be a use which is not permitted in the district in which it 
is located and which is in continuous operation after the effective date of such ordinance even though it 
does not comply with the use regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. A 
nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure 
and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Code by the addition of 
other uses of a nature which would be prohibited in the district involved. 
3.3.1 ?LIMITATION ON EXPANSION 
Provided it continues to comply with all provisions of the city's Zoning Ordinance, any nonconforming 
use may continue to operate and expand on the same land area/parcel containing the 
nonconforming use on the date the use first became nonconforming. A nonconforming use shall not 
expand upon any land area/parcel that was not part of the original property at the time the use first 
became nonconforming. 
3.3.1.1 ?STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS 
A. ?Any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and land in combination may as special 
exception be changed to another nonconforming use, provided the Board of Zoning 
Appeals finds that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the 
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of 
Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the 
provisions of this Code. 
B. ?All off-street parking operated by, in conjunction with, or accessory to a nonconforming use 
shall be maintained in accordance with all specifications for maintenance of off-street 
parking spaces as established by the Code. Required off-street parking space for a 
nonconforming use shall not be reduced in any manner or used for storage or display of 
materials or goods. 
C. ?Multifamily residential establishments (whether used as owner-occupied property or rental 
property) which were permitted to operate under zoning regulations or exceptions thereto 
immediately preceding a change in zoning shall be allowed to reconstruct new facilities 
necessary to the conduct of such multifamily residential establishment subsequent to the 
zoning change, in the event of damage (whether partial or complete) by involuntary fire or 
wind damage or other natural disaster. 
D. ?The provisions of this section shall not apply to a legally established nonconforming 
manufactured home provided: 
1. ?That written notification of intent to replace the manufactured home and the proposed 
date of replacement of is filed with the Chief Building Official within 90 days of the 
manufactured home's removal; 
2. ?That the manufactured home is replaced within 180 days of the removal of the 
previous manufactured home; 
3. ?That the replacement manufactured home is of structural quality at the date of filing of 
the notice with the Chief Building Official, equal to or exceeding that of the previous 
manufactured home, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official; and 
4. ?That the replacement manufactured home meets the area and yard requirements of 
the district in which it is located. 
E. ?Nonconforming structures resulting from the passage of Sections 6.28, 6.30, 6.31 and 6.33 
may expand, renovate, alter, remodel, or reconstruct without conformance to the 
Development Standards set forth in Sections 6.28.3, 6.30.3, 6.31.3 and 6.33.3 providing 
the nonconforming structures do not expand upon any land area/parcel that was not part of 
the original property at the time the structures first became nonconforming. The provisions 
contained in Section 3.4 are still applicable regarding structures that are removed, 
destroyed, or damaged. 


3.4 - TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES 
3.4.1 ?Should a nonconforming structure or a nonconforming portion of a structure be removed or 
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of 
damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Code, provided, 
however, that the right to maintain a nonconforming detached single-family residence in a residential 
or nonresidential district shall not be terminated regardless of the amount of damage. 
3.4.2 ?Subject to all other regulations of this Code, a building damaged by fire, explosion or other 
casualty, act of God, or government action to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its 
replacement cost at time of damage, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building or 
part thereof which existed at the time of such destruction may be continued, providing restoration 
shall begin within 180 days of the date of damage. 
3.4.3 ?When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or 
abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the structure, or structures and premises in combination, 
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is 
located. This provision shall not apply when government action impedes access to the premises or 
when the owner can demonstrate that an attempt has been made to continue the nonconforming 
status through continuous advertisement for sale, rent, or lease, or through alteration or remodeling, 
provided a building permit has been obtained. 
3.4.4 ?Changing any nonconforming use to a conforming use shall terminate the nonconforming use and 
the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished. 
3.4.5 ?Any one of the following violations of this Code shall terminate immediately the right to operate a 
nonconforming use: 
3.4.5.1 ?Failure to make a nonconforming use comply with local, state, or federal regulations which 
results in negative health or safety impacts; 
3.4.5.2 ?Increasing the number of dwelling units in the nonconforming use; or 
3.4.5.3 ?Changing a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use without approval from the 
Board of Zoning Appeals. 
3.4.6 ?The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming use shall terminate and shall cease to exist 
whenever the structure containing said use deteriorates to the point it becomes obsolete or 
substandard under the Code of Ordinances for Johnson City and the cost of placing such structure in 
compliance exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure as determined by the Chief 
Building Official; provided that in determining the replacement cost, the cost of the land shall not be 
included. 
3.4.7 ?The reconstruction or reestablishment of all or any part of a nonconforming use shall not be 
permitted whenever the structure in which the nonconforming use is operated and maintained has 
been intentionally demolished, damaged, or destroyed. 


3.5 - NONCONFORMING LOTS 
A nonconforming lot shall be any lot, the dimensions or location of which were lawful prior to the adoption 
or amendment of this Code, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the 
present requirements of this Code. Such lot is classified as a "legal lot of record". 
3.5.1 ?A nonconforming lot shall be used only for a permitted use or special exception in the zoning 
district in which the lot is located. 
3.5.2 ?Development or establishment of such use shall comply with all applicable standards for that 
zoning district, except compliance with existing minimum lot area standards is not required. 
3.5.3 ?A nonconforming lot shall not be used, conveyed, transferred, subdivided, nor have its boundaries 
altered in any manner, except for government purpose, that would compound or further increase the 
nonconforming characteristics of the lot. 
3.5.4 ?In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and 
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of 
adoption or amendment of this Code, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this 
Code. Such lot shall be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the 
same ownership. 
3.5.5 ?If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single 
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Code, and if the lots do not 
meet the requirements of a 50-foot lot width at the building line and 6,000 square feet of land area, 
the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Code and 
shall be platted together to create lots with a minimum of 6,000 square feet with a minimum lot width 
of 50 feet regardless of the zoning prior to a building permit being issued. During the platting 
process, no lot remnants will be created or remain which have a lot area of less than 6,000 square 
feet and a lot width of less than 50 feet. 
3.5.6 ?When a dedication of land to the public for the purpose of establishing open space for greenways, 
trails, parks, streets, slope protection, or stream protection makes a lot, building or structure 
nonconforming with respect to requirements for minimum yards, building setbacks, building 
coverage, lot area, lot width, lot depth, or required off-street parking, and this dedication is needed or 
required by the City of Johnson City, the property shall be considered conforming for zoning 
purposes without requirement of a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Planning 
Commission may approve a Subdivision plat without need or requirement of a zoning variance. 


3.6 - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 
Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this Code (other than a 
change through the Board of Zoning Appeals from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use 
not permitted in the district) shall not be classified as a nonconforming use in such district, but shall 
without further action be considered a conforming use. 


ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 


4.1 - CONFORMITY TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
No building permit shall be issued or no building shall be erected on any lot or parcel unless the street 
giving access to the lot or parcel has been accepted and improved, to the minimum specifications of the 
City Engineer, as a public street or unless said street corresponds in its location and lines with a street 
shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission and such 
approval is entered in writing on the plat by the Secretary of the Planning Commission, and further that a 
performance bond or other security has been posted with the Planning Commission or the City Recorder 
in an amount sufficient to insure the improvement of said street within a period of one year. 


4.2 - ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Unless specifically indicated on the Zoning Map, the boundaries of zoning districts are lot lines, 
centerlines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, the corporate limit lines, a line midway between the 
main track of a railroad, or the centerlines of streams or other water bodies. When a zoning district 
boundary is clearly intended to split a lot—i.e., does not follow the lot line—the rear yard setback shall be 
measured from the zoning district boundary if the adjoining zone is more restrictive. 


4.3 - USE 
No building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or 
altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations specified for the 
district in which it is located. 


4.4 - STREET FRONTAGE 
No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one street for at least 50 feet, excluding 
lots fronting on culs-de-sac which may have a minimum road frontage of 40 feet. 


4.5 - REDUCTION OF LOT SIZE 
No lot shall be reduced in area so that required yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other 
provisions of this Code shall not be maintained. 


4.6 - ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, unless 
otherwise provided in this Code. 


4.7 - YARDS AND SETBACKS 
4.7.1 ?REQUIRED YARD: 
No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with 
the provisions of this Code shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space required under 
this Code for another building or structure. 
4.7.2 ?CORNER LOTS: 
Except in B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, and PB districts, the minimum width of a side yard along an intersecting 
street shall be 50 percent greater than the minimum side yard requirements of the district in which 
the lot is located, or one-half of the minimum required front yard setback along the side street, 
whichever is greater. 
4.7.3 ?PRINCIPAL USES WITHOUT BUILDINGS: 
Where a permitted use of land involves no structures, such use, excluding agricultural uses, shall 
nonetheless comply with all yards and minimum lot area requirements applicable to the district in 
which it is located, as well as obtaining any other license or permit applicable to the particular use. 
4.7.4 ?FRONT YARD SETBACK: 
The minimum front yard setback for any structure or use located on a lot where the average front 
yard setback of existing structures within 100 feet on the same side of the street is ten feet more or 
less than what is required by this Code, the required setback shall be the average setback of said 
structures. 
4.7.5 ?MEASUREMENT OF SETBACKS: 
Where the dedicated right-of-way is less than 40 feet for a lane or 50 feet for all other streets, the 
front yard setback and, for corner lots, the side yard setback, shall be measured starting at a point 20 
feet from the centerline of the pavement for a lane or 25 feet from the centerline of the pavement for 
all other streets. 
4.7.6 ?OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE: 
Where permitted, merchandise displayed outdoors which exceeds the height of six feet, including 
new and used mobile homes, trucks, or other motor vehicles, shall set back from street right-of-way 
lines not less than one-half of the required building setback. 
4.7.7 ?DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS: 
The required front yard setback shall be observed on both frontages of such lot. 
4.7.8 ?LOT SPLIT: 
When a zone line is clearly intended to split a lot—i.e., does not follow the lot line—the rear yard 
setback must be measured from the zone line if the adjoining zone is more restrictive. 
4.7.9 ?FRONT-FACING GARAGES: 
Front-facing garages shall have a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet or the required front yard 
setback of the zone in which it is located, whichever is greater. 


4.8 - HEIGHT AND DENSITY 
No building or structure shall be erected or altered that exceeds the height limit, accommodates or 
houses a greater number of families, or creates narrower or smaller front yards or side yards than are 
permitted in the regulations for the district in which it is located. 


4.9 - EXCEPTION ON HEIGHT LIMITS 
The height limitations in this Code shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not 
intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, windmills, chimneys, 
smokestacks, derrick conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, masts, and aerials. 


4.10 - EXCEPTIONS ON SETBACKS 
The following structures subject to the provisions of Section 4.10, shall be permitted to encroach into the 
minimum yard setbacks of the specific district regulations set forth in Article VI. 
4.10.1 ?Awnings, canopies, and marquees, not to exceed three feet within all zoning districts except the 
B-2 Central Business District. Within the B-2 Central Business District metal marquees or awnings 
shall be permitted to extend into the public right-of-way up to 18 inches from the street curb. 
4.10.2 ?Parking spaces, driveways, curbs, sidewalks, and steps, provided, however, steps or stairs to a 
dwelling, non-enclosed, not to exceed six feet. 
4.10.3 ?Fences, walls, and landscaping. 
4.10.4 ?Flagpoles. 
4.10.5 ?Accessory structures subject to the requirements of Section 4.13 of this Zoning Code. Where a 
commercial property adjoins a residential development, permanent garbage disposal equipment 
shall be set at least 20 feet from the property line of the commercial property. 
4.10.6 ?On buildings over 35 feet in height, overhanging of roof, eave, gutter, cornice, or other 
architectural feature, not to exceed three feet. 
4.10.7 ?Open fire escapes on any building may extend into any required yard not more than six feet. 
4.10.8 ?Signs, subject to the regulations set forth in Article VII. 
4.10.9 ?Decks, not located closer than seven and one-half feet from the side or rear property line except 
in the R-1 and R-2 districts in which case they shall meet the principal building setback. 


4.11 - VISION CLEARANCE 
To maintain a safe line of sight for drivers of vehicles in all districts except the B-2 Central Business 
district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the height of three feet and 15 
feet shall be permitted within a sight distance triangle located at the intersection of the rights-of-way lines 
of streets or of streets and railroads. No sight distance triangle will be required in the case of intersecting 
streets or railroads not located on the same grade (overpasses, underpasses, etc.). The sight distance 
triangle required shall be the area enclosed by straight lines connecting three points. The first point shall 
be the intersection of the two street right-of-way lines, and the second and third points shall be located on 
each street's right-of-way line a specified distance from the first point. In the case of minor intersecting 
streets, two of these points shall be located on each street's right-of-way line a distance of 20 feet from 
the point of intersection of the two street rights-of-way. In the case of a minor street intersection with an 
arterial or collector street, the required sight distance triangle shall measure 12 feet by 40 feet along the 
street rights-of-way similar to the above method, with the 40-foot measurement being taken along the 
arterial or collector street. In the case of intersecting arterial or collector streets, as designated on the 
zoning map, dual 12-foot by 40-foot sight triangles shall be required. In the case of rounded property 
corners, the point of intersection of the two streets shall be assumed to be the point of intersection of the 
two streets where the two right-of-way lines would have met without such rounding. All measurements 
shall be made horizontally from the point of intersection of the two street right-of-way lines. The following 
diagrams illustrate the required sight triangles. 
 


4.12 - SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
4.12.1 ?PEDESTRIAN WALKS: 
To promote pedestrian connection within and between commercial developments, provision for 
internal pedestrian facilities shall be required where needed to accommodate existing or potential 
pedestrian use. Such facilities may include concrete, asphalt, stone, brick, or gravel sidewalks, 
painted lanes or crosswalks, appropriate signage, and similar improvements. 
4.12.2 ?DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL: 
The following standards are intended to minimize onsite erosion and sedimentation flow into streets 
and streams, to improve the general appearance of sites under development, and to ensure that 
stormwater is handled in a way which will not threaten or injure the health, safety, and welfare of 
citizens, property, or motorists. 
A. ?All developments shall meet the drainage and erosion control requirements of the Johnson City 
Public Works Department's standards of latest issue. 
B. ?Reseeding or sodding any cleared or graded site shall be required where no building activity 
has occurred within a three-month period. 
4.12.3 ?WATER AND SEWER: 
All water and sewer improvements shall comply with the "Standards of Design for Water and Sewer 
Lines" as adopted by the Board of Commissioners. 


4.13 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
Accessory structures and uses are permitted subject to the provisions of this section. 
4.13.1 ?Accessory structures, provided: 
A. ?Private residential garages and carports; 
B. ?Buildings for storage incidental to a permitted use; 
C. ?Private swimming pool and tennis courts; 
D. ?Alternative energy systems; and 
E. ?Greenhouses. 
4.13.2 ?No accessory structure or use shall be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of 
the substantial completion of the construction of the principal dwelling to which it is accessory. 
4.13.3 ?Prohibited accessory structures: Mobile storage units, e.g., semi-trailers, converted vans, or 
converted buses, shall not be used as accessory structures for storage or human occupancy on any 
residential lot. 
4.13.4 ?Area regulations: 
A. ?Structures 850 square feet or less. 
1. ?Maximum height 15 feet; 
2. ?Accessory structures and uses shall be located in the side or rear yard with a minimum of 
seven and one-half feet from all lot lines; and 
3. ?No accessory structure shall be larger than the size of the principle dwelling. 
B. ?Structures greater than 850 square feet and/or 15 feet in height, may be approved by special 
exception provided they meet the following conditions: 
1. ?Maximum size of structures shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor area of the principal 
dwelling; 
2. ?The accessory structure is constructed of similar materials of the principal dwelling for 
property less than an acre; 
3. ?Meet the district setbacks for a principle dwelling; 
4. ?Accessory structure shall not be taller than the principle dwelling; and 
5. ?The Board of Zoning Appeals may require additional standards be met in order to assure 
compatibility of the proposed use with adjoining properties and to maintain the integrity of 
the single-family zoning district. 
C. ?No more than two accessory structures shall be permitted on the property. Private swimming 
pools, tennis courts, alternative energy systems, and greenhouses are exempt from this 
requirement. The total combined area of those buildings shall not exceed 850 square feet or 30 
percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling, whichever is greater. 
4.13.5 ?Accessory uses: 
A. ?Permitted home occupations: 
1. ?Offices for such professionals as but not limited to architects, counselors, contractors, 
clergy, draftspersons and cartographers, engineers, financial planners, insurance agents, 
lawyers, real estate agents, accountants, psychologists, psychiatrists, surveyors, cleaning 
services, salespersons and manufacturer's representatives; 
2. ?Personal services including barber and beauty shops (limited to one chair), therapeutic 
massage, pet grooming, catering, tailors and dressmakers, and typing and word 
processing services; 
3. ?Instructional services including but not limited to dance, music, arts and crafts, and tutoring; 
4. ?Studios for artists, sculptors, musicians, and photographers and similar activities; 
5. ?Repair services for jewelry, watches and clocks, small appliances, computers, electronic 
devices, guns, lawnmowers, and small engines, and similar activities; 
6. ?It is recognized that this list is not totally inclusive. The Planning Division shall make the 
determination of whether an unlisted business qualifies as a permitted use. An appeal of 
the Planning Division's determination may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
B. ?Prohibited home occupations: 
1. ?Kennels and veterinarian clinics or hospitals; 
2. ?Medical and dentist offices involving patient visitation; 
3. ?Motor vehicle repair; 
4. ?Retail sales of goods on the premises; 
5. ?Barber and beauty shops exceeding one chair; and 
6. ?Substance abuse treatment facility involving client visitation; 
C. ?Operational standards: 
1. ?The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and 
shall not change the essential residential character and appearance of the dwelling. No 
internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use shall be permitted. 
2. ?Use of the dwelling for this purpose shall be limited to 25 percent of one floor of the primary 
residential dwelling and 50 percent of the floor area of one accessory structure. No outside 
storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. Refuse generated in the 
conduct of the home occupation shall be stored and or disposed of in accordance with city 
policy. 
3. ?The equipment used by the business and the operation of the business shall not create any 
vibrations, heat, glare, dust, odors, or smoke discernible at the property lines. The 
business and the operation of the business shall comply with all city noise ordinances and 
regulations. The business and the operation of the business shall not create any electrical, 
magnetic or other interference off the premises, consume utility quantities that negatively 
impact the delivery of those utilities to surrounding properties, or use and/or store 
hazardous/explosive materials in excess of quantities normally found in residential 
structures. 
4. ?The home occupation shall have no more than one nonresident employee on the premises 
at any one time. The number of nonresident employees working at locations other than the 
home occupation is not limited. 
5. ?Customer or client visits to the home occupation are limited to the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 
8:00 p.m., and no more than two customers or clients shall be present at any one time. 
6. ?Delivery vehicles used to deliver goods to the home occupation are limited to passenger 
vehicles, mail carriers, and express carriers such as UPS. Deliveries shall be permitted 
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The home occupation shall be limited to the parking or 
storage of one commercial vehicle on the premises, not exceeding a one-ton capacity. Off-
site employees shall not park vehicles at the location of the home occupation. 
7. ?Signage for home occupations shall be limited to one nameplate attached to the building, 
not to exceed two square feet in area and may not be internally illuminated. No 
freestanding signs in the yard used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be 
permitted. 


4.14 - TEMPORARY USES 
Temporary structures and uses are permitted subject to the provisions of this section. 
4.14.1 ?Temporary structures, provided: 
A. ?Temporary storage in a portable shipping container: Temporary storage in a portable shipping 
container shall be permitted to serve an existing use, subject to the following standards. A 
portable shipping container shall not be located: 
1. ?On a lot without prior approval from the Building Division; 
2. ?In a manner that impedes ingress, egress, or emergency access; and 
3. ?On an individual parcel or site for more than 60 days. 
B. ?Temporary building or yard for construction office, material or equipment, provided such use is 
adjacent to the construction site and is adequately equipped with sanitary facilities and removed 
when construction is completed. A permit shall be valid for the duration of building construction 
but every temporary building shall be removed when construction is completed or discontinued 
for more than 60 days. 
C. ?Real estate sales office, provided that such use is only for the sales within the development and 
is only valid for not more than three years, but, may be renewed with one-year extensions. Such 
office shall be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision or upon 
expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first. 
4.14.2 ?Temporary uses, provided: 
A. ?Religious service, show, exhibition and other gatherings under tent or in open. A temporary use 
permit may be issued for a period of time not exceeding 14 days. Such activities shall only be 
permitted on lots with adequate off-street parking. 
B. ?Garage sales 
1. ?No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the person desiring to conduct such 
sale shall obtain a permit from the city finance department. 
2. ?Such a garage sale shall be held only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
3. ?No more than three garage sales shall be held from the same address within any calendar 
year with not more than two garage sales permitted within a 30-day period. 
4. ?Each garage sale shall not exceed three consecutive days. 


4.15 - VESTING RIGHTS 
To avoid undue hardship, an approved site plan shall be considered vested for a period of three years 
from the date of site plan approval provided the developer secures all necessary permits. The vesting 
period shall be extended an additional two years provided site preparation has begun during the initial 
three year period. If construction commences and the developer maintains all necessary permits, the site 
plan remains vested for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of original approval. 
Developments involving multiple phases are vested for a period not to exceed 15 years. 
Type of 
Project 
Vesting Period 
Required Actions 
Site Plan 
3 yrs. 
Obtain Site Plan approval and secure necessary permits 

2 additional yrs. 
Site preparation has commenced 

5 additional yrs. (not to  
exceed a total of 10 yrs.) 
Construction commences and  
developer maintains all permits. 
Multi-phase  
Site Plans 
15 yrs. 
Complete construction for each phase,  
maintain necessary permits. 
 
In the event the city enacts a moratorium on development or construction, the vesting period shall be 
tolled during the moratorium period. 
4.15.1 ?TERMINATION OF VESTING RIGHTS: 
The vested rights of an approved site plan may be terminated upon a written determination by the 
city under the following circumstances: 
A. ?When the developer violates the terms and conditions specified in the approved site plan; 
provided, the applicant is given 90 days from the date of notification to cure the violation; 
provided further, that the city may, upon a determination that such is in the best interest of the 
community, grant, in writing, an additional time period to cure the violation; 
B. ?When the developer violates any of the terms and conditions specified in the local ordinance or 
resolution; provided, the developer is given 90 days from the date of notification to cure the 
violation; provided further, that the city may, upon a determination that such is in the best 
interest of the community, grant, in writing, an additional time period to cure the violation; 
C. ?Upon a finding by the city that the developer intentionally supplied inaccurate information or 
knowingly made misrepresentations material to the issuance of site plan approval or 
intentionally and knowingly did not construct the development in accordance with the approved 
site plan or an approved amendment for the building permit or the site plan; or 
D. ?Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law, regulation, rule, policy, corrective 
action or other governance, regardless of nomenclature, that is required to be enforced by the 
city and that precludes development as contemplated in the approved site plan, unless 
modifications to the development plan or building permit can be made by the developer, within 
90 days of notification of the new requirement, which will allow the developer to comply with the 
new requirements. 


ARTICLE V - SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURE 


5.1 - APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
With the exception of single-family and two-family dwellings, the following site plan approval procedure 
shall govern all development: 
5.1.1 ?Two sets of complete site plan drawings and an electronic copy of the site plan shall be submitted 
to the Code Enforcement Division, along with the appropriate review fee, if required. 
5.1.2 ?The site plan shall be drawn to scale and include: 
A. ?Boundary of the tract, including dimensions and location of any new or revised lots or 
easements within the tract; 
B. ?The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed roads, driveways, entrances and 
exits, lanes, easements, and parking areas, including the number of parking spaces; 
C. ?Proposed building locations and dimensions including the height of buildings and building 
entrances both pedestrian and vehicular; 
D. ?Location and extent of existing and proposed landscaping, buffer yards, fences, lighting, 
pedestrian walkways, and signage; 
E. ?Proposed use of land and buildings; 
F. ?The relation of the project to the adjoining street system and surrounding area, including the 
zoning and land use of surrounding properties; 
G. ?The complete grading plan, erosion prevention and sediment control plan in compliance with 
ordinance number 4064-04, water quality plan in compliance with ordinance number 4293-07, 
floodplain regulations information in compliance with Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance, and 
stormwater runoff calculations supporting the stormwater collection and detention plan, shall 
also be submitted; 
H. ?Location and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and stormwater sewers with grades, sizes, 
and elevations indicated; 
I. ?Proposed water distribution system showing pipe location, sizes, and the location of all pumps, 
meters, valves, and fire hydrants; and 
J. ?The location and extent of other utility facilities, including electric, telephone, and TV cable lines, 
natural gas lines, and poles for power or telephone. 
5.1.3 ?Review procedure: 
Staff review procedure—Upon receipt of a site plan, the Code Enforcement Division shall: 
A. ?Notify the Planning Department, Engineering Division, Water and Sewer Department, and any 
other department as appropriate of submitted plans; 
B. ?Each department shall promptly review the site plan for conformity with the requirements in 
Subsection 5.1.2 and convey its findings to the Code Enforcement Division, which shall compile 
a consolidated staff report on the site plan; 
C. ?If any deficiency is found in the plan, the applicant and property owner shall be contacted and 
the deficiency or deficiencies explained. If the applicant and owner agree to amend the plan to 
correct all deficiencies, then a corrected site plan shall be submitted for review; and 
D. ?Finding of compliance—Upon finding that the site plan is in full compliance with the 
requirements of Subsection 5.1.2, the Chief Building Official shall issue the appropriate grading 
or building permits. 
5.1.4 ?Appeal procedure: 
A. ?If the applicant disagrees with the findings of the city staff, an appeal may be made to the 
Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the Planning Department and 
shall state the reasons why in the applicant's opinion, that feels the site plan is in compliance. 
The appeal shall be filed no later than ten full working days prior to the next Planning 
Commission meeting and shall be accompanied by ten additional copies of the site plan. 
B. ?The Planning Commission at its regular meeting shall review the disputed site plan and hear 
evidence from the applicant, the staff, and from any other interested persons. After hearing 
evidence, the Planning Commission shall approve the site plan as submitted, approve with 
amendments, or disapprove the plan. In determining its findings, the Planning Commission shall 
take into consideration the character of the surrounding area to: (1) protect adjoining 
residentially-zoned lots and residential uses; (2) to provide for the public safety; and (3) to 
prevent traffic congestion. 
C. ?The applicant may appeal the Planning Commission's finding to the City Commission. After 
receiving the findings of the Planning Commission, the City Commission shall review the site 
plan and the evidence presented by the staff, the applicant, and any other concerned persons. 
The appeal shall be filed no later than 14 full working days prior to the next City Commission 
meeting and shall be accompanied by seven additional copies of the site plan. After such 
review, the City Commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve with amendment the site 
plan. In determining its action, the City Commission may also make additional reasonable 
requirements. 
5.1.6 ?Subdivision and replatting procedure: 
A. ?In order to promote interconnectivity, reduce the number of curb cuts, and the development of 
comprehensive stormwater management, a Subdivision Site Plan shall be required for all 
subdivisions in the B-4, B-5, and PB districts. A Subdivision Site Plan shall include the following: 
1. ?Location and number of proposed curb cuts; 
2. ?Proposed interconnectivity between proposed lots; and 
3. ?Preliminary stormwater detention location. 
B. ?In the B-4, B-5, and PB districts, lots may be created which gain access from a private drive, 
private street, or easement. Any creation of lots or easements or any replatting of or within the 
original tract shall be reviewed according to the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations of the 
Johnson City Regional Planning Commission. The original subdivision of land within the tract or 
the establishment of permanent easements for access shall be reviewed by the Planning 
Commission; thereafter, replats or further subdivisions may be reviewed administratively subject 
to the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations. 
5.1.7 ?Development plan amendment: 
A. ?An amendment to an approved site plan by the developer must be approved by the city to retain 
the protections of the vested property rights. An amendment may be denied based upon a 
written finding by the city that the amendment: 
1. ?Alters the proposed use; 
2. ?Increases the overall area of the development; 
3. ?Alters the size of any nonresidential structures included in the development plan; 
4. ?Increases the density of the development so as to affect traffic, noise or other 
environmental impacts; or 
5. ?Increases any local government expenditure necessary to implement or sustain the 
proposed use. 
If approval of an amendment is denied, then the developer may either proceed under the prior 
approved site plan with the associated vested property rights or, alternatively, allow the vested 
property rights to terminate and submit a new site plan. 
B. ?Expiration/extension of vesting period: 
1. ?Upon the expiration of a vesting period for a site plan, construction may not proceed unless 
a new site plan is approved. Any new site plan submitted under this subsection shall meet 
all development standards then in effect for those portions of the project not already 
constructed or under construction. 
2. ?Alternatively, the Planning Commission may extend the vesting period for any or all of the 
vested rights applicable to a site plan if it determines, in writing, that it is in the best interest 
of the community to allow the development to proceed without terminating the vested 
property right(s). 


5.2 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Each proposed site plan shall be evaluated according to the following standards: 
5.2.1 ?Reserved. 
5.2.2 ?Internal circulation and curb-cut location: 
To promote and protect the safety and function of city streets, the internal circulation and the location 
and number of curb cuts of each project shall be carefully regulated. The City Engineer may request 
that information from the developer be provided concerning future development plans. In addition, 
developments having off-street parking facilities shall interconnect on-site vehicular access with 
adjoining property where practical. 
5.2.3 ?Private streets and permanent easements: 
A. ?Private streets designed to serve as internal streets within a commercial development shall be 
built to the public street standards of Article IV of the Subdivision Regulations. So long as such 
streets and utilities remain private, their maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property 
owner. Upon verification by the Planning Commission, City Engineer, and the Water and Sewer 
Engineer that private streets and utilities have been constructed according to Subdivision 
Regulations standards for public streets and the utilities have been constructed according to 
TDEC and Water and Sewer Department Standards, they may be accepted by the city upon 
dedication by the owner. 
B. ?Permanent private easements for transportation access may be established within a 
commercial development across parking lots or driveways where appropriate, based on traffic 
volumes, site conditions, and building location. The minimum width of such easement shall be 
12 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for two-way traffic. The minimum pavement depths of 
such easements shall be six inches of mineral aggregate base and three inches of asphalt. The 
maintenance of such easements shall be the permanent responsibility of the owner. In no case 
shall the city accept such easements as public nor maintain them. 
5.2.4 ?Sidewalk requirement: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all multi-family, commercial, and office developments along their 
public street frontages, and for all industrial developments along their collector and arterial street 
frontages, in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and "The Standards of Design for 
Streets and Drainage." 


ARTICLE VI - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 


6.1 - R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.1.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-1 Low Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.1.1.1 ?Single-family residences; 
6.1.1.2 ?Customary general farming, but not the raising of farm animals or poultry; 
6.1.1.3 ?Public utility stations, provided all lot area requirements of the district in which they are 
located are met; 
6.1.1.4 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings or land uses; 
6.1.1.5 ?Group homes for eight or fewer unrelated mentally retarded, mentally handicapped, or 
physically handicapped residents, which may include two additional persons, approved by the 
licensing agency to act as houseparents or guardians, and who need not be related, provided 
that: 
A. ?Prior to admission to the facility, all resident applicants are screened by the appropriate 
sponsoring agency, such as Watauga Mental Health Center or Dawn of Hope, in order to 
exclude violence-prone or other potentially dangerous persons; 
B. ?The facility is fully licensed/certified by the appropriate overseeing state agency (e.g. the 
State Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation); 
C. ?The facility is operated as a residential home only and does not include teaching or training 
activities for non-residents; and 
D. ?The facility is located not closer than 1,320 feet to any other group home or temporary 
shelter. 
6.1.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.1.2.1 ?Schools offering general education, churches with parish houses, and Sunday school 
buildings, provided: 
A. ?They are located on an arterial or collector street; and 
B. ?The buildings are placed not less than 30 feet from side property lines. 
6.1.2.2 ?Day-care centers established to offer instruction to persons of pre-school, elementary, and 
secondary school age, provided: 
A. ?The facility meets all requirements imposed by the state licensing board, including, but not 
limited to, maximum allowable enrollment, adequate play and work space, and noise and 
safety controls; 
B. ?Excessive noise shall be controlled by such means as enclosure, screening, and/or play 
yard supervision to not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding 
properties; 
C. ?The facility shall be located on an arterial or collector street; 
D. ?A paved driveway for the off-street loading and unloading of children provides a separate 
entrance and exit to and from the property from an arterial or collector street, without 
backing into the street; 
E. ?The property shall contain a minimum of one and one-half acres; and 
F. ?Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard. 
6.1.2.3 ?Alternative tower structures 
6.1.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.1.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 21,780 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet at the front building line. 
6.1.3.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
70 feet 
Collector 
60 feet 
All other 
50 feet 
 
B. ?Side Yards: Minimum side yard setback shall be 15 feet for a one-story building, 20 feet for 
a two-story building, and 25 feet for a three-story building. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.1.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 30 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.1.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.1.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required along the public street frontages of churches, day-care centers, 
government buildings, public utility stations, and schools in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk 
Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 


6.2 - R-2 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.2.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-2 Low Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.2.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residential District provided all other R-2 
requirements are observed; 
6.2.1.2 ?Publicly owned recreational facilities and grounds; 
6.2.1.3 ?Cemeteries; and 
6.2.1.4 ?Local or counsel headquarters of national, nonprofit organizations providing for the 
education, attainment of high morals, good citizenship, and character of young men and women 
from the ages of nine to 16 years inclusive provided: 
A. ?The buildings are placed no less than 50 feet from the side property lines; 
B. ?The lot area contains no less than 50,000 square feet; and 
C. ?No external evidence of such use of the property other than a sign attached to the principal 
building, not more than two square feet in area. 
6.2.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.2.2.1 ?All special exceptions permitted in the R-1 Low Density Residential District. 
6.2.2.2 ?Swimming clubs, tennis clubs, and similar recreational facilities, provided: 
A. ?They are owned and operated by private clubs organized as nonprofit associations, 
whether incorporated or not, conducting noncommercial recreational activities for the 
exclusive use of club members and their guests; 
B. ?Community recreational facilities must be located on an arterial or collector street as 
designated on the city's Zoning Map and have a minimum lot size of ten acres. A 
neighborhood recreational facility may be located on a minor street and must have a 
minimum lot size of one-half acre. Membership to the neighborhood facility will be limited to 
families residing in the subdivision or a designated neighborhood and shall not exceed 200 
memberships; 
C. ?All buildings, machinery, and equipment shall meet the minimum setback requirements of 
the district in which the facility is located; 
D. ?The sale of merchandise, excluding refreshments to be consumed on the premises by 
members and their guests, shall be prohibited; 
E. ?One identification sign, with an area not to exceed 12 square feet, shall be permitted; 
F. ?Noise and glare shall be minimized. Outdoor loud speakers, juke boxes, public address 
systems, electric amplifiers, and similar electronic devices shall not be permitted; and 
G. ?Neighborhood recreational facilities shall have no parking requirements. 
6.2.2.3 ?Golf courses provided: 
A. ?Minimum size for a par three golf course shall be 20 acres; for an executive golf course, 50 
acres; and for a regulation golf course, 120 acres; 
B. ?Location shall be on a collector or arterial street with direct access provided by such street 
unless waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a result of conditions unique to the site; 
C. ?A generalized site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet shall be 
submitted depicting the following: the identification of existing and/or planned uses 
surrounding the site; the location and size of all holes (including tees and greens); 
proposed driveways; off-street parking areas; accessory uses including clubhouse, pro-
shop, snack bar, maintenance and storage buildings or similar uses; putting greens; driving 
ranges; walkways; landscaping; screening; fencing; and buffering; 
D. ?Orientation of driving tees shall direct golf balls away from any abutting streets and 
residences, or suitable screens or netting shall be required; 
E. ?Driving ranges and night lighting shall not be permitted on par three golf courses and 
allowed only at the discretion of the BZA on executive and regulation golf courses; and 
F. ?Any additional requirements to ensure the protection of the surrounding neighborhood. 
6.2.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.2.3.1 ?Minimum lot size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 90 feet at the front building line. 
6.2.3.2 ?Yard area: 
A. ?Front yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
C. ?Rear yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.2.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 30 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.2.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.2.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-1, Subsection 6.1.6, and for headquarters of 
non-profit organizations (youth), recreational clubs, and public owned recreation facilities and 
grounds along their public street frontages in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and 
The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 


6.3 - R-2A LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.3.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-2A Low Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.3.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-2 Low Density Residential District provided all other R-2A 
requirements are observed. 
6.3.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.3.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the R-2 Low Density Residential District. 
6.3.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.3.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 12,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet at the front building line. 
6.3.3.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.3.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 30 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.3.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.3.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-2, Subsection 6.2.6, along their public street 
frontages in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for 
Streets and Drainage. 


6.4 - R-2B LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.4.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-2B Low Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.4.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-2A Low Density Residential District provided all other R-2B 
requirements are observed. 
6.4.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.4.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in R-2A Low Density Residential Districts. 
6.4.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.4.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 9,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet at the front building line. 
6.4.3.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.4.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.4.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.4.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-2, Subsection 6.2.6, along their public street 
frontages in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for 
Streets and Drainage. 


6.5 - R-2C LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.5.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-2C Low Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.5.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-2B Low Density Residential District provided all other R-2C 
requirements are observed. 
6.5.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.5.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the R-2B Low Density Residential District. 
6.5.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.5.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet at the front building line. 
6.5.3.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
6.5.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 40 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.5.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.5.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-2, Subsection 6.2.6, along their public street 
frontages in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for 
Streets and Drainage. 


6.6 - R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.6.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-3 Medium Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.6.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-2C, Low Density Residential District, provided all other R-3 
requirements are observed; 
6.6.1.2 ?Two-family and multi-family dwellings; 
6.6.1.3 ?Boarding or rooming houses; 
6.6.1.4 ?Churches with parish houses and Sunday school buildings, provided all buildings have a 
minimum side yard setback of 25 feet; 
6.6.1.5 ?Group homes for ten or fewer unrelated mentally retarded, mentally handicapped, or 
physically handicapped residents, which may include two additional persons, approved by the 
licensing agency to act as houseparents or guardians, and who need not be related, provided: 
A. ?Prior to admission to the facility, all resident applicants are screened by the appropriate 
sponsoring agency, such as Watauga Mental Health Center or Dawn of Hope, in order to 
exclude violence-prone or other potentially dangerous persons; 
B. ?The facility is fully licensed/certified by the appropriate overseeing state agency (e.g. the 
State Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation); 
C. ?The facility is operated as a residential home only and does not include teaching or training 
activities for non-residents; and 
D. ?The facility is located not closer than 1,320 feet to any other group home or temporary 
shelter. 
6.6.1.6 ?Residential homes for the aged, provided: 
A. ?Such a home shall be licensed and shall meet all requirements of the minimum standards 
and regulations of nursing homes except nursing services by a professional nurse; 
B. ?Such a home shall meet all building and fire safety codes as required by the State of 
Tennessee Department of Public Health; and 
C. ?Density shall be based on bedrooms per acre and shall be calculated as two times the 
number of dwelling units allowed in the zoning district. In the R-3 district, maximum 
allowable density shall be 14 bedrooms per acre. 
6.6.1.7 ?Emergency or temporary shelters, provided: 
A. ?The shelter houses no more than eight persons for no more than 30 days per person. 
Length of stay may be extended when extenuating circumstances can be shown to the 
Shelter Director; 
B. ?Prior to admission to the facility, all shelter applicants are screened by the appropriate 
sponsoring agency, in order to exclude violence-prone or other potentially dangerous 
persons; 
C. ?The facility meets the "Shelter Service and Performance Standards" as recognized by the 
State Department of Human Services; and 
D. ?The facility is located no closer than 1,320 feet to any other temporary shelter or group 
home as defined in Article II. 
6.6.1.8 ?Adult day-care centers, provided: 
A. ?The facility has a maximum allowable enrollment of 30 people and adequate work space 
(25 square feet per person); 
B. ?Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard; 
C. ?For emergency purposes, including ambulances, emergency vehicles, and fire vehicles, 
the facility shall be located on an arterial or collector street, or a minor street provided it is 
not a cul-de-sac and the street has a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet with a 
minimum paved width of 29 feet, including curbs; and 
D. ?A paved driveway for the off-street loading and unloading of handicapped persons 
provides a separate entrance and exit to and from the property from an arterial or collector 
street without backing into the street. 
6.6.1.9 ?Bed-and-breakfast homes, provided: 
A. ?There shall be no more than six registered guests at one time and a current guest register 
shall be kept by the owner; 
B. ?Parking shall be located at the rear or side of the building; 
C. ?There shall be no more than one bed-and-breakfast home located within 1,500 feet 
(determined by a straight line and not street distance) of the establishment; 
D. ?All necessary state and city permits, certifications, or requirements shall be obtained as a 
condition of approval of a bed-and-breakfast home service; and 
E. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure safety of the structure, shall 
be made to any building for the purpose of providing bed-and-breakfast. 
6.6.1.10 ?Mortuary establishments provided: 
A. ?Primary access shall be from a collector or arterial street; 
B. ?Minimum lot size shall be three acres; 
C. ?A Type 2 buffer shall be required along all property lines that abut R-1 through R-6 zoning 
districts; 
D. ?A ground-mounted sign with a maximum of 32 square feet shall be allowed for each street 
granting access. If two or more individual signs are allowed due to multiple street frontage, 
they may be substituted for one ground-mounted sign with a maximum size of 64 square 
feet; and 
E. ?A site plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission; said plan shall contain the 
following: 
1. ?Location, size, and height of all proposed structures; 
2. ?A traffic circulation plan including the location of all parking areas, driveways, and 
points of ingress and egress; 
3. ?Location, extent, and composition of all proposed buffering; and 
4. ?Other information as required by the Planning Commission. 
F. ?Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet, side yard setback shall be 25 feet except 
where said side yard abuts a residential district in which case said side yard shall be 50 
feet; and rear yard setback shall be 50 feet. 
6.6.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.6.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the R-2C Low Density Residential District; 
6.6.2.2 ?Libraries, museums, art galleries and other cultural facilities, offices and facilities of non-
profit and civic organizations, and social service organizations provided: 
A. ?The use shall be located in a discontinued school or similar public building; 
B. ?Pick-up and delivery of goods shall be restricted to access only from a collector or arterial 
street and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; 
C. ?Parking and loading docks shall be located at the rear or side of the building and not be 
visible from any public right-of-way (excluding alleys) or residential property; 
D. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure the safety of the structure, 
shall be made to any building; and 
E. ?No exterior storage shall be permitted. 
6.6.2.3 ?Alternative tower structures. 
6.6.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.6.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 9,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 75 feet at the front building line. 
6.6.3.2 ?Density: Maximum density shall be seven dwelling units per acre. 
6.6.3.3 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.6.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.6.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.6.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-2, Subsection 6.2.6, and for adult day-care 
centers and multi-family developments along their public street frontages in accordance with Article 
IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.6.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.7 - R-4 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.7.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-4 Medium Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.7.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-3 Medium Density Residential District provided all other R-4 
requirements are observed. 
6.7.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.7.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the R-3 Medium Density Residential District; 
6.7.2.2 ?Day-care centers and private dancing schools that are established to offer instructions to 
persons of pre-school, elementary, and secondary school age, provided: 
A. ?No more than 100 children are cared for in day-care centers and no more than 20 students 
are given instruction at one time in dancing schools; 
B. ?These uses are not permitted to be located on cul-de-sacs; 
C. ?If access is gained from an arterial or collector street, a paved driveway connected to the 
arterial or collector street must be provided. This driveway must include an exit and an 
entrance to facilitate safe, off-street loading and unloading which does not require backing 
into the street; and 
D. ?The maximum permitted floor area of the principal building shall be 5,000 square feet. 
6.7.2.3 ?Golf courses provided: 
A. ?The golf course consists of a minimum of ten acres open space; 
B. ?The property was previously used for a golf course within the last five years, and such use 
was found then to be a satisfactory and compatible use, and is considered to still be 
satisfactory and compatible by review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The golf course is located on an arterial or collector street, and all access to the golf 
course, including its parking areas, club house, etc. is gained from the designated arterial 
or collector; 
D. ?The clubhouse, parking, and any accessory buildings are no closer than 50 feet to any 
property line; 
E. ?The sale of merchandise is limited to an enclosed area no larger than 400 square feet, and 
this use shall be clearly incidental to the golf course use; 
F. ?The sale of food is restricted to the club house, is limited to no more than 400 square feet, 
and is clearly incidental to the golf course function; 
G. ?One sign shall be permitted and shall be oriented to the street giving access to the 
property. The size, setbacks, and any lighting restrictions shall be the same as for other 
nonresidential uses permitted within the applicable zone; and 
H. ?Noise and glare are to be minimized as follows: loud speakers, juke boxes, public address 
systems, electric amplifiers, and similar electronic devices shall not be permitted. 
6.7.2.4 ?Restaurants, museums, or art galleries provided: 
A. ?The structure was constructed prior to 1864; 
B. ?The use shall be allowed only in structures that are recognized as architecturally, 
historically, or culturally significant and that, through renovation and use as a restaurant, 
museum, or art gallery, will contribute significantly to the ambiance, character, or economic 
revitalization of the neighborhood. In demonstrating compliance with this condition, the 
petitioner shall provide a brief history of the residence that illustrates its architectural, 
historical, or cultural significance; 
C. ?The structure shall be located on an arterial or collector street; 
D. ?The structure shall be adjacent to a nonresidential zoning district; 
E. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure safety of the structure or are 
consistent with the architectural, historical, or cultural significance of the structure shall be 
permitted; 
F. ?Parking shall be located at the rear or side of the building and not be visible from any 
public right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjacent residential property; and 
G. ?Noise is to be minimized. Outdoor loudspeakers, public address systems, and similar 
electronic devices shall not be permitted. 
6.7.2.5 ?Bed-and-breakfast inns, provided: 
A. ?There shall be no more than 12 registered adult guests at one time and a current guest 
register must be kept by the owner (or manager); 
B. ?The owner (or manager) must reside on the premises; 
C. ?Parking shall not be visible from any public right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjacent 
property; 
D. ?All necessary state and city permits, certifications, or requirements be obtained as a 
condition of a bed-and-breakfast inn service; 
E. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure safety of the structure, shall 
be made to any building for the purpose of providing bed-and-breakfast; 
F. ?No bed-and-breakfast inn may be located within 1,500 feet (determined by a straight line 
and not street distance) of another; 
G. ?The structure shall be located on an arterial or collector street; and 
H. ?The property shall be a minimum lot size of one acre. 
6.7.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.7.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 7,000 square feet; and 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
6.7.3.2 ?Density: Maximum density shall be 14 dwelling units per acre. 
6.7.3.3 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.7.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.7.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 
6.7.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-3, Subsection 6.6.6, and for dance schools, 
golf courses, and multi-family developments along their public street frontages in accordance with 
Article XI, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.7.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.8 - R-5 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
6.8.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-5 High Density Residential District the following uses are permitted: 
6.8.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-4 Medium Density Residential District provided all other R-5 
requirements are observed; 
6.8.1.2 ?Schools, public and private, offering general education, provided: 
A. ?They are located on an arterial or collector street; and 
B. ?The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from the side property lines. 
6.8.1.3 ?Swimming clubs, provided: 
A. ?They are owned and operated by private clubs organized as non-profit associations, 
whether incorporated or not, conducting noncommercial recreational swimming activities 
and other related recreational activities for the exclusive use of club members and their 
guests; 
B. ?The minimum lot area is two acres with the total lot area to be calculated on the basis of 
one acre for each 100 families in the membership of the club or organization; 
C. ?They are located on arterial or collector streets as the same are designated on the Official 
Zoning Map of the city of Johnson City; 
D. ?No recreational activity takes place nor any building, machinery, or equipment is located 
within 50 feet of any side, front, or rear property lines; 
E. ?The sale of merchandise, excluding refreshments to be consumed on the premises by 
members and their guests, shall be prohibited; 
F. ?One identification sign, with an area not to exceed 12 square feet, erected flat against a 
fence or the front or side of the building shall be permitted. Lighting of such sign shall be 
prohibited; and 
G. ?Noise and glare are to be minimized. Outdoor loud speakers, juke boxes, public address 
systems, electric amplifiers, and similar electronic devices shall not be permitted. 
6.8.1.4 ?Day-care centers and dance schools which are established to offer instructions to persons 
of preschool and elementary and secondary school age, provided: 
A. ?No more than 100 children are cared for in day-care centers and no more than 20 students 
are given instructions at one time in dancing schools; 
B. ?These uses are not permitted to be located on culs-de-sac; 
C. ?If access is gained from an arterial or collector street, a paved driveway connected to the 
arterial or collector street must be provided. This driveway must include an exit and an 
entrance to facilitate safe, off-street loading and unloading which does not require backing 
into the street; and 
D. ?The maximum permitted floor area of the principal building shall be 5,000 square feet. 
6.8.1.5 ?Emergency or temporary shelters, provided: 
A. ?The shelter houses no more than 15 persons for no more than 30 days per person. Length 
of stay may be extended when extenuating circumstances can be shown by the Shelter 
Director; and 
B. ?All applicable conditions for approval listed in Subsection 6.6.1.7 are met. 
6.8.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.8.2.1 ?Nursing homes, provided: 
A. ?They are located on an arterial or collector street; and 
B. ?The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from side property lines. 
6.8.2.2 ?Golf courses, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.7.2.3. 
6.8.2.3 ?Group homes for 11 to 15 unrelated mentally retarded, mentally handicapped, or physically 
handicapped residents, provided: 
A. ?Supervisor(s) or houseparents(s), certified by the appropriate overseeing agency (e.g. the 
State Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation), be on-premise at all times; 
B. ?Prior to admission to the facility, all resident applications are screened by the appropriate 
sponsoring agency, such as Watauga Mental Health Center or Dawn of Hope, in order to 
exclude violence-prone or other potentially dangerous persons; 
C. ?The facility is fully licensed by the appropriate overseeing state agency; and 
D. ?The facility is located not closer than 1,320 feet to any group home or temporary shelter. 
6.8.2.4 ?Alternative tower structures. 
6.8.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.8.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet at the front building line. 
6.8.3.2 ?Density: Maximum density shall be 22 dwelling units per acre. 
6.8.3.3 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.8.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.8.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 65 feet. 
6.8.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-4, Subsection 6.7.6, and for swimming clubs 
and multi-family developments along their public street frontages in accordance with Article XI, 
Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.8.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.9 - R-6 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-UNIVERSITY DISTRICT 
6.9.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the R-6 High Density Residential-University District the following uses are permitted: 
6.9.1.1 ?All uses permitted in the R-5 High Density Residential District provided all other R-6 
requirements are observed; and 
6.9.1.2 ?Fraternity and sorority houses. 
6.9.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4. 
6.9.2.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the R-5 High Density Residential District; and 
6.9.2.2 ?Student activity centers, provided: 
A. ?Minimum side yard setbacks shall be 50 feet; and 
B. ?No living quarters are provided, except for not more than two persons employed as 
custodians. 
6.9.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage and area requirements: 
6.9.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet at the front building line. 
6.9.3.2 ?Density: Maximum allowable density for residential uses shall be 25 dwelling units per 
acre. For multi-family units consisting of four or more bedrooms, maximum density shall be 
18.75 dwelling units per acre. (See also Article II (Family) and Subsection 11.3.3.7). 
6.9.3.3 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and 20 feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.9.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.9.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 65 feet. 
6.9.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all uses required in R-5, Subsection 6.8.6, student activity centers, 
and multi-family residential developments along their public street frontages in accordance with 
Article XI, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.9.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.10 - RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, AND RP-5 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
6.10.1 ?GENERAL DESCRIPTION: 
6.10.1.1 ?The regulations established in this section are intended to provide optional methods of 
land development which encourage more imaginative solutions to environmental design 
problems. Residential areas thus established would be characterized by a unified building and 
site development program, open space for recreation, and provision for commercial, religious, 
education, and cultural facilities which are integrated with the total project by unified 
architectural and open space treatment. 
6.10.1.2 ?District regulations shall be as outlined in the following paragraphs and shall be the same 
for RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, and RP-5 districts except for the density permitted in each district. 
6.10.1.3 ?Each planned residential development shall be compatible with the surrounding or 
adjacent districts. Such compatibility shall be determined by the Planning Commission and 
Board of Commissioners by review of a Concept Plan. 
6.10.1.3.1 ?Any substantial deviation from the approved Concept Plan shall require approval 
by the Planning Commission and City Commission as an amended plan. A substantial 
deviation includes but is not limited to: (1) increase in the number of dwelling units; (2) 
change in the type and location of dwelling units that would impact adjoining property; (3) 
change in access to the proposed development that would negatively impact adjoining 
property; and (4) an increase, exceeding ten percent, in the amount of projected traffic 
resulting from the proposed development. 
6.10.2 ?USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW: 
All uses listed below shall be approved as part of the Concept Plan. Any change of use shall require 
approval of an amended Concept Plan. 
6.10.2.1 ?Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings; 
6.10.2.2 ?Recreation uses including a community center, a golf course, a swimming pool, or parks, 
playground or other public or private recreational uses, and non-profit clubs such as country 
clubs, swimming and/or tennis clubs; 
6.10.2.3 ?Public and semi-public uses which are designed to primarily serve the RP district. 
6.10.2.4 ?Home occupations as defined in Subsection 6.1.1.7; 
6.10.2.5 ?Private day nurseries and kindergartens, as regulated in Subsection 6.8.1.4; 
6.10.2.6 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.10.2.7 ?Accessory structures and uses; and 
6.10.2.8 ?Commercial Uses: In planned residential developments of 20 acres or more, commercial 
uses may be permitted which conform with permitted uses in the B-1 Neighborhood Business 
District—Article 6.14. Commercial uses shall further be governed by the following: 
A. ?No commercial facilities shall be permitted in developments of less than 200 dwelling units; 
B. ?One acre of land may be set aside for commercial development for each 200 dwelling units 
in the development plan. Commercial uses shall not be constructed until a minimum of 200 
residential units have been constructed; and 
C. ?Commercial development shall be compatible, in scale with surrounding residential 
development as determined by the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners. 
6.10.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All structures and uses shall meet the following requirements: 
6.10.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size for a detached single-family unit shall be 4,000 square feet and; 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 40 feet. 
6.10.3.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard. No front yard setback shall be required except for detached single-family 
residential structures. Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or 
collector street and ten feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum 
setback of 25 feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard. No side yard setback shall be required except for drainage and utility 
easements where necessary. 
C. ?Rear Yard. The rear yard setback on lots adjoining a non-RP District shall be the same as 
the setback of the adjacent yard in the non-RP District, provided the rear yard setback in 
the RP District shall not be required to be greater than 25 feet. All other lots not adjoining a 
non-RP District shall maintain a rear yard setback for drainage and utility easements where 
necessary. 
6.10.3.3 ?Height Regulations. Principal buildings located in an RP-2 or RP-3 district shall not 
exceed the height of 35 feet. Principal buildings located in the RP-4 and RP-5 district shall not 
exceed the height of 35 feet on local streets and 65 feet on collector and arterial streets. 
6.10.3.4 ?Open Space and Recreational Areas. Fifteen percent of the overall RP-zoned area shall 
be set aside and developed for common open space or recreational uses not including building 
setbacks and stormwater detention facilities. Said open space shall be designated as common 
area. 
6.10.3.5 ?Sidewalk Requirement. Sidewalks shall be required for all residential uses, churches, 
schools, recreational facilities and grounds, libraries, museums, and historic monuments and 
sites, private day nurseries and kindergartens, and multi- family developments along their public 
street frontages in accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of 
Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.10.4 ?UNIT DENSITY: 
A. ?For attached dwelling units i.e. duplexes, apartments, townhouses, and condominiums, the 
maximum density shall be as follows: 
6.10.4.1 ?RP-2 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be three and four-tenths dwelling units per acre. 
6.10.4.2 ?RP-3 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be eight and one-half dwelling units per acre. 
6.10.4.3 ?RP-4 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be 15.3 dwelling units per acre. 
6.10.4.4 ?RP-5 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be 27.2 dwelling units per acre. 
B. ?For detached single-family units, the maximum density shall be dictated by the minimum lot size of 
not less than 4,000 square feet per lot. 
6.10.5 ?ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR A PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: 
6.10.5.1 ?Application shall be made to the Planning Commission for rezoning to RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, 
or RP-5 in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article XIV of this Code. The application 
shall be accompanied by a Concept Plan including the following information: 
1. ?Use(s) including the number and type of dwelling units; 
2. ?Buffers and/or screening; 
3. ?Approximate building location, size and height, with setbacks; 
4. ?Parking and driveway areas; 
5. ?Entrance and exit locations; 
6. ?Internal vehicular circulation pattern (if appropriate); 
7. ?Private streets must be indentified, if proposed; 
8. ?The location of the required 15 percent of open space; and 
6.10.5.2 ?The Planning Commission shall review the proposed development and forward its 
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners which shall review and give final approval or 
reject the proposed plan. 
A. ?The Planning Commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development 
recognizing the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and neighborhood compatibility; 
B. ?The Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners may impose conditions 
regarding layout, circulation, and performance of the proposed development and may 
require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed; 
C. ?The proposed development must be designed to produce an environment of compatible 
and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood and must 
provide standards of recreation and open space, transportation, and areas for parking 
adequate for the occupancy proposed; and 
D. ?A final plat of the development shall be recorded in the office of the appropriate county 
Registrar of Deeds and shall show property lines, common land, streets, easements, and 
other applicable features required by the Subdivision Regulations. Building permits may be 
issued prior to final subdivision approval. However, no certificate of occupancy will be 
issued prior to the recording of the final plat. 


6.11 - RM-3, RM-4, AND RM-5 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICTS 
6.11.1 ?GENERAL DESCRIPTION: 
6.11.1.1 ?The regulations established in this subsection are intended to provide optional methods of 
land development which encourage more imaginative solutions to environmental design 
problems. Manufactured home parks thus established would be characterized by a unified 
building and site development program. 
6.11.1.2 ?District regulations shall be as outlined in the following paragraphs and shall be the same 
for RM-3, RM-4, and RM-5 districts except for the dwelling unit density permitted in each district. 
6.11.1.3 ?Each manufactured home park shall be compatible with the surrounding or adjacent 
districts. Such compatibility shall be determined by the Planning Commission by review of 
development plans for the district. Any use considered on review shall be judged by the 
Planning Commission to be an integral and necessary function in the design of the 
manufactured home park. 
6.11.2 ?GENERAL PROVISIONS: 
6.11.2.1 ?The manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to 
insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
6.11.2.2 ?No building or structure erected or stationed in the park shall have a height greater than 
one story or 15 feet. 
6.11.2.3 ?A manufactured home park shall be entirely enclosed, exclusive of driveways, at its 
external boundaries by an opaque wall not less than seven feet in height or an opaque buffer 
yard, as described in Section 12.4 in this code. 
6.11.2.4 ?Each Manufactured Home Park shall be permitted a sign as described in Article VII, Sign 
Regulations. 
6.11.2.5 ?Each manufactured home space shall be of sufficient size that, in addition to the 
manufactured home, the following areas shall be provided: 
A. ?Each manufactured home space shall be at least 30 feet wide and such space shall be 
clearly defined by permanent markers; 
B. ?There shall be a front yard setback of ten from all access roads within the manufactured 
home park; 
C. ?Manufactured homes shall be so harbored on each space so that there shall be at least a 
20-foot clearance between manufactured homes, provided, however, with respect to 
manufactured homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance shall be not less than 
12 feet. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet from any building 
within the manufactured home park; 
D. ?Parking spaces may be located in the rear or side yard of said manufactured home space; 
and 
E. ?Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a paved patio of at least 200 
square feet and having a storage locker of at least 100 cubic feet. Storage lockers may be 
located in locker compounds. 
6.11.2.6 ?Common Parking, Access Points, Access Roads, Trailer Spaces, and Walkways: 
A. ?Access roads within a manufactured home park shall be paved to a width of not less than 
24 feet. Where access roads are paved to a width of 32 feet or more, the required guest 
parking area shall be waived; 
B. ?Manufactured home spaces may abut upon a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, 
which shall have unobstructed access to the access road within the manufactured home 
park. The sole vehicular access shall not be by the alley, and all dead-end driveways shall 
include adequate vehicular turning space or a cul-de-sac; 
C. ?All access roads and driveways shall be constructed with a six-inch stone base and a two-
inch layer of asphalt. Extruded concrete roll curbs, the face of which shall not be less than 
five and one-half inches high, shall be installed along the entire length of all such access 
roads; 
D. ?A minimum of six inches of compacted gravel or other suitable pavement material shall be 
installed for each manufactured home space. Size of pads shall be as follows: 
1. ?Five percent—10 feet x 40 feet or larger. 
2. ?Ninety percent—10 feet x 50 feet or larger. 
3. ?Five percent—10 feet x 60 feet or larger. 
E. ?Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the manufactured home 
spaces to service buildings. 
6.11.2.7 ?Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer 
line. 
6.11.2.8 ?A park and recreation area with a minimum of 150 square feet for each manufactured 
home space shall be provided. Areas shall be consolidated into usable areas with minimum 
dimensions of not less than 30 feet. 
6.11.2.9 ?Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a management office and service 
buildings as necessary to provide facilities for mail distribution, storage space for suppliers, 
maintenance materials and equipment, and laundry facilities. Outside laundry drying yards shall 
be enclosed with a six-foot high solid fence. 
6.11.2.9.1 ?Trailers, with or without toilet facilities, that cannot be connected to a sanitary 
sewer line shall not be permitted in a manufactured home park. 
6.11.2.10 ?Prohibited Uses: 
A. ?Cabanas and other similar enclosed structures are prohibited; and 
B. ?Manufactured homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial, or other non-residential 
uses within the manufactured home park. 
6.11.2.11 ?Each manufactured home shall have a non-combustible, corrosive resistant skirt 
extending from the bottom of the manufactured home to the pad pavement. Said skirt shall be 
provided with an access way with a door measuring at least 18 inches by 24 inches; and the 
skirt shall be constructed to prohibit insect and rodent infestation. 
6.11.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and manufactured homes shall be set back from street right-of-way lines and the 
periphery of the project to comply with the following requirements: 
6.11.3.1 ?No manufactured home park shall be established to occupy less than five acres nor 
contain less than 25 manufactured home spaces at the time of first occupancy. However, the 
park, upon completion, must be designed for a minimum of 50 manufactured home units. 
6.11.3.2 ?The manufactured home park shall be subject to the density provisions of the district in 
which it is located, provided, however, there shall be not less than 3,000 square feet of lot area 
for each space provided on the site. This space ratio shall include access roads, automobile 
parking, accessory building space, and recreational area. 
6.11.4 ?DENSITY: 
With net area being calculated on the basis of total area less all access roads and driveways, 
common parking space and accessory building space. 
6.11.4.1 ?RM-3 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be four manufactured homes per net acre. 
6.11.4.2 ?RM-4 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be eight manufactured homes per net acre. 
6.11.4.3 ?RM-5 DISTRICT: Maximum density shall be ten manufactured homes per net acre. 
6.11.5 ?ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT: 
6.11.5.1 ?Application shall be made to the Planning Commission for rezoning to RM-3, RM-4, or 
RM-5 in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article XIV of this Code. Any application 
shall be accompanied by: 
A. ?A general site plan showing tentative street plans, public facilities, building arrangements, 
and manufactured home space locations. 
B. ?Preliminary sketches and specifications showing the proposed architectural design and 
type of construction. 
6.11.5.2 ?Within one year after an area is rezoned RM-3, RM-4, or RM-5 there shall have been filed 
with the Planning Commission a written application for review and approval. Said application 
shall be accompanied by the following information: 
A. ?The application shall be accompanied by an overall development plan showing the use or 
uses, dimensions and locations of proposed streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites, and 
other open spaces, with such other pertinent information as may be necessary to 
determine the contemplated arrangement or use which makes it acceptable to develop a 
manufactured home park as proposed; 
B. ?Where several buildings are to be constructed, architectural sketches and data should be 
provided to insure an aesthetically-acceptable design for all buildings; 
C. ?At least the following construction plans must be submitted: profiles of proposed streets, 
sanitary sewers and storm water sewers with grading sizes and elevations indicated, 
proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes, location of valves and fire 
hydrants, and complete grading plan; and 
D. ?The proposed development plan and all construction plans shall be prepared by and have 
the seal of an architect or engineer duly registered to practice in the State of Tennessee. 
6.11.5.3 ?The Planning Commission shall review the proposed development and forward its 
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners which shall review and may, by resolution, 
give final approval or reject the proposed development: 
A. ?The Planning Commission shall review the conformity of the proposed development 
recognizing principles of civic design, land-use planning and landscape architecture. The 
final design must conform with the original application to the satisfaction of the Planning 
Commission. 
B. ?The Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners may impose conditions 
regarding layout, circulation, and performance of the proposed development and may 
require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed. 
C. ?No building permit or zoning compliance permit shall be issued until a final plat of the 
proposed development is approved by the Board of Commissioners and recorded. No 
occupancy permit shall be issued until the Chief Building Official has determined that the 
project, as constructed, meets all the requirements of the approved plan. The tract or 
parcel of land involved must be either in one ownership or the subject of an application 
filed jointly by the owners of all the property. 
D. ?The proposed development must be designed to produce an environment of stable and 
desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood and must 
provide standards of open space and areas for parking adequate for the occupancy 
proposed. It must include provisions for recreation areas to meet the anticipated 
population. 
E. ?A plat of the development shall be recorded in the office of the appropriate county 
Registrar of Deeds and shall show building lines, common land, streets, easements, and 
other applicable features required by the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission's 
Subdivision Regulations for final subdivision plats, provided, however, that the approval of 
said plat does not constitute the approval of a subdivision within the meaning of the 
Subdivision Regulations. 
6.11.5.4 ?Upon abandonment of a particular project authorized by this Section or upon the 
expiration of three years from the authorization hereunder of a manufactured home park which 
has not by then been completed (or commenced and an extension of time for completion 
granted), the authorization shall expire and the Planning Commission shall consider whether to 
extend the RM zoning, to rezone the property to the zoning district that existed prior to the 
current zoning, or to apply a different and more appropriate zoning classification. Should the 
Planning Commission extend the RM zoning, such extension shall be reviewed after one year. 
6.11.5.5 ?Failure to file an application for review and approval of the Manufactured Home Park 
within one year of the RM-3, RM-4, and RM-5 zoning shall require review of the zoning by the 
Planning Commission as stipulated in Subsection 6.11.5.4. 
6.11.6 ?MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS WHICH PROVIDE FOR THE SALE OF INDIVIDUAL LOTS: 
Manufactured home park developments which are intended to provide for the sale of individual lots 
are authorized within the RM-3, RM-4, and RM-5 Zoning Districts provided the following regulations 
are satisfied: 
6.11.6.1 ?General Requirements: The proposed development must satisfy the requirements set 
forth in Subsection 6.11.1 of this Zoning Code. 
6.11.6.2 ?Preliminary Plan Requirements: Application for rezoning to RM-3, RM-4, or RM-5 shall 
include a Concept Plan which meets the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, provided 
all manufactured home developments shall be served by a sanitary sewer system and all 
streets shall be public streets constructed in conformance with the Subdivision Regulations. 
6.11.6.3 ?Final Plat Requirements: Within one year from the date of preliminary approval, unless an 
extension of time is applied for and approved by the Planning Commission, the developer shall 
submit to the Planning Commission a final plat which shall: 
A. ?Conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations; and 
B. ?Contain certified copies of all deed restrictions, covenants, owner association agreements 
(if any), etc. which provide for the maintenance of any common use recreation or service 
facilities. Upon final approval by the Planning Commission and all necessary certifications, 
the original copy of the final plat shall be maintained by the Planning Commission with 
other subdivision plats. A copy of the approved final plat shall be provided to the developer 
for recording in the office of the County Registrar. 
6.11.6.4 ?Area Requirements: 
A. ?A manufactured home park development which provides for the sale of individual lots shall 
occupy a site not less than five acres in area; 
B. ?The maximum density of the development shall conform to the requirements of Subsection 
6.11.4. In no case shall a lot contain less than 3,000 square feet of area; 
C. ?Each manufactured home lot shall have a minimum of 30 feet frontage on a public street 
and a minimum lot width of 30 feet; and 
D. ?Each manufactured home lot shall contain a paved pad which is no smaller in width or 
length than the manufactured home to be placed on said pad. Each pad shall be no closer 
than ten feet to each side lot line and no closer than 30 feet to any public right-of-way. 
Rear yard setback shall be no less than six feet, except that all setbacks from the periphery 
of the manufactured home development shall be at least 30 feet. 
6.11.7 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all multi-family developments along their public street frontages in 
accordance with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and 
Drainage. 


6.12 - RO-1 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 
6.12.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the RO-1 High Density Residential-Professional Office District the following uses are 
permitted: 
6.12.1.1 ?Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings; 
6.12.1.2 ?Day-care centers, adult day-care centers, and dance schools; 
6.12.1.3 ?Churches, including parish houses and Sunday school buildings; 
6.12.1.4 ?Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for profit; 
6.12.1.5 ?Student activity centers; 
6.12.1.6 ?Public utility stations; 
6.12.1.7 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings or land uses; 
6.12.1.8 ?Elementary and secondary schools, colleges, universities, and similar institutions, public 
or private with or without students in residence; 
6.12.1.9 ?Fraternity or sorority houses; 
6.12.1.10 ?Libraries, museums, and art galleries; 
6.12.1.11 ?Clinics; 
6.12.1.12 ?Office buildings: government and private office buildings, including professional offices. 
For the purposes of this Section, a permitted office building is defined as a building having not 
less than 50 percent of its total floor area occupied by medical, dental, governmental, private, or 
professional office uses; 
6.12.1.13 ?Drug stores, located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12; 
6.12.1.14 ?Barber and beauty shops, located within a permitted office building as defined in 
Subsection 6.12.1.12; 
6.12.1.15 ?Branch banks, located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12; 
6.12.1.16 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are located in the rear yard and setback a 
minimum of seven and one-half feet from all property lines; 
6.12.1.17 ?Bed-and-breakfast inns, provided: 
A. ?There shall be no more than 12 registered adult guests at one time and a current guest 
register must be kept by the owner (or manager); 
B. ?The owner (or manager) must reside on the premises; 
C. ?Parking shall be located at the rear or side of the building and not be visible from any 
public right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjacent property; 
D. ?All necessary state and city permits, certifications, or requirements be obtained as a 
condition of a bed-and-breakfast inn service; and 
E. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure safety of the structure, shall 
be made to any building for the purpose of providing bed-and-breakfast. 
6.12.1.18 ?Group homes, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.6.1.5; 
6.12.1.19 ?Residential homes for the aged, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.6.1.6; 
6.12.1.20 ?Emergency or temporary shelters, provided: 
A. ?The shelter houses no more than 25 persons for no more than 30 days per person. Length 
of stay may be extended when extenuating circumstances can be shown to the Shelter 
Director; and 
B. ?All other applicable conditions for approval listed in Subsection 6.6.1.7 are met. 
6.12.1.21 ?Portrait studio, provided: 
A. ?The use shall be located on an arterial or collector street; and 
B. ?Off-street parking shall be provided in either the side or rear yard at one space per 300 
square feet of floor area used in conjunction with the business; and 
6.12.1.22 ?Professional Services. 
6.12.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.12.2.1 ?Restaurants, provided: 
A. ?Food is prepared to be consumed within the principal building only; and 
B. ?The restaurant is located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12. 
6.12.2.2 ?Mortuary establishments, provided such establishments will not cause undue traffic 
congestion or create a traffic hazard; 
6.12.2.3 ?Hospitals for the treatment of human ailments, provided they are located on an arterial or 
collector street, on a street constructed to industrial or commercial standards, or where a portion 
of the property lies within 500 feet of an arterial or collector street; 
6.12.2.4 ?Gasoline service stations, provided: 
A. ?Service stations principal and accessory buildings shall not be constructed closer than 40 
feet to any side or rear lot line nor closer than 45 feet to any street right-of-way; 
B. ?Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 30 feet to any street right-of-way 
line nor closer than 40 feet to any side or rear lot line which abuts an RO-1 or more 
restrictive zone but which does not abut a street right-of-way; and 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 30 feet from any street right-of-way. (Since 
the code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a gasoline station may be constructed on a lot, the land has 
resulted in beneficial use; and, therefore, no waiver may be given permitting the canopy to 
extend closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way.) 
6.12.2.5 ?Golf courses, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.7.2.3; 
6.12.2.6 ?Group homes, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.8.2.3; 
6.12.2.7 ?Antique sales and home decorating service; 
6.12.2.8 ?Alternative tower structures; and 
6.12.2.9 ?Tearoom provided: 
A. ?The structure shall be located on an arterial street; 
B. ?The use shall be located either in a residential structure or bed-and-breakfast inn with the 
owner residing on the premises of the residential structure of the bed-and- breakfast inn. 
Tearooms not part of a bed-and breakfast inn shall provide a minimum of five off-street 
parking spaces located in the side or rear yard; 
C. ?No exterior alterations designed to increase seating capacity shall be permitted; 
D. ?Kitchen facilities shall meet applicable code requirements; 
E. ?Outside dining shall be screened from adjacent residential uses by a six-foot opaque 
wooden fence, Type 1 buffer, or other acceptable screening approved by the BZA; 
F. ?Operation shall be limited to the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., seven days a week; and 
G. ?Any other conditions deemed appropriate by the BZA to ensure protection of surrounding 
residential uses. 
6.12.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.12.3.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet at the front building line. 
6.12.3.2 ?Density: Maximum density shall be 35 dwelling units per acre. 
6.12.3.3 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and ten feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side Yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.12.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.12.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Unlimited. 
6.12.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all adult day care centers, churches, dance schools, day-care 
centers, fraternal organizations, government buildings, hospitals, libraries/museums/art galleries, 
public utility stations, schools, student activity centers, bed-and-breakfast inns, golf courses, multi-
family residential, office, and commercial developments along their public street frontages in 
accordance with the Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and 
Drainage. 
6.12.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.13 - MS-1 MEDICAL SERVICES DISTRICT 
6.13.1 ?INTENT: 
This district is intended to provide space for the harmonious development of medical facilities, 
services, and related support uses. The Medical Services District is intended to be protected from 
encroachment by land uses adverse to the location, operation, and expansion of medical use 
development. 
6.13.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the MS-1 Medical Services District the following uses are permitted: 
6.13.2.1 ?Apothecaries, drug stores, and pharmacies; 
6.13.2.2 ?Artificial limb and brace, therapeutic establishments, including the manufacturing, 
wholesale, and retail sales of products; 
6.13.2.3 ?Banks; 
6.13.2.4 ?Barber and beauty shops; 
6.13.2.5 ?Bookstores including card and gift shops; 
6.13.2.6 ?Churches, including parish houses; 
6.13.2.7 ?Clinics; 
6.13.2.8 ?Day-care centers and adult day-care centers; 
6.13.2.9 ?Florist shops; 
6.13.2.10 ?General office uses and office buildings, including professional and governmental; 
6.13.2.11 ?Group homes, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.8.2.3; 
6.13.2.12 ?Hospitals for the treatment of human ailments, including psychiatric hospitals; 
6.13.2.13 ?Laboratories—medical, dental, optical, pharmaceutical and related; 
6.13.2.14 ?Medical, surgical, and dental supply businesses, both wholesale and retail; 
6.13.2.15 ?Municipal, county, state or federal buildings or land uses; 
6.13.2.16 ?Motels and hotels; 
6.13.2.17 ?Nursing homes, rest homes, and convalescent homes; 
6.13.2.18 ?Parking garages; 
6.13.2.19 ?Public utility stations; 
6.13.2.20 ?Residential homes for the aged, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.6.1.5; 
6.13.2.21 ?Restaurants, including drive-in services; 
6.13.2.22 ?Retail sales and service establishments pertaining to any medically oriented product or 
service; 
6.13.2.23 ?Schools; 
6.13.2.24 ?Single-family residences; 
6.13.2.25 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are located in the rear yard and set back a 
minimum of seven and one-half feet from all property lines; 
6.13.2.26 ?Alternative tower structures; and 
6.13.2.27 ?Heliports subject to compliance with the most recent edition of Federal Aviation 
Administration Circular 150/5390-2A. 
6.13.2.28 ?Beer serving/sales establishments. 
6.13.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.13.3.1 ?Mortuary establishments, provided such establishments will not cause undue traffic 
congestion or create a traffic hazard; 
6.13.3.2 ?Gasoline service stations, provided: 
A. ?Service stations' principal and accessory buildings shall not be constructed closer than 40 
feet to any side or rear lot line nor closer than 45 feet to any street right-of-way; 
B. ?Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 30 feet to any street right-of-way 
line nor closer than 40 feet to any side or rear lot line which abuts an RO-1 or more 
restrictive zone but which does not abut a street right-of-way; and 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 30 feet from any street right-of-way. (Since 
the Code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a gasoline station may be constructed on a lot, the land has 
resulted in beneficial use; and, therefore, no waiver may be given permitting the canopy to 
extend closer than 30 feet to the street right-of-way.) 
6.13.3.3 ?Tower Structures. 
6.13.3.4 ?Non-Residential Substance Abuse Treatment Facility (scheduled drugs dispensed on-
site): 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state or federal 
agency, if required; 
B. ?If a certificate of need (CON) is required, a copy of the CON application shall be submitted 
to the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to being heard by the Board. The CON shall be 
obtained as a condition of final approval; no building permits shall be issued or occupancy 
be allowed prior to the petitioner receiving the CON and licenses; and presenting them to 
the Development Services Department; 
C. ?The facility shall be located on properties which abuts, adjoins, or physically borders a 
collector street, arterial street, or any section of State of Franklin Road; 
D. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of Zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
E. ?The facility shall provide one off-street space per 100 square feet of gross floor area plus 
one space per employee as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3. 
6.13.3.5 ?Substance abuse treatment facility provided: 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state agency, if 
required; 
B. ?A certificiate of need, if required, shall be obtained from the appropriate state agency prior 
to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The facility shall not be located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a residential district 
including R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R- 4, R-5, R-6, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, RM-3, 
RM-4, RM-6, RO-1, and RO-2 districts; 
D. ?The facilty shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
E. ?The facility shall be located on a collector street, arterial street, or State of Franklin Road; 
F. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of Zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
G. ?The facility, if located within a single tenant structure, shall meet the off-street parking 
requirements as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3. 
6.13.4 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all developments along their public street frontages, in accordance 
with Article IX, Sidewalk Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.13.5 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.13.5.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: Not restricted. 
6.13.5.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 45 feet on an arterial street, 35 feet on a 
collector street, and 25 feet on all other streets. 
B. ?Side Yards: The minimum total depth of the two side yards shall be 12 feet for the first 
story; eight additional feet for each of the next two stories, and four additional feet for each 
of the next five stories, and zero additional feet for each additional story. At least one-third 
of the total depth shall be provided on the smaller side, provided that neither side yard shall 
be less than six feet in depth. 
C. ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
6.13.6 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 50 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.13.7 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Unlimited. 
6.13.8 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.14 - B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.14.1 ?INTENT: 
The B-1, Neighborhood Business District is located to provide limited commercial and personal 
service facilities of a convenience nature, servicing persons residing in adjacent residential areas 
without adversely impacting the residential character of the area. Commercial uses should be in 
scale and character with the adjacent residential uses and do not encourage the generation of 
additional traffic from outside the area. Pedestrian uses are encouraged and districts are typically 
located on collector/arterial streets. Residential uses on the upper floors of buildings are encouraged. 
6.14.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the B-1 Neighborhood Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.14.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are not located in the required front or side 
yard nor within seven and one-half feet of the rear property line. 
6.14.2.2 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.14.2.3 ?Bakery; 
6.14.2.4 ?Beer serving/sales establishments; 
6.14.2.5 ?Financial institutions; 
6.14.2.6 ?Home occupations (subject to Section 6.1.1.7); 
6.14.2.7 ?Laundromats, dry-cleaning and laundry establishments not exceeding 1,500 square feet; 
6.14.2.8 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings, or land uses; 
6.14.2.9 ?Neighborhood convenience center, provided: 
A. ?Auto servicing operations such as oil changes shall be permitted, however, no vehicle 
repair shall be permitted; 
B. ?A one-bay drive-thru car wash shall be permitted only in conjunction with the neighborhood 
convenience center; and 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way. Since the 
Code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a neighborhood convenience center can be constructed on a lot, 
the land has resulted in beneficial use. Therefore, no waiver shall be given permitting a 
pump island or canopy to be constructed closer than 15 feet to any right-of-way. 
6.14.2.10 ?Personal and professional services limited to 1,500 square feet of gross floor area for 
each use; 
6.14.2.11 ?Pharmacies, limited to 4,000 square feet; 
6.14.2.12 ?Public utility stations; 
6.14.2.13 ?Residential uses, on upper stories of multi-story buildings; 
6.14.2.14 ?Restaurants and eating places which are established to serve neighborhood residents, 
provided: 
A. ?Total floor area does not exceed 2,000 gross square feet; 
B. ?Total patron seating does not exceed 40; 
C. ?Noise and glare are minimized; public address systems, electric amplifiers, video games, 
amusements, loud speakers, and similar devices shall be prohibited; and 
D. ?Drive through windows are permitted provided there is indoor seating. 
6.14.2.15 ?Temporary uses not to exceed 90 days; and 
6.14.2.16 ?Video movie rental stores. 
6.14.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided for in Section 15.4: 
6.14.3.1 ?Day-care centers and schools established to offer instructions to persons of pre-school, 
elementary, and secondary school age, subject to the conditions of Subsection 6.7.2.2. 
6.14.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
6.14.4.1 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
45 feet 
Collector 
35 feet 
All other 
25 feet 
 
B. ?Side Yards: No side yard is required; unless it abuts a single-family district in which 
instance, it shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet. 
6.14.5 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
No restrictions. 
6.14.6 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet. 


6.15 - B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.15.1 ?INTENT: 
The intent of the B-2, Central Business District is to promote a compact urban core with a mixture of 
commercial, office, institutional, and residential uses which facilitate pedestrian accessibility. 
6.15.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the B-2 Central Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.15.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses; 
6.15.2.2 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.15.2.3 ?Amusements, and recreation, including theaters; 
6.15.2.4 ?Auction houses; 
6.15.2.5 ?Bakeries; 
6.15.2.6 ?Beer serving/sales establishments; 
6.15.2.7 ?Churches, parish houses, Sunday school buildings, cemeteries, and other church related 
activities; 
6.15.2.8 ?Clinics; 
6.15.2.9 ?Cultural, civic, and institutional uses; 
6.15.2.10 ?Financial institutions; 
6.15.2.11 ?Fraternal organizations and clubs, not operated for profit; 
6.15.2.12 ?Graphics, printing, and newspaper publishing facilities; 
6.15.2.13 ?Home occupations (subject to Section 6.1.1.7); 
6.15.2.14 ?Hotels; 
6.15.2.15 ?Liquor stores; 
6.15.2.16 ?Micro breweries and distilleries; 
6.15.2.17 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings and uses; 
6.15.2.18 ?Offices, both private and governmental; 
6.15.2.19 ?Parking lots and garages with first floor retail encouraged; 
6.15.2.20 ?Personal, business, and professional services; 
6.15.2.21 ?Pharmacies; 
6.15.2.22 ?Public utility stations; 
6.15.2.23 ?Radio and television stations; 
6.15.2.24 ?Residential dwellings on the upper floors of buildings; 
6.15.2.25 ?Restaurants (without drive-thru facilities); 
6.15.2.26 ?Schools, public and private; 
6.15.2.27 ?Stores and shops conducting retail trade; 
6.15.2.28 ?Taxi facilities, train stations, and bus stations; 
6.15.2.29 ?Temporary uses not to exceed 90 days; and 
6.15.2.30 ?Warehousing, not including self-service storage facilities. 
6.15.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special 
Exception as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.15.3.1 ?Production and assembly of hand crafted items and custom designed products provided: 
A. ?Such uses shall not produce exterior smoke, dust, noise, odor, unusual lighting, vibrations, 
fumes, hazards, or other objectionable, noxious or injurious conditions and shall and shall 
conform to applicable building and fire codes; 
B. ?The front of the building at street level shall remain open and visible from the sidewalk with 
a view of the activities inside; and 
C. ?A showroom or display area, or a sales area shall be provided. 
6.15.3.2 ?Sidewalk dining provided: 
A. ?No sidewalk dining shall be permitted except for a restaurant. Restaurant shall be defined 
as any place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place 
where food is prepared and served; 
B. ?Sidewalk dining includes the serving and consumption of both food and beverages within 
the permitted sidewalk dining area. The serving or consumption of food shall occur within 
the hours of operation, not to exceed 11:00 p.m. The serving of alcohol shall be limited to 
the hours of 11:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. No serving or consumption of food or beverage 
shall occur within the permitted sidewalk dining area after 11:00 p.m. No cooking or food 
preparation shall be conducted on the sidewalk at any time; 
C. ?Sidewalk dining shall be permitted only along that length of sidewalk and/or public property 
immediately adjoining the building containing the restaurant; 
D. ?A four-foot unobstructed pedestrian way shall be maintained on all sidewalks at all times. 
The unobstructed pedestrian way shall be measured and maintained from the back of the 
curb toward the building along a line perpendicular to the building; 
E. ?All outer boundaries of the permitted sidewalk dining area shall be clearly delineated. A 
scaled drawing of the proposed permitted sidewalk dining area shall be submitted with the 
special exception request; 
F. ?The restaurant shall keep in full force and effect a minimum of $1,000,000.00 commercial 
general liability insurance policy naming the City of Johnson City, Tennessee, as additional 
insured and, at the time of renewal of the special exception, shall provide proof thereof to 
the Risk Management Department of the City of Johnson City, Tennessee; 
G. ?Outside furniture shall be suitable for outdoor use and able to withstand the elements. 
Furniture shall not be attached, chained, or permanently placed within the right-of-way or 
on the sidewalk. No alterations or modifications of any kind, including but not limited to 
penetration of the sidewalk, shall be made to any part of the sidewalk or public right-of-
way; 
H. ?No table umbrellas shall be permitted that encroach into the four-foot unobstructed 
pedestrian way, and all umbrellas shall be fastened to a secure base properly weighted to 
prevent the umbrella's movement; umbrellas shall not contain messages, symbols, or 
advertising, in any form; 
I. ?Any trash receptacles provided by the restaurant shall have the recommendation of the 
Johnson City Development Authority; 
J. ?When granted a special exception, the restaurant may serve, and its patrons may display 
and consume, any alcoholic beverages for which the restaurant has a license, within the 
permitted sidewalk dining area at permitted times. No alcoholic beverages shall be served, 
displayed, or consumed outside of the permitted sidewalk dining area at any time or within 
the permitted sidewalk dining area beyond the permitted time; 
K. ?The restaurant shall comply with all state and local regulations regarding the sale, 
possession, and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
L. ?The special exception granted herein shall be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals at 
any time to assure continued compliance with the criteria set forth above. No special 
exception shall be considered to be permanent, and no special exception shall be 
considered as attached to, appurtenant to, or a part of the property to which it applies. The 
special exception shall, instead, be considered applicable only to the restaurant to which it 
is granted and only for so long as the restaurant is operating and in compliance with the 
criteria set forth above. A restaurant's failure to comply with any of the criteria set forth 
above or its failure to maintain furniture, umbrellas, and the premises in good condition and 
free of trash shall be cause for the Board of Zoning Appeals to revoke the special 
exception. Notwithstanding the date that a special exception is granted by the Board of 
Zoning Appeals, all permits are valid for three years and shall expire on June 30th of the 
third year; 
M. ?The restaurant shall provide any additional information required by the Board of Zoning 
Appeals to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
N. ?Outdoor dining on public property, in addition to the right-of-way adjoining the restaurant, 
may be permitted by special exception if the following terms and conditions are met and 
satisfied and the Board of Zoning Appeals approves such requests: 
1. ?Approval for outdoor dining use requires a yes/no recommendation from the City 
Manager with a yes/no recommendation from the appropriate city department 
responsible for maintenance and use of the public property; 
2. ?Dining space shall not exceed 25 percent or 250 square feet whichever is less of the 
public property in question and shall adjoin the restaurant with an impervious surface; 
3. ?The area of dining space shall be determined in a manner that does not impede, 
restrict, or otherwise diminish the use of the remaining public property, as determined 
by the appropriate city department; and 
4. ?Special exception approval shall require compliance with all applicable conditions for 
sidewalk dining. 
6.15.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
To create an interesting and visually stimulating environment, all buildings, excluding civic and 
institutional uses, should be located at the sidewalk edge. Civic and institutional uses, such as 
churches, museums, and publicly-owned buildings, are encouraged to be set back from the street 
with a plaza or lawn. Blank or monotonous facades create a hostile and uninviting environment and 
are to be avoided on all buildings by using doors, windows, display areas, sculptures, columns, and 
other architectural features. 
6.15.4.1 ?Building Placement: All buildings, excluding cultural, civic, and institutional uses, shall be 
set back no further than five feet from the front lot line for at least 90 percent of the front facade, 
unless an outdoor eating area is provided which extends from the front building line to within 
five feet of the front lot line. Corner lots shall be considered to have front lot lines for all sides of 
the lot adjoining a public right-of-way, excluding alleys. 
6.15.4.2 ?Exterior Building Treatment: 
A. ?Cultural, civic, and Institutional Uses: A minimum of 25 percent of the street level facade of 
all buildings shall be windows, doors, display areas, or similar architectural features. 
B. ?All Other Buildings: A minimum of 65 percent of the street level facade of all buildings, 
shall be windows, doors, display areas, or similar architectural features. 
6.15.4.3 ?Building Height: All buildings will be a minimum of two stories in height. 


6.16 - B-3 SUPPORTING CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.16.1 ?INTENT: 
The B-3, Supporting Central Business District is intended to promote uses and services which are 
compatible with the downtown uses. Residential uses are encouraged in order to enhance housing 
opportunities for downtown employees, as well as existing and future residents and the expansion of 
the B-2 district. 
6.16.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the B-3 Supporting Central Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.16.2.1 ?All uses permitted in the B-2 Central Business District provided all other B-3 requirements 
are observed; 
6.16.2.2 ?Day-care centers that offer instructions to persons of preschool and elementary school 
age, provided: 
A. ?A paved driveway, with access to and from a street or alley as described in Section 5.3, for 
the off-street loading and unloading of children is constructed in such a manner as to 
provide an entrance to and separate exit from the property without backing into the street; 
and 
B. ?Must meet all state licensing requirements. 
6.16.2.3 ?Elderly housing including: assisted living; congregate care; and retirement housing; 
6.16.2.4 ?Emergency or temporary shelters, provided: 
A. ?The shelter houses no more than 25 persons for no more than 30 days per person. Length 
of stay may be extended when extenuating circumstances can be shown to the Shelter 
Director; and 
B. ?All other conditions for approval listed in Subsection 6.6.1.7 are met. 
6.16.2.5 ?Fraternity and sorority houses; 
6.16.2.6 ?Funeral homes and mortuary establishments; 
6.16.2.7 ?Group homes; 
6.16.2.8 ?Hospitals; 
6.16.2.9 ?Multi-bay car washes; 
6.16.2.10 ?Neighborhood convenience centers, provided: 
A. ?Service stations, principal accessory buildings, and gasoline pumps shall not be 
constructed closer than 40 feet to any residential district; 
B. ?Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any street right-of-way 
line; however, where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the pavement edge, 
the pump island shall be located not less than 30 feet back of the right-of-way line; 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 15 feet from any street right-of-way. (Since 
code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a gasoline station may be constructed on a lot, the land has 
resulted in beneficial use; and, therefore, no waiver may be given permitting the canopy to 
extend closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way); and 
D. ?Any vehicle repair shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
6.16.2.11 ?Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings, provided the development meets all 
requirements of an RO-1 High Density Residential-Professional Office District; 
6.16.2.12 ?Vehicular sales and services; 
6.16.2.13 ?Wholesale businesses and warehouses. 
6.16.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.16.3.1 ?Tower structures, provided the provisions of Subsection 10.3.2.2 are complied with. 
6.16.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All structures and uses shall meet the following requirements: 
6.16.4.1 ?Yard area: 
A. ?Front yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial or collector 
15 feet 
All other 
0 feet 
 
B. ?Side yard: No side yard setback shall be required. 
C. ?Rear yard: No rear yard setback shall be required. 
6.16.5 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: Not restricted. 
6.16.6 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: Not restricted. 


6.17 - B-4 PLANNED ARTERIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.17.1 ?INTENT: 
The B-4, Planned Arterial Business District is designed to encourage a unified development 
approach along the major highway corridors. The principal uses of land are devoted to commercial 
establishments which cater specifically to motor-vehicle-oriented trades and services. It is further 
intended to provide appropriate space and sufficient depth from the street to provide for the orderly 
development and concentration of appropriate highway and arterial commercial uses at suitable 
locations, and to encourage the clustered development of such uses to minimize traffic hazards and 
interference with other uses in the vicinity, rather than to encourage the spread of strip commercial 
development. The introduction of residential uses in buildings with two or more stories with 
residential uses permitted on the upper floors may be appropriate in certain instances. 
6.17.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the B-4 Planned Arterial Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.17.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are not located in the front or side yard nor 
within seven and one-half feet of the rear property line; 
6.17.2.2 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.17.2.3 ?Amusements, and recreation, including theaters; 
6.17.2.4 ?Beer serving/sales establishments; 
6.17.2.5 ?Bus terminals and taxi facilities; 
6.17.2.6 ?Churches; parish houses, Sunday school buildings, cemeteries, and other related church 
activities; 
6.17.2.7 ?Clinics; 
6.17.2.8 ?Cultural, civic, and institutional uses; 
6.17.2.9 ?Day-care centers, provided: 
A. ?If access is gained from an arterial or collector street, a paved driveway connected to the 
arterial or collector street must be provided. This driveway must include an exit and an 
entrance to facilitate safe, off-street loading and unloading which does not require backing 
into the street; and 
B. ?Must meet all state licensing requirements. 
6.17.2.10 ?Financial institutions; 
6.17.2.11 ?Fraternal organization and clubs, not operated for profit; 
6.17.2.12 ?Funeral homes and mortuary establishments; 
6.17.2.13 ?Golf driving range; 
6.17.2.14 ?Home occupations (subject to Section 6.1.1.7); 
6.17.2.15 ?Hospitals; 
6.17.2.16 ?Hotels, motels, and extended stay facilities; 
6.17.2.17 ?Liquor stores; 
6.17.2.18 ?Manufactured homes, boats, and recreational vehicle sales; 
6.17.2.19 ?Micro breweries and distilleries; 
6.17.2.20 ?Multi-bay car washes; 
6.17.2.21 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings or land uses; 
6.17.2.22 ?Neighborhood convenience centers, provided: 
A. ?Service stations, principal accessory buildings, and gasoline pumps shall not be 
constructed closer than 40 feet to any residential district; 
B. ?Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 20 feet to any street right-of-way 
line; however, where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the pavement edge, 
the pump island shall be located not less than 30 feet back of the right-of-way line; 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 15 feet from any street right-of-way. (Since 
code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a gasoline station may be constructed on a lot, the land has 
resulted in beneficial use; and, therefore, no waiver may be given permitting the canopy to 
extend closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way); and 
D. ?Any vehicle repair shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
6.17.2.23 ?Offices, both governmental and private; 
6.17.2.24 ?Parking lots and garages; 
6.17.2.25 ?Personal, business, and professional services; 
6.17.2.26 ?Pharmacies; 
6.17.2.27 ?Public utility stations; 
6.17.2.28 ?Radio and television stations; 
6.17.2.29 ?Residential dwellings on the upper floors of buildings; 
6.17.2.30 ?Restaurants; 
6.17.2.31 ?Schools, public and private; 
6.17.2.32 ?Stores and shops conducting retail trade; 
6.17.2.33 ?Temporary uses, not to exceed 90 days; 
6.17.2.34 ?Vehicular sales and services; and 
6.17.2.35 ?Wholesale businesses, warehouses, and storage buildings. 
6.17.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.17.3.1 ?Light manufacturing, provided no more than 50 employees are working per shift; 
6.17.3.2 ?Outdoor storage yards, but not including junk yards, provided they are buffered (Type 1 
buffer) from public view from streets granting access; 
6.17.3.3 ?Pet daycare provided: 
A. ?All facilities shall provide a fenced area in the rear yard; 
B. ?All facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of a single-family use or district, including 
RP districts, measured from property line to property line; and 
C. ?The outside keeping of animals shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
6.17.3.4 ?Self-service storage units and mini warehouses provided: 
A. ?All service storage units and mini warehouse buildings shall be constructed perpendicular 
to the street where the visual impact is the greatest; 
B. ?No exterior storage shall be permitted with the exception of recreation vehicles, boats, and 
other watercraft; 
C. ?The site shall be fenced and, as a minimum, a Type I evergreen buffer shall be provided 
on three sides. No buffer shall be required along the front property line; however, a row of 
evergreen shrubs spaced a maximum of five feet on center and approved by the City 
Forrester shall be provided adjacent to the fence; and 
D. ?Parking shall be provided for accessory uses and shall not be permitted in required 
setback areas. 
6.17.3.5 ?Substance abuse treatment facility provided: 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state agency, if 
required; 
B. ?A certificate of need, if required, shall be obtained from the appropriate state agency prior 
to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The facility shall not be located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a residential district 
including R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, RM-3, 
RM-4, RM-6, RO- 1, and RO-2 districts; 
D. ?The facility shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
E. ?The facility shall be located on a collector street, arterial street, or State of Franklin Road; 
F. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of Zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
G. ?The facility, if located within a single tenant structure, shall meet the off-street parking 
requirements as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3; and 
6.17.3.6 ?Tower structures, provided the provisions of subsection 10.3.2.2 are complied with. 
6.17.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
The following area regulations shall apply to each project in the B-4 zoning district developed under 
an approved site plan. Setbacks shall apply to the perimeter of each tract; no additional setback 
regulations shall apply to interior lots created within a single comprehensive development. 
6.17.4.1 ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of a front yard and any yard abutting a public street shall 
be: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
45 feet 
Collector 
35 feet 
Minor 
25 feet 
 
6.17.4.2 ?Side Yard: 
A. ?Where adjacent to an R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, or R-2C zone, the minimum depth of the side 
yard setback shall be 12.5 feet for a one-story building and ten feet times the number of 
stories for a multi-story building. 
B. ?Where adjacent to an R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RP, RM, RO-1, or MS-1 zone, the minimum 
depth of the side yard setback shall be the same as the adjacent zoning district. 
C. ?Where adjacent to any other zoning district, there shall be no required minimum side yard 
setback. 
6.17.4.3 ?Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet except where abutting a 
residential zone, in which case the minimum shall be 40 feet. 
6.17.5 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
No restrictions. 
6.17.6 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
No restrictions. 
6.17.7 ?SUBDIVISION SITE PLAN REQUIRED: 
Within the B-4 District, any subdivision of land shall be accompanied by a site plan that addresses: 
stormwater management, curb-cut number and location, buffering and landscaping, pedestrian 
walkway, utility system design, and similar factors prior to construction. Within the B-4 District, the 
subdivision on permanent private easements shall be permitted, subject to meeting other 
requirements of this code, and approval of the subdivision plat in accordance with the Subdivision 
Regulations. Please refer to Article V. 


6.18 - B-5 PLANNED COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.18.1 ?INTENT: 
This District is intended to provide for selected community retail sales, service, office, and public use 
establishments in an orderly, coordinated manner so that any adverse impact on the area's existing 
character, surrounding uses, and traffic circulation can be minimized. 
6.18.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the B-5 Planned Community Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.18.2.1 ?All uses permitted in the B-4, Planned Arterial Business District with the exception of 
6.17.2.17, Liquor stores. 
6.18.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.18.3.1 ?All special exception uses permitted in the B-4, Planned Arterial Business District. 
6.18.4 ?PROHIBITED USES: 
6.18.4.1 ?Liquor stores. 
6.18.5 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following area 
requirement: 
6.18.5.1 ?Minimum lot size: Not restricted. 
6.18.5.2 ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be: 
Type Street 
Minimum Setback 
Arterial 
45 feet 
Collector 
35 feet 
Minor Street 
25 feet 
 
6.18.5.3 ?Side Yard: The minimum width of the side yard shall be as follows: 
A. ?Where adjacent to an R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, or R-2C zone, the minimum depth of the side 
yard setback shall be 12.5 feet for a one-story building and ten feet times the number of 
stories for a multi-story building. 
B. ?Where adjacent to an R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RP, RM, RO-1, or MS-1 zone, the minimum 
depth of the side yard setback shall be the same as in the adjacent zoning district. 
C. ?Where adjacent to any other zoning district, there shall be no required minimum side yard 
setback. 
6.18.5.4 ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard setback shall be 25 feet except where 
abutting a residential zone in which case the minimum depth shall be 40 feet. 
6.18.6 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
No Restrictions. 
6.18.7 ?HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS: 
No Restrictions. 
6.17.8 ?SUBDIVISION SITE PLAN REQUIRED: 
Within the B-5 District, any subdivision of land shall be accompanied by a site plan that addresses: 
stormwater management, curb-cut number and location, buffering and landscaping, pedestrian 
walkway, utility system design, and similar factors prior to construction. Within the B-5 District, the 
subdivision on permanent private easements shall be permitted, subject to meeting other 
requirements of this code, and approval of the subdivision plat in accordance with the Subdivision 
Regulations. Please refer to Article V. 


6.19 - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
6.19.1 ?INTENT: 
The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed to accommodate wholesale, warehouse, storage, 
research and development, and manufacturing activities whose external effects are restricted to the 
site and have no detrimental effects on the surrounding area. The I-1 district generally permits the 
manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and treatment of finished or semi-
finished products from previously prepared material or materials. The sale of goods produced on-site 
may be allowed with certain restrictions. It is not the intent of this district to permit the processing of 
raw materials, unless such activity is minor and accessory to the permitted use and where there is no 
external evidence of such activity. 
6.19.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the I-1 Light Industrial district the following uses are permitted: 
6.19.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses; 
6.19.2.2 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.19.2.3 ?Auction houses, not including flea markets where merchandise is sold at retail; 
6.19.2.4 ?Bottling works; 
6.19.2.5 ?Building materials yards; 
6.19.2.6 ?Business services; 
6.19.2.7 ?Carpenters' shops; 
6.19.2.8 ?Clinics; 
6.19.2.9 ?Cloth bag manufacturing; 
6.19.2.10 ?Coal yards; 
6.19.2.11 ?Contractors' yards; 
6.19.2.12 ?Reserved; 
6.19.2.13 ?Dry cleaning and laundry establishments; 
6.19.2.14 ?Electric or acetylene welding shops; 
6.19.2.15 ?Equipment rental and repair establishments; 
6.19.2.16 ?Gasoline, propane, oil, or alcohol storage above ground, provided no storage tank shall 
be closer than 50 feet to any property line other than a property line abutting a railroad right-of-
way; 
6.19.2.17 ?The fabrication, compounding, assembly, processing, repair, manufacturing, or 
packaging of finished or semi-finished materials and products where all operations, including 
storage of materials and finished goods are contained within closed buildings. Such allowed 
uses shall not produce exterior smoke, dust, noise, odor, unusual lighting, vibrations, fumes, fire 
hazards, or other objectionable, noxious, or injurious conditions; 
6.19.2.18 ?Municipal, county, state, or federally owned buildings or land uses; 
6.19.2.19 ?National fraternal organizations not operated for profit; 
6.19.2.20 ?Offices; 
6.19.2.21 ?Parking lots and garages; 
6.19.2.22 ?Printing and engraving establishments; 
6.19.2.23 ?Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and related 
uses; 
6.19.2.24 ?Research, development, or testing laboratories and facilities; 
6.19.2.25 ?Service, communication, and distribution centers not conducting on-site retail sale of 
merchandise; 
6.19.2.26 ?Self-service storage and mini warehouses; 
6.19.2.27 ?Showroom featuring the display and sale of goods produced or assembled on-site. The 
total floor area devoted to the display and sale of goods shall be no greater than the total floor 
area devoted for production and front office uses; 
6.19.2.28 ?Stone cutting and polishing; 
6.19.2.29 ?Supervised vocational, recreational, or institutional activities; 
6.19.2.30 ?Truck terminals; 
6.19.2.31 ?Vehicular sales and/services; 
6.19.2.32 ?Warehouses; and 
6.19.2.33 ?Wholesale establishments. 
6.19.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as special 
exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.19.3.1 ?All structures which exceed the height of 35 feet and located within 100 feet of a 
residential zone. 
6.19.3.2 ?Day-care centers provided: 
A. ?The principal building shall have a minimum rear yard setback of 50 feet and a minimum 
side yard setback of 25 feet; 
B. ?If access is gained from an arterial or collector street, a paved driveway connected to the 
arterial or collector street must be provided. This driveway must include an exit and an 
entrance to facilitate safe, off-street loading and unloading which does not require backing 
into the street; 
C. ?Sufficient evidence is presented to the BZA to insure that children will be isolated from any 
real or potential industrial hazards. The BZA may impose additional requirements to insure 
the safety of the children; and 
D. ?All necessary state and city permits, certifications, and requirements shall be obtained. 
6.19.3.3 ?Tower structures. 
6.19.3.4 ?Adult-oriented businesses provided: 
A. ?The use shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from any residential use or 
residential district; 
B. ?The use shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from any other adult-oriented 
business; 
C. ?The use shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from any school, public or 
private educational facility, child daycare facility, nursery school, preschool, kindergarten, 
elementary school, private school, intermediate school, junior high school, middle school, 
high school, vocational school, secondary school, continuing school, special education 
school, community college, junior college, college, university, playground, public park, 
indoor or outdoor swimming pool under city management or used by members paying 
membership dues to either a public or private entity, publicly owned athletic field under the 
ownership or management of any governmental entity, publicly owned basketball or tennis 
court under the ownership or management of any governmental entity, public or private or 
family cemetery, church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building used primarily for 
religious worship and related religious activities; and 
D. ?The use shall be located a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from any premises licensed 
pursuant to State or local law or regulation concerning the sale of alcoholic beverages, 
whether such beverages are sold on-premises or off-premises. 
E. ?For the purpose of Subsections A—D above, measurement shall be made in a straight 
line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the 
property lines used as part of the premises where an adult-oriented business is conducted, 
to the nearest point of the property lines of the premises of a use listed in Subsections A—
D above. The presence of a city, county, or other political subdivision boundary shall be 
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this 
subsection. 
F. ?The applicant shall submit maps showing existing land use and zoning within one-half mile 
of the proposed site along with site plans, surveys, or other such special information as 
might be reasonably required by the Board of Zoning Appeals for use in making a thorough 
evaluation of the application. 
6.19.3.5 ?Security housing provided: 
A. ?The dwelling unit shall be considered an accessory use to the principal use; 
B. ?The dwelling unit shall be only used by an employee of the property owner, existing 
business, or lessor. Members of the employee's immediate family (spouse and dependent 
children) may also reside in the dwelling unit; 
C. ?The dwelling unit shall meet all applicable building codes; 
D. ?On sites of ten acres or greater a separate structure not exceeding 2,500 square feet in 
floor area may be used for security housing purposes; 
E. ?If at any time, a portable structure intended for security housing remains vacant for a 
period of six months or more, it shall be removed from the site; 
F. ?The structure shall not be located in any front yard; and 
G. ?Any additional requirements of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
6.19.3.6 ?Substance abuse treatment facility provided: 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state agency, if 
required; 
B. ?A certificate of need, if required, shall be obtained from the appropriate state agency prior 
to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The facility shall not be located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a residential district 
including R-1, R-2, R-2A, R- 2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, RM-3, 
RM-4, RM-6, RO-1, and RO-2 districts; 
D. ?The facility shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
E. ?The facility shall be located on a collector street, arterial street, or State of Franklin Road; 
F. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
G. ?The facility, if located within a single tenant structure, shall meet the off-street parking 
requirements as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3. 
6.19.3.7 ?Solar Farms. 
A. ?All on-site utility and transmission lines shall, to the extent feasible, be placed 
underground; 
B. ?A solar collection device or combination of devices are designed and located to avoid glare 
or reflection onto adjacent properties and adjacent roadways and shall not interfere with 
traffic or create a safety hazard; 
C. ?All mechanical equipment of principal solar energy systems including any structure for 
batteries or storage cells, shall be completely enclosed by a minimum eight-foot high fence 
with a self-locking gate, and provided with screening in accordance with the landscaping 
provisions of the municipal subdivision and land development ordinance; 
D. ?Screening, capable of providing year-round screening, is provided along all sides that do 
not collect energy; 
E. ?Height. Solar power electric generation structures shall not exceed the height of 25 feet; 
F. ?Setback. Active solar system structures must meet the following setbacks; and 
G. ?Ground-mounted solar systems. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet the 
minimum zoning setback for the zoning district in which located, or 25 feet, whichever is 
strictest. 
6.19.4 ?MINIMUM STANDARDS: 
6.19.4.1 ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
45 feet 
Collector 
35 feet 
All other 
25 feet 
 
6.19.4.2 ?Side Yards: The minimum depth of the side yard shall be ten feet or one-half of the 
principal building height whichever is greater except: 
A. ?Where an interior sprinkling system is provided as approved by the Fire Marshal in which 
case the minimum side yard shall be ten feet. 
B. ?Where adjacent to any residential zone, in which case the setback shall be 40 feet. 
6.19.4.3 ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet, except: 
A. ?Where adjacent to any residential zone, in which case the setback shall be 40 feet. 
B. ?Where adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, in which case there shall be no required setback 
if such is needed to obtain desirable rail service. 
6.19.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Not restricted except as provided in Subsection 6.19.3 above. 
6.19.6 ?PROTECTION FOR SURROUNDING AREAS: 
The following site design considerations shall be required to reduce potentially adverse impacts by 
the industry: 
6.19.6.1 ?All parking shall be located outside of the required front yard with the exception of ten or 
fewer visitor parking spaces; 
6.19.6.2 ?All site design work shall be done by a state-certified architect, engineer, or surveyor; 
6.19.6.3 ?All transportation, storage, and use of hazardous material shall comply with the Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Tennessee Department of Health and 
Environment regulations; and 
6.19.6.4 ?The City Engineer may require additional submittals to evaluate on-site and off-site 
stormwater drainage controls and traffic improvements. 
6.19.7 ?APPEAL PROCESS: 
If the developer believes that the staff-determined requirements are unreasonable, an appeal may be 
submitted to the Planning Commission for relief. The developer and the appropriate staff shall submit 
in writing their disagreements and justifications and present the same to the Planning Commission at 
its earliest convenient meeting. The decision by the Planning Commission shall be included fully in 
the minutes. 
6.19.8 ?SITE PLAN APPROVAL: 
All development and redevelopment must meet the provisions of Article V, Site Plan Approval 
Process. 


6.20 - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
6.20.1 ?INTENT: 
The I-2, Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide areas in which the principal uses permitted 
are manufacturing, wholesaling, or warehousing and which are accessible to major transportation 
routes. The regulations of this district are designed to minimize the adverse impact such uses may 
have on nearby districts. 
6.20.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the I-2 Heavy Industrial district, the following uses are permitted: 
6.20.2.1 ?All uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District, including the outdoor storage of 
goods and materials; 
6.20.2.2 ?Any manufacturing process which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, 
vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards, or other objectionable conditions; and 
6.20.2.3 ?Railroad yards. 
6.20.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as special 
exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.20.3.1 ?All Special Exceptions permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District; 
6.20.4 ?MINIMUM STANDARDS: 
6.20.4.1 ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
60 feet 
Collector 
45 feet 
All other 
25 feet 
 
6.20.4.2 ?Side Yards: The minimum depth of the side yard shall be 25 feet, except: 
A. ?Where adjacent to any residential zone, in which case the setback shall be 40 feet. 
6.20.4.3 ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 25 feet, except: 
A. ?Where adjacent to any residential zone, in which case the setback shall be 40 feet. 
B. ?Where adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, in which case there shall be no required setback 
if such is needed to obtain desirable rail service. 
6.20.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Not restricted except as provided in Subsection 6.20.3. 
6.20.6 ?PROTECTION FOR SURROUNDING AREAS: 
The following site design considerations shall be required to reduce potentially adverse impacts by 
the industry: 
6.20.6.1 ?All parking shall be located outside of the required front yard with the exception of 30 or 
fewer visitor parking spaces; 
6.20.6.2 ?All site design work shall be done by a state-certified architect, engineer, or surveyor; 
6.20.6.3 ?All transportation, storage, and use of hazardous material shall comply with the Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Tennessee Department of Health and 
Environment regulations; and 
6.20.6.4 ?The City Engineer may require additional submittals to evaluate on-site and off-site 
stormwater drainage controls and traffic improvements. 
6.20.7 ?APPEAL PROCESS: 
If the developer believes that the staff-determined requirements are unreasonable, an appeal may be 
submitted to the Planning Commission for relief. The developer and the appropriate staff shall submit 
in writing their disagreements and justifications and present the same to the Planning Commission at 
its earliest convenient meeting. The decision by the Planning Commission shall be included fully in 
the minutes. 
6.20.8 ?SITE PLAN APPROVAL: 
All development and redevelopment must meet the provisions of Article V, SITE PLAN APPROVAL 
PROCESS 


6.21 - A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
6.21.1 ?INTENT: 
This district is intended to provide space for agricultural and similar rural uses and activities. A 
second intent is to conserve the city's active farms, agricultural lands, and other rural areas until 
urban development occurs and the appropriate zoning changes are made. 
6.21.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the A-1 Agricultural District the following uses are permitted: 
6.21.2.1 ?Agricultural uses, including the raising of crops, horticulture, and floriculture; 
6.21.2.2 ?The raising of animals, fowl, and poultry, provided approval of the city health officer is 
obtained; 
6.21.2.3 ?Agricultural industries or businesses including fruit packing plants, wineries, dairies, 
orchards, nurseries, feed mills, and similar fiber or food processing uses where products are 
produced on the premises; 
6.21.2.4 ?Bed-and-breakfast inns, subject to the conditions of Subsection 6.12.1.18; 
6.21.2.5 ?Churches and cemeteries; 
6.21.2.6 ?Clubs and lodges whether civic, patriotic, or fraternal; 
6.21.2.7 ?Day-care centers, subject to the conditions of Subsection 6.7.2.2; 
6.21.2.8 ?Fairgrounds; 
6.21.2.9 ?Golf courses and driving ranges; 
6.21.2.10 ?Home occupations, subject to the conditions of Subsection 6.1.1.9; 
6.21.2.11 ?Marinas and boat-launching facilities; 
6.21.2.12 ?Public uses and buildings such as community centers, schools, offices, and parks, which 
are owned or operated by local, state, or federal agencies; 
6.21.2.13 ?Public utility stations and facilities for the distribution of local service; and 
6.21.2.14 ?Single-family residences. 
6.21.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.21.3.1 ?Commercial kennels, veterinary services, and animal hospitals, provided: 
A. ?Except where animals are confined in soundproof air-conditioned buildings, no structure or 
area occupied by animals shall be closer than 500 feet to any residential lot line. In no case 
shall any such structure be located closer than 200 feet to any residential lot line; 
B. ?For non-soundproofed animal confinements, an external fence or wall not less than six feet 
in height shall be provided; and 
C. ?In all cases, animals shall be confined in an enclosed building from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
6.21.3.2 ?Horse show grounds and related support structures and uses provided: 
A. ?Fencing and other methods of animal confinement are maintained at all times; 
B. ?Loud speakers, public address systems, and similar electronic devices shall not be 
operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; and 
C. ?Riding rings and other riding surfaces shall be covered and maintained with a material 
such as pine bark to minimize dust and erosion. 
6.21.3.3 ?Sawmills, planing mills, and woodyards, provided: 
A. ?No structure and no storage of lumber, logs, or timber shall be located closer than 100 feet 
to any lot line; 
B. ?Activities shall be restricted to materials grown and harvested on the premises; and 
C. ?No sawing, planing, chipping, or operation of other processing machinery shall occur 
between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
6.21.3.4 ?Wayside stand, provided: 
A. ?The sale of agricultural products shall be limited to produce grown on the premises; and 
B. ?Structures shall not exceed 500 square feet in aggregate floor area. 
6.21.3.5 ?Tower structures and alternative tower structures. 
6.21.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements. 
6.21.4.1 ?Minimum Lot Size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be three acres for single-family residences and one acre for non-
residential uses. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be of 125 feet at the front building line. 
6.21.4.2 ?Yard Area: 
A. ?Front Yard: The minimum depth of the front yard setback shall be as follows: 
Type Street 
Setback 
Arterial 
50 feet 
Collector 
40 feet 
All other 
30 feet 
 
B. ?Side Yards: The minimum depth of each side yard setback shall be 25 feet. 
C. ?Rear Yard: The minimum depth of the rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
6.21.5 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 30 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.21.6 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 35 feet and accessory buildings shall not exceed 
the height of 15 feet with the exception of agricultural buildings, barns, silos, windmills, and other 
agricultural structures not intended for dwelling purposes. 


6.22 - BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT 
6.22.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of the BP Business Park District is to provide for a variety of office, wholesale, 
distribution, warehouse, light manufacturing, and service uses in a planned, coordinated 
development. Development within the district is expected to be of high quality design for buildings, 
site design, and site amenities. Development will be expected to conform to higher levels of 
standards to protect adjacent residential areas as well as to enhance development within the district. 
To assure that any proposal for a BP district can fulfill the intent of the district and to encourage 
planned developments, the minimum area necessary for the initial establishment of a BP district is 
20 acres. 
6.22.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the BP Business Park District the following uses are permitted: 
6.22.2.1 ?Manufacturing, fabrication, compounding, assembly, processing, repair, or packaging of 
finished or semi-finished materials and products. Such uses shall not produce: exterior smoke, 
dust, noise, odor, unusual lighting, vibrations, fumes, fire hazards or objectionable, noxious, or 
injurious conditions, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area; 
6.22.2.2 ?Business, professional, corporate, or governmental offices; 
6.22.2.3 ?Research, medical, dental, and optical laboratories; 
6.22.2.4 ?Service, communication, or distribution center not conducting on site retail sale of 
merchandise; 
6.22.2.5 ?Financial institutions; 
6.22.2.6 ?Day-care centers subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.1.2.2; 
6.22.2.7 ?Graphics and printing facilities; 
6.22.2.8 ?Manufacturer's representatives, including offices and repair and service facilities; 
6.22.2.9 ?Wholesale sales including warehousing within an enclosed building, but excluding self-
service storage units; 
6.22.2.10 ?Federal, State, County, City, or public utility buildings and uses; 
6.22.2.11 ?Parking structures; 
6.22.2.12 ?Computer and data processing services; 
6.22.2.13 ?Business incubator facilities and services; 
6.22.2.14 ?Engineering, surveying, architectural, and design services; 
6.22.2.15 ?Accessory structures and uses; and 
6.22.2.16 ?Alternative tower structures. 
6.22.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as special 
exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.22.3.1 ?Tower structures. 
6.22.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.22.4.1 ?Minimum District Area: 20 acres. 
6.22.4.2 ?Minimum Lot Area: One acre. 
6.22.4.3 ?Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet. 
6.22.5 ?MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: 
6.22.5.1 ?Front Yard: 50 feet. Parking in the front yard is not permitted within 25 feet of the right-of-
way line. 
6.22.5.2 ?Side Yard: 30 feet. 
6.22.5.3 ?Street Side Yard: Same as Front Yard. 
6.22.5.4 ?Rear Yard: Same as Side Yard. 
6.22.5.5 ?No loading or unloading areas permitted in any front or side yard. 
6.22.6 ?MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT: 
There shall be no maximum height, provided all minimum yards are increased five feet for each story 
over 35 feet. 
6.22.7 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
Not more than 35 percent of the lot may be covered by structures. 
6.22.8 ?APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE: 
Site plan approval shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.17.4. 
6.22.9 ?Development standards shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.17.5. 


6.23 - RTP RESEARCH/TECHNOLOGY PARK DISTRICT 
6.23.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of the RTP Research/Technology Park District is to provide a planned employment 
district within a park-like atmosphere. The RTP District is oriented toward education, research and 
development, offices, medical uses, and high technology activities and uses. Development within the 
district is characterized by a landscaped environment with emphasis on architectural, aesthetic, and 
environmental considerations. 
6.23.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the RTP Research/Technology Park district the following uses are permitted, provided no 
outside storage shall be allowed: 
6.23.2.1 ?Laboratories for research, development, testing, and related production activities; 
6.23.2.2 ?Medical research and manufacturing facilities including but not limited to pharmaceuticals, 
biomedical technologies medical instruments and supplies, surgical appliances and supplies, 
dental equipment and supplies, x-ray apparatus, and electromedical equipment; 
6.23.2.3 ?Educational, scientific, and research activities; 
6.23.2.4 ?Federal, State, County, City, or public utility buildings, and uses; 
6.23.2.5 ?Clinics; 
6.23.2.6 ?Laboratories—medical, dental, optical, pharmaceutical, and related; 
6.23.2.7 ?Hospitals for the treatment of human ailments, including psychiatric hospitals; 
6.23.2.8 ?Computer programming and other software and telecommunications services and uses; 
6.23.2.9 ?Office buildings: medical, government, and professional; 
6.23.2.10 ?Branch banks; personal services; business services; and professional services; 
restaurants, excluding drive-thru facilities; and day-care centers not to exceed 25 percent of the 
gross floor area within a permitted multi-story building on a single or collective basis. Outdoor 
uses associated with a day-care facility shall be located in the rear yard and shall be screened 
from view from any adjoining public right-of-way; 
6.23.2.11 ?Medical, surgical, and dental production and supply businesses, both wholesale and 
retail; 
6.23.2.12 ?Alternative tower structures; and 
6.23.2.13 ?Business incubator facilities. 
6.23.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as special 
exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.23.3.1 ?Tower structures; and 
6.23.3.2 ?Substance abuse treatment facility provided: 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state agency, if 
required; 
B. ?A certificiate of need, if required, shall be obtained from the appropriate state agency prior 
to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The facility shall not be located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a residential district 
including R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R- 4, R-5, R-6, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, RM-3, 
RM-4, RM-6, RO-1, and RO-2 districts; 
D. ?The facilty shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
E. ?The facility shall be located on a collector street, arterial street, or State of Franklin Road; 
F. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
G. ?The facility, if located within a single tenant structure, shall meet the off-street parking 
requirements as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3. 
6.23.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in the Code shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.23.4.1 ?Minimum Lot Area: Not restricted. 
6.23.4.2 ?Minimum Lot Width: Not restricted. 
6.23.5 ?MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS: 
6.23.5.1 ?Front Yard: 25 feet. 
6.23.5.2 ?Side Yard: 25 feet. 
6.23.5.3 ?Street Side Yard: 50 feet. 
6.23.5.4 ?Rear Yard: 50 feet. 
6.23.5.5 ?No loading or unloading areas shall be permitted in any front or side yards. 
6.23.6 ?MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT: 
There shall be no maximum height, provided all minimum yards are increased five feet for each story 
over 35 feet. 
6.23.7 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
Not more than 50 percent of the lot may be covered by structures. 
6.23.8 ?APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE: 
Site plan approval shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.17.4. 
6.23.9 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
Development standards shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.17.5. 
6.23.10 ?PARKING: 
A. ?Parking in front of the building shall be as follows: No more than two rows of parking with a 
travel aisle between; 
B. ?No more than a total of 30 percent of the parking on the side(s) of the building; and 
C. ?All remaining parking shall be located in the rear of the building. 
6.23.11 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.24 - MX MIXED USE DISTRICT 
6.24.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of the MX Mixed Use District is to accommodate the development of a wide-range of 
residential and compatible non-residential uses (including major employment and institutional 
activities) which are designed and developed within the framework of a coordinated master plan. To 
encourage high quality design and innovative arrangement of buildings and open space, the district 
provides flexibility from conventional use and dimension requirements of other zoning districts. 
Structures with commercial, service, or office uses on the first floor and upper level residential uses 
are encouraged. Outside storage is prohibited except in conjunction with one and two-family 
residential uses. 
6.24.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the MX Mixed Use District the following uses are permitted: 
6.24.2.1 ?Residential dwellings not exceeding 22 units per acre; 
6.24.2.2 ?Light manufacturing, fabrication, compounding, assembly, processing, repair, or 
packaging of finished or semi-finished materials and products. Such uses shall not produce: 
exterior smoke, dust, noise, odor, unusual lighting, vibrations, fumes, fire hazards or 
objectionable, noxious or injurious conditions, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, 
and welfare of the area; 
6.24.2.3 ?Business, professional, corporate, or governmental offices; 
6.24.2.4 ?Research, medical, dental, and optical laboratories; 
6.24.2.5 ?Neighborhood retail and service establishments allowed in the B-1 district, Subsection 
6.14.1, except that Subsection 6.14.1.14 shall not apply to accessory buildings; 
6.24.2.6 ?General retail and service establishments which are more intense than neighborhood 
retail, subject to the conditions of Subsection 6.24.4.1; 
6.24.2.7 ?Day-care centers, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.1.2.2; 
6.24.2.8 ?Computer programming and other software services; 
6.24.2.9 ?Educational, scientific, and research activities; 
6.24.2.10 ?Group homes, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.6.1.5; 
6.24.2.11 ?Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.1.1.9; 
6.24.2.12 ?Nursing and convalescent homes; 
6.24.2.13 ?Retirement communities; 
6.24.2.14 ?Cultural uses; 
6.24.2.15 ?Federal, State, County, City, or public utility buildings and uses; 
6.24.2.16 ?Accessory structures and uses; and 
6.24.2.17 ?Alternative tower structures. 
6.24.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as special 
exceptions as provided by Section 15.4. 
6.24.3.1 ?Tower structures. 
6.24.4 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
6.24.4.1 ?General retail and service developments as referenced in Subsection 6.24.2.6 shall be 
subject to the development standards set forth in this entire section, Subsection 6.24.4, unless a 
different standard is specified below. 
A. ?General retail and service establishments shall include those uses permitted in the B-4 
District, Subsection 6.17.2. 
B. ?All uses shall be located within a 750 foot radius of the intersection of a freeway and a 
collector or arterial street as measured at the right-of-way lines at the intersection. 
C. ?No individual use, including required parking, landscaping, accessory uses, and open 
space, or any assembly or collection of uses or comprehensive development shall occupy 
more than 25 acres. 
D. ?No single building or group of adjoining buildings shall exceed 100,000 square feet in area. 
Only one business or occupancy within a building may exceed 20,000 square feet in area 
and it shall not exceed 40,000 square feet in area. 
E. ?Local streets shall have a maximum pavement width of 28 feet from back of curb to back of 
curb. On-street parking may be allowed on at least one side of the street. 
F. ?Buildings shall have a maximum setback of 75 feet from the front property line. In no case 
shall the property line adjacent to a freeway be designated as the front property line. 
G. ?The maximum building height shall be 60 feet. 
6.24.4.2 ?General Development Standards for the MX District are as follows: 
A. ?Streets, curb cuts, and internal circulation: 
1. ?Local streets (defined as all streets other than freeways, collectors, and arterials) shall 
have a pavement width of 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb with parking on 
one side of the street or 32 feet with parking on both sides of the street. Where 
medians or traffic calming devices are provided these local street standards may be 
varied and must be approved by the City Engineer. Other street classifications shall 
comply with the pavement widths set forth in Article IV of the Subdivision Regulations 
of the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission. Any street exceeding 36 feet in 
width shall have a raised landscaped median a minimum of eight feet wide. 
2. ?Street intersections and intersections of driveways with streets shall be as close to 90 
degrees as possible. Where a local street intersects any other street, the curb radius 
shall not exceed 20 feet. These standards may be exceeded if it can be demonstrated 
to the City Engineer that compliance is not possible or feasible. 
3. ?All streets, except local streets, shall contain bike lanes which, at a minimum, meet?
AASHTO standards. Lanes may be a part of, or separate from the street. 
4. ?Lots with 200 feet or less of frontage on a collector or arterial street and lots with 100 
feet or less of frontage on a local street shall be permitted only one curb cut or access 
point. No lot shall have more than two curb cuts or access points on any street 
regardless of length of frontage. Cross access agreements and shared accesses 
between non-residential properties are required except where it can be demonstrated 
that such an agreement is not feasible. 
5. ?Driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the property line unless a raised 
median a minimum of five feet wide is provided as part of the driveway. No driveway 
shall exceed 50 feet in total width. 
6. ?Streets shall be designed to connect with other streets whenever possible. Culs-de-
sac should be avoided except in cases of severe topographic or other physical 
conditions. Where culs-de-sac are provided, other non-vehicular connections to 
nearby streets shall be provided. 
B. ?Sidewalks: Sidewalks which are a minimum of five feet wide are required along all street 
frontages and are to be separated from the back of curb by a strip consisting of 
landscaping or decorative pavement which is a minimum of four feet wide. Trees shall be 
placed in this strip as specified in the Subsection 6.24.4(F) of this Code. All buildings must 
have a defined pedestrian connection to the sidewalk system along all street frontages. 
Internal sidewalk connection between properties is encouraged to facilitate pedestrian 
movement. 
C. ?Area regulations: There are no required minimum setbacks or maximum lot coverage 
specified in the MX zoning district. Minimum setbacks from the street are encouraged. 
1. ?All buildings shall have the primary entrance visible and accessible from the street. 
2. ?All nonresidential buildings are encouraged but not required to have awnings or 
covered walkways along public walkways and streets. 
3. ?The maximum amount of impervious surface permitted on any lot shall not exceed 85 
percent. 
4. ?The maximum building height shall be 35 feet unless uses are mixed vertically (i.e. 
ground floor commercial with office or residential in upper floors) in which case the 
maximum height may be increased to 45 feet. 
D. ?Accessory structures: A maximum of two accessory structures, one of which may contain 
an accessory residential unit, may be permitted if the following requirements are met: 
1. ?One accessory structure may exceed 100 square feet and it must be constructed of 
similar exterior building materials as the primary building. 
2. ?The cumulative area of all structures which are accessory to residential uses shall not 
exceed 50 percent of the square foot area of the principal structure. 
3. ?Accessory structures shall be located to the rear of the primary building. 
4. ?Accessory structures which are less than 100 square feet may be located on the side 
or rear property line and structures which are 100 square feet or larger must be set 
back a minimum of three feet from the property line except where existing easements 
require a larger setback. 
E. ?Parking: A mixed use district will contain uses which experience parking demands at 
different times, allowing them to take advantage of shared parking. It can accommodate 
more activities with fewer vehicle trips by providing a variety of uses in a pedestrian setting. 
The following standards are designed to encourage a reasonable balance between the 
private automobile, the pedestrian, and alternative means of transportation. 
1. ?On-street parking located adjacent to any lot may be counted toward meeting the 
parking requirements for that lot as set forth in Article XI of this Code. 
2. ?All off-street parking lots shall be located in the rear or side yard of any building. 
3. ?Shared parking is encouraged between appropriate uses and can be approved as part 
of the site plan review process. Approval shall not require a Special Exception 
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as specified in Section 11.5. 
4. ?Any public parking or commonly owned parking lots may be counted toward meeting 
the required parking for uses on other lots within 1,000 feet of the common lot. The 
allocation of such spaces shall be documented as part of the Comprehensive 
Development Plan and will be approved through that process. 
5. ?Any development which exceeds current requirements with design features which 
encourage and facilitate pedestrian movement between uses may reduce the parking 
required by Article XI of this Code by a maximum of ten percent. 
F. ?Landscaping: The MX District shall be subject to Article XII Landscape Regulations; 
excluding: Section 12.2 Landscape Yards, 12.4 Buffer Yards, and 12.5 Protective 
Screening. 
G. ?Screening and buffering: 
1. ?The MX District shall be exempt from buffering requirements of this Code. All buffers 
between uses shall be identified on the concept plan and detailed on the 
Comprehensive Development Plan and site plan. 
2. ?Loading docks, dumpsters, and satellite dishes shall be screened from public streets 
and walkways by walls, trellises, fences, or opaque landscaping. Walls and fences 
must be constructed of similar exterior building materials as that of the primary 
building. 
3. ?Except for single-family and two-family residential properties, mechanical equipment 
shall be screened from public view. 
H. ?Utilities: 
1. ?No overhead utility lines may be installed in the MX District. 
2. ?All street lighting shall be designed to address pedestrian as well as vehicular needs. 
3. ?Reseeding or sodding of any cleared or graded site shall be required when no building 
activity has occurred within a three month period. This may be extended to six months 
by the Development Coordinator if justification is presented. 
4. ?All development shall comply with the erosion control and drainage specified in the 
Subdivision Regulations and all water and sewer improvements shall comply with the 
"Standards of Design for Water and Sewer Lines" as adopted by the Board of 
Commissioners. 
6.24.5 ?APPROVAL PROCESS FOR MX ZONING: 
The following process shall be required for any development within the MX District. 
6.24.5.1 ?Concept plan: Application to the Planning Commission for rezoning to MX must contain, 
at a minimum, a general description of all proposed uses with their intensity, location, 
relationship to each other, and densities. This requirement may be met in writing or graphically, 
provided there is sufficient detail for adequate review. 
6.24.5.2 ?Comprehensive development plan (CDP): A CDP is a generalized plan for the 
coordinated development of areas within the Mixed Use (MX) zoning district. The purpose of 
this plan is to examine the impacts of various types of uses with respect to land use, site design, 
aesthetics, harmony, compatibility, intensity, phasing, the need for off site improvements, and 
conformance to the Comprehensive Plan. 
Prior to the development of any property with a zoning designation of MX, five copies of the 
CDP will be required to be submitted to the Development Coordinator. If the CDP conforms to 
the concept plan referenced in Subsection 6.24.5.1, only staff review and approval will be 
required. If there has been no rezoning or concept plan approved by the City Commission, if the 
CDP varies significantly from the approved concept plan, or if an approved concept plan is to be 
significantly amended, approval shall be by the City Commission following Planning 
Commission and staff review and recommendation. At a minimum, the CDP shall include the 
following: 
A. ?Required plans, drawings, and illustrations: 
1. ?A development plan identifying each type of land use with acreage tabulations and 
proposed phasing. The plan shall show the placement of proposed uses and 
buildings, the number and size of residential units, the square footage of non-
residential buildings, a layout of lots, open space designations, location of landscaped 
and buffer areas, on and off street parking, loading facilities, conceptual utility location 
and connection, and refuse collection locations. 
2. ?The plan must show site accessibility, internal and external, involving all vehicular and 
pedestrian traffic. 
3. ?An overall drainage plan with sufficient detail to demonstrate orderly collection and 
disposal of stormwater from the development site, taking into account the impact that 
any discharge will have on downstream properties. The quality of stormwater 
discharged must be acceptable as regulated by State and Federal agencies. 
4. ?Conceptual architectural elevations and sketches demonstrating style, colors, 
textures, and materials in sufficient detail to evaluate compatibility. 
B. ?Analysis of the following factors: 
1. ?Compatibility of proposed and existing uses and potential impact on adjoining and 
surrounding uses. 
2. ?Impacts on surrounding natural or architectural features in terms of design 
compatibility, harmony, and intensity of the proposed development. 
3. ?Impacts on the health and safety of customers, residents, employees, and the general 
population, specifically as related to environmental factors such as, but not limited to, 
noise, odors, hazardous materials, fire, fumes, vibration, and traffic. 
4. ?Impact of traffic and parking areas particularly as related to pedestrian, transit, and 
bicycle provisions. 
5. ?Adequacy of existing municipal facilities and services to support the development. 
Consideration should be given to, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, 
stormwater, fire protection, street systems, public safety, schools, and recreational 
facilities. 
6. ?Consistency of the proposed CDP with the intent of the MX district, the adopted 
Comprehensive Plan, and sound planning and development practices. 
Upon approval of a Comprehensive Development Plan, two copies of that plan shall be signed 
by the applicant and the City Manager or designee. Signed copies shall be retained on file by 
the Development Coordinator and the applicant. 
6.24.5.3 ?SITE PLAN APPROVAL. The site plan is the detailed engineering document which must 
be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of any clearing, grading, development, 
construction, or building permit. Each site plan for development in an MX district shall conform 
to the appropriate recorded CDP. Each MX site plan shall be submitted and reviewed in 
conformance with the regulations set forth in Subsection 6.17.4 of this Code. 


6.25 - MX-1 MIXED USE NEIGHBORHOOD 
6.25.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of the MX-1 Mixed Use Neighborhood District is to accommodate the development of a 
wide-range of residential and compatible non-residential uses, which are designed and developed 
within the framework of a coordinated master plan. The district provides flexibility from conventional 
use and dimension requirements of other zoning districts in order to encourage affordable, high 
quality design and an innovative arrangement of buildings and open space. Structures with 
commercial, service, or office uses on the first floor and upper level residential uses are encouraged. 
The maximum cost of a single-family dwelling unit to be constructed in this district shall by derived by 
using the Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) latest Low and Moderate Income 
Table for a family of four and multiplying it by four. A minimum of 20 percent of the housing shall be 
Value-Oriented Housing. Value-Oriented Housing is defined as the maximum value of a single-family 
house in this district derived by using the HUD's latest Low and Moderate Income Table for a family 
of four and multiplying it by two and one-half. 
6.25.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the MX-1 Mixed Use Neighborhood District the following uses are permitted: 
6.25.2.1 ?Residential dwellings not to exceed one and a half times the density of developed 
property within 1,000 feet radius of the property line of the proposed development. At no time 
will the residential density exceed 14 units per acre; 
6.25.2.2 ?Day-care centers, subject to the provisions of Subsection 6.1.2.2; 
6.25.2.3 ?Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and assisted living facilities; 
6.25.2.4 ?The following nonresidential uses shall be permitted provided they do not exceed 2,000 
square feet of floor area: 
A. ?Business, professional, corporate, or government offices; 
B. ?General retail and service establishments; 
C. ?Cultural uses; and 
D. ?Federal, State, County, City, or public utility buildings and uses. 
6.25.2.5 ?Accessory structures and uses; and 
6.25.2.6 ?Customary, incidental, home occupations, provided: 
A. ?The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and 
shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling; 
B. ?Use of the dwelling for this purpose shall be limited to 50 percent of the total floor area of 
the dwelling; 
C. ?No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home 
occupation; 
D. ?No chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or 
household equipment shall be used primarily for commercial purposes, with the exception 
of medical and dental equipment used for professional purposes; 
E. ?Machinery that causes noise or interference in radio or television reception shall be 
prohibited; 
F. ?No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall 
be permitted; 
G. ?Residents of the dwelling and no more than one nonresident may be engaged in the home 
occupation; 
H. ?No display of products shall be visible from the street and the selling of merchandise on-
premise cannot be the primary function of the home occupation; 
I. ?Instruction in music, dancing, and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at a time; 
and 
J. ?Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with 
the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
6.25.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All structures and uses shall meet the following requirements: 
6.25.3.1 ?Setback Requirements: 
A. ?Front Yard: No front yard setback shall be required. However, there may be a seven and 
one-half foot drainage and utility easement along the property line. 
B. ?Side Yard: No side yard setback shall be required. However, there may be a seven and 
one-half foot drainage and utility easement along the property line. 
C. ?Rear Yard: No rear yard setback shall be required. However, there may be a seven and 
one-half foot drainage and utility easement along the property line. 
D. ?Garages that face the street shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet to the garage door. 
E. ?Lot Area: No minimum lot area. 
F. ?All buildings shall have the primary entrance visible and accessible from the street. 
G. ?All nonresidential buildings are encouraged but not required to have awnings or covered 
walkways along public walkways and streets. 
H. ?The maximum amount of impervious surface permitted shall not exceed 75 percent. 
I. ?The maximum building height shall be 35 feet unless uses are mixed vertically (i.e. ground 
floor commercial with office or residential in upper floors) in which case the maximum 
height may be increased to 45 feet. 
J. ?The development shall include a minimum of two acres. 
K. ?All commercial space shall be constructed concurrently with or after the construction of the 
residential units, and no Certificate of Occupancy for such accessory commercial space 
shall be issued until Certificates of Occupancy have been issued for at least 50 percent of 
the dwelling units to be constructed within the said development. 
L. ?The total gross floor area of the commercial uses defined under Subsection 6.25.2.4 
including off-street parking areas, shall not exceed ten percent of the total area of the 
development. 
6.25.4 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
6.25.4.1 ?Pedestrian systems: All buildings shall have a defined pedestrian connection to all street 
frontages. Internal sidewalk connection between properties is encouraged to facilitate 
pedestrian movement. 
6.25.4.2 ?Street design: A street design including a pedestrian system that deviates from the typical 
street cross-sections of the city's Subdivision Regulations may be approved provided such 
departure does not destroy the intent of those regulations. 
6.25.4.3 ?Parking: A mixed-use district may contain uses that experience parking demands at 
different times, allowing them to take advantage of shared parking. It can accommodate more 
activities with fewer vehicle trips by providing a variety of uses in a pedestrian setting. The 
following standards are designed to encourage a reasonable balance between the private 
automobile, the pedestrian, and alternative means of transportation. 
A. ?On-street parking located adjacent to any lot shall be counted toward meeting the parking 
requirements for that lot as set forth in Article XI of this Code. 
B. ?All off-street parking lots shall be located in the rear or side yard of any building for all 
multi-family and nonresidential uses. Side yard parking lots shall account for no more than 
25 percent of required parking and shall be screened from the street by a combination of 
landscaping and a wall or fence that is a minimum of three feet in height. 
C. ?Parking lots shall not abut a street intersection. 
D. ?Shared parking is encouraged between appropriate uses and may be approved as part of 
the Comprehensive Development Plan review process. Approval shall not require Special 
Exception approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as specified in Section 11.5. 
E. ?Any public parking or commonly owned parking lots may be counted toward meeting the 
required parking for uses on other lots within 300 feet of the common lot. The allocation of 
such spaces shall be documented as part of the Comprehensive Development Plan and 
will be approved through that process. 
F. ?In view of the pedestrian-oriented nature of this district, the parking requirements for 
commercial uses included in Subsection 6.10.2.14 through 6.10.2.24 shall be 75 percent of 
the number of spaces required for uses in Subsection 5.2.3. 
6.25.4.4 ?Landscaping: The MX-1 District shall be subject to Article XII Landscape Regulations; 
excluding: Section 12.2 Landscape Yards, 12.4 Buffer Yards, and 12.5 Protective Screening. 
6.25.4.5 ?Screening and buffering: 
A. ?The proposed concept plan shall not be required to follow the buffering requirements of 
this Code. However, all buffers between uses shall be identified on the concept plan and 
detailed on the Comprehensive Development Plan and site plan. 
B. ?Loading docks, dumpsters, and satellite dishes shall be screened from public streets and 
walkways by walls, trellises, fences, or opaque landscaping. Walls and fences shall be 
constructed of similar exterior building materials as that of the primary building. 
C. ?Except for single-family and two-family residential properties, mechanical equipment shall 
be screened from public view. 
6.25.4.6 ?Utilities: 
A. ?All street lighting shall be designed to address pedestrian as well as vehicular needs. 
B. ?If surrounding properties are served with overhead utilities, the proposed development 
may, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and the City Commission, use 
overhead utilities, provided the property does not lie within an overlay district prohibiting 
overhead utilities. 
6.25.4.7 ?Architecture: The architectural style and material shall be compatible with the residential 
character of the surrounding area. 
6.25.5 ?APPROVAL PROCESS FOR MX-1 ZONING: 
The following process shall be required for any development within the MX-1 District. 
6.25.5.1 ?Neighborhood meeting: The developer shall hold a neighborhood meeting to inform 
abutting property owners of the proposed development prior to making application to the 
Planning Commission. Property owners within 200 feet of the proposed development shall be 
notified in writing at least ten days prior to the proposed neighborhood meeting. 
6.25.5.2 ?Concept plan: Application to the Planning Commission for rezoning to MX-1 must contain, 
at a minimum, a general description of all proposed uses with their intensity, location, 
relationship to each other, and densities. This requirement may be met in writing or graphically, 
provided there is sufficient detail for adequate review. 
6.25.5.3 ?Comprehensive development plan (CDP). A CDP is a generalized plan for the 
coordinated development of areas within the Mixed Use (MX) zoning districts. The purpose of 
this plan is to examine the impacts of various types of uses with respect to land use, site design, 
aesthetics, harmony, compatibility, intensity, phasing, the need for off site improvements, and 
conformance to the Comprehensive Plan. 
6.25.5.4 ?Prior to the development of any property with a zoning designation of MX-1, five copies of 
the CDP shall be submitted to the Development Coordinator. If the CDP conforms to the 
concept plan referenced in Subsection 6.24.5.1, only staff review and approval will be required. 
If there has been no rezoning or concept plan approved by the City Commission, if the CDP 
varies significantly from the approved concept plan, or if an approved concept plan is to be 
significantly amended, approval shall be by the City Commission following Planning 
Commission and staff review and recommendation. At a minimum, the CDP shall include the 
following: 
A. ?Required plans, drawings, and illustrations: 
1. ?A development plan identifying each type of land use with acreage tabulations and 
proposed phasing. The plan shall show the placement of proposed uses and 
buildings, the number and size of residential units, the square footage of non-
residential buildings, a layout of lots, open space designations, location of landscaped 
and buffer areas, on and off street parking, loading facilities, conceptual utility location 
and connection, and refuse collection locations. 
2. ?The plan must show site accessibility, internal and external, involving all vehicular and 
pedestrian traffic. 
3. ?An overall drainage plan with sufficient detail to demonstrate orderly collection and 
disposal of stormwater from the development site, taking into account the impact that 
any discharge will have on downstream properties. The quality of stormwater 
discharged must be acceptable as regulated by State and Federal agencies. 
4. ?Conceptual architectural elevations and sketches demonstrating style, colors, 
textures, and materials in sufficient detail to evaluate compatibility. 
B. ?Analysis of the following factors: 
1. ?Compatibility of proposed and existing uses and potential impact on adjoining and 
surrounding uses. 
2. ?Impacts on surrounding natural or architectural features in terms of design 
compatibility, harmony, and intensity of the proposed development. 
3. ?Impacts on the health and safety of customers, residents, employees, and the general 
population, specifically as related to environmental factors such as, but not limited to, 
noise, odors, hazardous materials, fire, fumes, vibration, and traffic. 
4. ?Impact of traffic and parking areas particularly as related to pedestrian, transit, and 
bicycle provisions. 
5. ?Adequacy of existing municipal facilities and services to support the development. 
Consideration should be given to, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, 
stormwater, fire protection, street systems, public safety, schools, and recreational 
facilities. 
6. ?Consistency of the proposed CDP with the intent of the MX district, the adopted 
Comprehensive Plan, and sound planning and development practices. 
Upon approval of a Comprehensive Development Plan, two copies of that plan shall 
be signed by the applicant and the City Manager or designee. Signed copies shall be 
retained on file by the Development Coordinator and the applicant. 
6.25.5.5 ?Site plan approval: The site plan is the detailed engineering document which must be 
submitted and approved prior to the issuance of any clearing, grading, development, 
construction, or building permit. Each site plan for development in a MX-1 district shall conform 
to the appropriate recorded Comprehensive Development Plan. Any significant deviation 
between the final site plan and Comprehensive Development Plan approved by the City 
Commission shall be resubmitted to the Planning Commission and City Commission for 
approval. Examples of significant deviations include but are not limited to: increase in density, 
change of use, change of circulation or parking patterns, significant change in size or location of 
buildings, or significant change in the architectural appearance of the buildings. 


6.26 - HCZO HISTORIC/CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.26.1 ?INTENT: 
The Historic/Conservation Overlay District provisions are established in order that appropriate 
measures may be taken to ensure preservation of structures of historic value to Johnson City 
pursuant to the authority contained in Section 13-7-401 of the Tennessee Code Annotated. The 
general intent includes, among others, the following specific purposes: 
A. ?To preserve and protect the historical and/or architectural value of buildings, other structures, or 
historically significant areas; 
B. ?To regulate exterior design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used within the 
historic district to ensure compatibility; 
C. ?To create an aesthetic appearance which complements the historic buildings or other 
structures; 
D. ?To stabilize and improve property values; 
E. ?To foster civic beauty; 
F. ?To strengthen the local economy; and 
G. ?To promote the use of Historic/Conservation Overlay Districts for the education, pleasure, and 
welfare of the present and future citizens of Johnson City. 
6.26.2 ?CREATION OF HISTORIC/CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT: 
The Historic District and/or Conservation District boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map or on 
special overlays thereto and are made a part of this Code and noted by name on said map. Any 
Historic District and/or Conservation District shall be created by the Johnson City Board of 
Commissioners upon the recommendations of the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission and 
the Historic Zoning Commission. Within an Historic District no structure shall be constructed, 
relocated, demolished, or altered unless the action complies with the requirements set forth in this 
Code. Within a Conservation District, no structure shall be constructed, relocated, demolished, or 
increased in habitable area unless the action complies with the requirements set forth in this Code. 
6.26.3 ?DEFINITION OF HISTORIC/CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT: 
A Historic/Conservation Overlay District shall be defined as a geographic area which possesses a 
significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects which are 
united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development, and which meets one or 
more of the following criteria: 
6.26.3.1 ?Associated with an event which has made a significant contribution to local, state, or 
national history; or 
6.26.3.2 ?Includes structures associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state, or 
national history; or 
6.26.3.3 ?Contains structures or groups of structures which embody the distinctive characteristics of 
a type, period, or method of construction, or that represents the work of a master, or someone 
that possesses high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity 
whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
6.26.3.4 ?Yielded or may be likely to yield archaeological information important in history or 
prehistory; or 
6.26.3.5 ?Is listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
6.26.4 ?CREATION OF A HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
A Historic Zoning Commission is hereby created for the city of Johnson City, Tennessee, consisting 
of seven members who shall have been bona-fide residents of the city for not less than three years 
immediately prior to appointment and who shall continue to be so eligible as long as they serve. 
6.26.4.1 ?Membership on the Historic Zoning Commission: Membership on the Historic Zoning 
Commission shall be composed of at least the following members: a) one architect who is a 
member, or meets membership requirements, of the American Institute of Architects; b) one 
member of the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission; c) one member with knowledge of 
the history of Johnson City; and d) remaining members selected from the community at large. 
6.26.4.2 ?Appointment to the Historic Zoning Commission: Members of the Historic Zoning 
Commission shall be appointed by the Johnson City Board of Commissioners. 
6.26.4.3 ?Terms of Appointment, Removal, and Vacancies: The members of the Historic Zoning 
Commission shall serve five-year terms. All members shall serve without compensation and 
may be removed from membership by the Board of Commissioners for just cause. Any 
vacancies on the Historic Zoning Commission shall be filled in the manner herein provided for 
the appointment of such member. Such appointment shall be for the duration of the expired 
term. 
6.26.4.4 ?Election of Officers, Rules, and Meetings: The Historic Zoning Commission shall elect 
from its members a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Commission shall adopt rules of 
procedure and shall keep records of application and action thereon, which shall be public 
record. Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such times 
as two or more members of the Commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the 
public. At least three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction 
of its business. Actions and recommendations of the Commission shall be by majority vote. The 
Secretary of the Historic Zoning Commission, who shall be the Planning Director or designee, 
shall conduct all official correspondence, keep the minutes and records of the Commission, give 
adequate public notice of meetings, keep a file on each item which comes before the 
Commission, and attend to such other duties as are normally the function of a Secretary. 
6.26.4.5 ?Conflict of Interest: When any member of the Historic Zoning Commission shall have a 
conflict of interest in a matter before the Commission, it is expected that he or she declare that 
conflict of interest prior to considering whether to vote upon the matter. 
6.26.5 ?POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
6.26.5.1 ?The Historic Zoning Commission shall review applications regarding the creation of 
Historic Districts and/or Conservation Districts. The review of such applications shall be in 
accordance with the criteria set forth in the Definition of Historic/Conservation Overlay District in 
this Article. The Commission shall furnish to the Planning Commission, in writing, its 
recommendations regarding the creation of any Historic District and/or Conservation District. 
6.26.5.2 ?Prior to the establishment of a Historic District and/or Conservation District, and 
subsequent to Board of Commissioners adoption of the District, the Historic Zoning Commission 
shall adopt for each such proposed District a set of review guidelines, which it will apply in ruling 
upon the granting or denial of a certificate of appropriateness as provided for in this Code. Such 
review guidelines shall be consistent with the purposes of this Code and with regulations and 
standards adopted by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the National Historic Preservation 
Act of 1966, as amended, applicable to the construction, alteration, rehabilitation, relocation or 
demolition of any building, structure, or other improvement situated within a Historic District 
and/or Conservation District. Reasonable public notice and opportunity for public comment, by 
public hearing or otherwise, shall be required before the adoption of any such review guidelines. 
6.26.5.3 ?It shall further be the duty of the Historic Zoning Commission to make the following 
determinations with respect to the Historic District and/or Conservation District when applicable: 
A. ?Appropriateness of altering or demolishing any building or structure within the Historic 
District and/or Conservation District. The Commission may require interior and exterior 
photographs, architecturally measured drawings of the exterior, or other notations of 
architectural features to be used for historical documentation as a condition of any 
permission to demolish a building or structure, such photographs, drawings, etc. shall be at 
the expense of the Commission. 
B. ?Appropriateness of exterior architectural features, including signs and other exterior 
fixtures, of any new buildings and structures to be constructed within the Historic District 
and/or Conservation District. 
C. ?Appropriateness of front yards, side yards, rear yards, off-street parking spaces, location of 
entrance drives into the property, sidewalks along the public right-of-way, which might 
affect the character of any building or structure within the Historic District and/or 
Conservation District. 
D. ?Appropriateness of the general exterior design, arrangement, texture, material, of the 
building or other structure in question and the relation of such factors to similar features of 
buildings in the immediate surroundings and entire district. However, the Historic Zoning 
Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or design. 
E. ?That all work to be undertaken in the Historic District and/or Conservation District complies 
with the applicable review guidelines, with primary consideration to be given to: 
1. ?Historical or architectural value of the present structure; 
2. ?The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such structure to the rest of 
the structures, to the surrounding area, and to the character of the District; 
3. ?The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture, and materials 
proposed to be used; and 
4. ?To any other factor, including aesthetic, which is reasonably related to the purpose of 
this Article. 
6.26.5.4 ?Right of Entry Upon Land: The Commission, its members and employees, in the 
performance of its work, may enter upon any land within its jurisdiction and make examinations 
and surveys and place or remove public notices as required by this Code, but there shall be no 
right of entry into any building without the consent of the owner. 
6.26.6 ?SUBMITTAL OF APPLICATION TO THE HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
Prior to issuance of any building permit for the construction, alteration, repair, demolition, or 
relocation of a building or other structure within any Historic District and/or Conservation District, the 
applicant shall first receive a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Zoning Commission. 
Application for such certificate shall be made by the applicant to the Secretary of the Historic Zoning 
Commission and shall include all plans, elevations, or other information as may be required to 
determine the appropriateness of the proposed actions. 
6.26.7 ?MEETINGS ON APPLICATION: 
The Historic Zoning Commission shall meet within 15 days after notification by the Secretary of the 
Historic Zoning Commission of the filing of an application relating to the Historic District and/or 
Conservation District. 
6.26.8 ?APPROVAL BY THE HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
Upon approval of any application, the Historic Zoning Commission shall forthwith transmit a report to 
the Chief Building Official stating the basis upon which such approval was made and cause a 
Certificate of Appropriateness to be issued. The provisions of the Certificate of Appropriateness, and 
any conditions attached thereto, shall become a part of the Building Permit upon issuance. Upon 
failure of the Historic Zoning Commission to take final action with 30 days after receipt of the 
application, the case shall be deemed approved, except when mutual agreement has been made for 
an extension of the time limit. When a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued, a copy thereof 
shall be transmitted to the Chief Building Official, who shall from time to time inspect the construction 
or alteration of the exterior approved by such certificate, and report to the Historic Zoning 
Commission any work not in accordance with such certificate before issuing a certificate of 
occupancy. 
6.26.9 ?DISAPPROVAL BY THE HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
In the case of disapproval of any application, the Historic Zoning Commission shall state the reasons 
therefore in a written statement to the applicant, in terms of design, arrangement, texture, color, 
material, and the like of the property involved. Notice of such disapproval and a copy of the written 
statement of reasons therefore shall also be transmitted to the Chief Building Official. 
6.26.10 ?APPROVAL OF REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION: 
In the event an application for removal or demolition of a building or other structure within a Historic 
District and/or Conservation District is submitted or such demolition is required, the governmental 
agency receiving such request or initiating such action shall transmit a copy thereof to the Historic 
Zoning Commission and said Commission shall have a period of 30 days from the date the 
application was filed to act upon the application. Upon failure of the Historic Zoning Commission to 
take final action within 30 days after the filing of the application, the case shall be deemed approved, 
except when mutual agreement has been made for an extension of the time limit. 
6.26.11 ?DETERMINATION OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: 
Any applicant denied a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Commission within 30 days thereafter 
and any applicant seeking demolition of a landmark or contributing structure within a district may 
make application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship from the Commission. 
6.26.11.1 ?The applicant shall submit all the following information by affidavit for an application to 
be considered: 
A. ?The assessed value of the property and/or the structure. In the case of a demolition, two 
recent assessments; 
B. ?For the previous two years, the real property taxes paid; 
C. ?The amount paid for the property by the owner, the date of purchase, the name of the 
party from whom it was purchased, and a description of the relationship, if any, between 
the current owner and the previous owner; 
D. ?The current balance of any mortgage or any other financing secured by the property owner 
and the annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years; 
E. ?All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in 
connection with purchase, offerings for sale, financing, or ownership of the property, or 
state that none were obtained; 
F. ?All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the 
previous four years, or state that none were obtained; 
G. ?All studies commissioned by the owners as to profitable renovation, rehabilitation, or 
utilization of any structures or objects on the property for alternative use, or a statement 
that none were obtained; 
H. ?For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the 
property for the previous two years; 
I. ?Estimate of the cost of the proposed alteration, construction, demolition, or removal and an 
estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations 
of the Commission for changes necessary for it to approve a Certificate of 
Appropriateness; and 
J. ?Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit, or 
not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or other. 
6.26.11.2 ?In the event that the information required to be submitted by the applicant is not 
reasonably available, the applicant shall file with the affidavit a statement of the information that 
cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information is unavailable. 
6.26.11.3 ?Not withstanding the submission of the above information, the Commission may require 
additional evidence. 
6.26.11.4 ?The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within 30 days following 
receipt of the completed application form. 
6.26.11.5 ?The determination by the Commission shall be made within 45 days following the close 
of the public hearing and submission of all information, documentation, or evidence requested 
by the Commission. The determination shall be accompanied by findings of fact. 
6.26.11.6 ?The Commission shall not grant approval of any application involving demolition, unless 
the Commission determines, upon clear and convincing evidence that one or more of the 
following circumstances applies: 
A. ?The structure is not subject to this article; or 
B. ?Denial of a demolition permit would result in a hardship to the property owner so great that 
it would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the structure. The extent of 
any demolition permitted shall be limited to the amount necessary to allow reasonable use 
of the structure. Where the condition of the structure is not the result of the acts of neglect 
of the owner or his predecessors in title occurring in whole or in part after August 1, 1988. 
6.26.11.7 ?If the determination of the Commission is to disapprove the application for a Certificate 
of Economic Hardship, the applicant shall be notified within five business days. The notice shall 
include a copy of the findings of fact and report. 
6.26.12 ?APPEALS FROM DECISION OF THE HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION: 
Appeals from any decision of the Historic Zoning Commission may be taken to a court of competent 
jurisdiction as provided for by law. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as giving the Historic Zoning Commission any authority to 
consider, review, examine, or control the use of property classified as a conservation zoning district. 
Use shall be controlled solely by the zoning of such property prior to its classification as a Historic 
District and/or Conservation District or as may be rezoned by subsequent amendments. 


6.27 - PB PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT 
6.27.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of the PB Planned Business District is to ensure that certain retail, office, and service 
developments are designed and constructed to minimize any negative impact or nuisance on 
adjacent residential development prior to the approval of the rezoning. It is further intended to permit 
the establishment of such districts only where planned business districts with carefully-related 
buildings, parking and service area, and landscaped areas will serve clearly demonstrated public 
needs, reduce traffic impact, and protect property values in surrounding neighborhoods. This district 
is also intended to serve infill commercial needs where compatibility with adjoining neighborhoods is 
of primary importance. Location on a collector street is required as a minimum. 
6.27.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the PB Planned Business District the following uses are permitted: 
6.27.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are not located in the front or side yard nor 
within seven and one-half feet of the rear property line; 
6.27.2.2 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.27.2.3 ?Amusements, and recreation, including theaters; 
6.27.2.4 ?Beer serving/sales establishments; 
6.27.2.5 ?Clinics; 
6.27.2.6 ?Day-care centers, provided: 
A. ?If access is gained from an arterial or collector street, a paved driveway connected to the 
arterial or collector street must be provided. This driveway must include an exit and an 
entrance to facilitate safe, off-street loading and unloading which does not require backing 
into the street; and 
B. ?They meet all state licensing requirements; 
6.27.2.7 ?Financial institutions; 
6.27.2.8 ?Home occupations (subject to Section 6.1.1.7); 
6.27.2.9 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal building or land uses; 
6.27.2.10 ?Neighborhood convenience center, provided: 
A. ?Auto servicing operations such as oil changes shall be permitted; however, no vehicle 
repair shall be permitted; 
B. ?A one-bay drive-thru car wash shall be permitted only in conjunction with the neighborhood 
convenience center; and 
C. ?Canopies shall not be constructed closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way. Since the 
Code states that variances may only be given when special conditions prevent the 
beneficial use of land, if a neighborhood convenience center can be constructed on a lot, 
the land has resulted in beneficial use. Therefore, no waiver shall be given permitting a 
pump island or canopy to be constructed closer than 15 feet to any right-of-way. 
6.27.2.11 ?Offices; both governmental and private; 
6.27.2.12 ?Personal, business, and professional services; 
6.27.2.13 ?Pharmacies; 
6.27.2.14 ?Residential uses on the upper floors of buildings; 
6.27.2.15 ?Restaurants; 
6.27.2.16 ?Stores and shops conducting retail trade; and 
6.27.2.17 ?Temporary uses not to exceed 90 days. 
6.27.3 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.27.3.1 ?Tower structures, provided the provisions of Subsection 10.3.2.2 are complied with; and 
6.27.3.2 ?Substance abuse treatment facility provided: 
A. ?The facility shall be fully licensed/certified by the appropriate regulating state agency, if 
required; 
B. ?A certificate of need, if required, shall be obtained from the appropriate state agency prior 
to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals; 
C. ?The Facility shall not be located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a residential district 
including R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, RM-3, 
RM-4, RM-5, RO-1, and RO-2 districts; 
D. ?The facility shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.; 
E. ?The facility shall be located on a collector street, arterial street, or State of Franklin Road; 
F. ?The petitioner shall provide the Board of Zoning Appeals with information regarding the 
number of staff to be employed; and 
G. ?The facility, if located within a single tenant structure, shall meet the off-street parking 
requirements as specified in Article XI, Section 11.3. 
6.27.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
The following area regulations shall apply to each project in the PB zoning district developed under 
an approved Concept Plan. Setbacks shall apply to the perimeter of each tract; no additional setback 
regulations shall apply to interior lots created within a single comprehensive development. 
6.27.4.1 ?Front yard: The minimum depth of a front yard and any yard abutting a public street shall 
be: 
Typ
e 
Str
eet 
Set
bac
k 
Art
eria
l 
45 
feet 
Coll
ect
or 
35 
feet 
Min
or 
25 
feet 
 
6.27.4.2 ?Side yard: 
A. ?Where adjacent to an R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, or R-2C zone, the minimum depth of the side 
yard setback shall be 12.5 feet for a one-story building and ten feet times the number of 
stories for a multi-story building. 
B. ?Where adjacent to an R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, any RP, any RM, RO-1, RO-2, or MX-1 zone, the 
minimum depth of the side yard setback shall be the same as the adjacent zoning district. 
C. ?Where adjacent to any other zoning district, there shall be no required minimum side yard 
setback. 
6.27.4.3 ?Rear yard: The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet except where abutting a 
residential zone, in which case the minimum shall be 40 feet. 
6.27.4.4 ?Maximum lot coverage: No restrictions. 
6.27.4.5 ?Height regulations: No more than one-story above the tallest surrounding building as 
measured within 200 feet from property line to property line. 
6.27.5 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
6.27.5.1 ?Each application for a rezoning request to PB shall be accompanied by five sets of a 
Concept Plan as described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.2.2.1. The review and approval 
process for such Concept Plan shall be as described in Subsection 14.2.2.2. 


6.28 - CO CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.28.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of this overlay district is to establish higher environmental, aesthetic, and design 
standards for designated areas of Johnson City that includes properties visible from specified 
roadways. Because these standards shall apply without regard to the underlying use of the land, 
they are created in a special overlay district which shall be applied over any zoning district located 
along a designated roadway. 
6.28.2 ?APPLICABILITY: 
The Corridor Overlay District shall be in effect in all zoning districts along designated roadways. The 
district as measured extends from a parcel's front property line for a distance of 300 feet. Any parcel 
having area within the overlay is subject to these requirements. As an overlay, this district is applied 
in addition to those standards of the underlying district. Any developments within the geographic 
limits of this district shall conform to the requirements of both districts or the more restrictive of the 
two. Single-family and two-family land uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this overlay. 
6.28.3 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all development, construction, reconstruction, 
or alteration: 
6.28.3.1 ?Utilities: All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, and TV cable, 
shall be placed underground (with exception for electric power lines in excess of 100 amp, three 
phase, 2500 KVA, which may be placed aboveground). 
6.28.3.2 ?Mechanical Equipment: Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located in 
the front yard. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from the 
designated street by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping. All roof-mounted mechanical 
equipment shall be properly screened to minimize visual impact from the designated street, 
where such screening will be effective. Where screening will not be effective, the color of the 
equipment shall be the same as or complementary to the building. 
6.28.3.3 ?Building Facades: Buildings shall be designed and constructed to avoid lengthy, 
unbroken facades with no scale, detailing, or fenestration. Examples of architectural details 
include: recessed or articulated wall surfaces; columns and beams; windows and other 
openings that reflect and enhance the character and style of the building; and defined rooflines. 
The use of sloped roofs in combination with flat roofs, may be used to vary the building profile 
and to provide equipment screening. 
Exterior building materials that are prohibited, when visible from the designated roadway or 
abutting residential development, include: corrugated metal siding; vinyl siding; and unpainted 
concrete block. Painted smooth-faced concrete block may be utilized, in an amount not to 
exceed five percent. 
6.28.3.4 ?Service, Loading, and Equipment Storage Areas: Service areas, including storage, 
special equipment, maintenance, and loading areas, shall be screened so as to minimize 
visibility from the designated roadway or abutting residential development. Refuse collection 
areas shall be located in the side or rear yard and shall be screened so as to minimize visibility. 
If architectural elements are employed for screening, they shall be of the same building 
materials as the principal structure. 
6.28.3.5 ?Signage: All signage located within this overlay shall comply with the requirements of the 
underlying zoning unless modified below. 
No freestanding or development identification sign shall exceed 30 feet in height as measured 
from the surface grade at the base of the sign or from the surface grade of the highway to which 
this overlay is applied. The surface grade of the designated highway shall be measured from 
the centerline of the travel lane closest to the sign. No freestanding sign or development 
identification sign shall exceed 200 square feet in sign area. If the distance from the outside 
driving lane of the adjacent right-of-way to the property line is greater than 60 feet, then the 
setback for a permitted freestanding or development identification sign may be reduced to ten 
feet. 
6.28.3.6 ?Lighting: Direct light and glare from lights can be both a hazard and a nuisance to drivers 
and neighboring residential development. Exterior lighting shall not emit any light above a 
horizontal plane. Searchlights, laser source lights, or any similar high intensity light for 
advertising purposes shall be prohibited. The maximum height of lights not located in the public 
right-of-way shall be 35 feet. 
6.28.4 ?PROHIBITED USES: 
The following uses shall be prohibited in the CO district: 
A. ?Adult-oriented businesses; 
B. ?Transmission tower structures; 
C. ?Mobile home sales; and 
D. ?Salvage and/or junk yards. 
6.28.5 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
When allowed in the underlying district, the following use is permitted when approved by the Board 
of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception as provided by Section 15.4: 
A. ?Self Service Storage, as a primary use: provided that 1) all buildings adhere to the development 
standards; 2) all storage buildings on site are located perpendicular to the primary adjoining 
public right-of-way; 3) decorative fencing (examples: wood, wrought iron, vinyl, aluminum) is 
installed along adjoining right-of-way(s); 4) chain link fencing may be used on side and rear 
property lines, provided that it is not adjoining a public right-of-way or residential use, and the 
fencing is buffered by maintained landscaping; and 5) the colors utilized for all buildings shall be 
compatible earth tones. 
6.28.6 ?GREENWAYS: 
At the time of subdivision or development, whichever comes first, all parcels which abut a flood zone 
shall provide a drainage and transportation easement of up to 15 feet in the flood zone to ensure the 
continued safe flow and unimpeded access. 
6.28.7 ?DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL: 
The construction of storm sewers and storm water management systems shall be in accordance with 
the Johnson City Public Works Department's standards of latest issue. Reseeding or sodding any 
cleared or graded site shall be required where no building activity has occurred within a three-month 
period. Additional reseeding or sodding will be required in the event the initial application(s) are 
unsuccessful. 


6.29 - HVO HIGHWAY VISTA OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.29.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of this overlay district is to establish higher environmental, aesthetic, and design 
standards for designated areas of Johnson City which are visible from specified highways. Because 
these standards shall apply without regard to the underlying use of the land, they are created in a 
special overlay district which can be applied over any zoning district located along a designated 
highway. 
6.29.2 ?APPLICABILITY: 
The Highway Vista Overlay District shall be in effect in all zoning districts along designated 
highways. Any parcel with more than half of its area within the overlay is subject to these 
requirements. As an overlay, this district is applied in addition to those standards of the underlying 
district. Any development within the geographic limits of this district shall conform to the 
requirements of both districts or the more restrictive of the two. Single-family and two-family land 
uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this overlay. 
6.29.3 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all development, construction, reconstruction, 
or alteration: 
6.29.3.1 ?Utilities: All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, and TV cable, 
shall be placed underground. 
6.29.3.2 ?Mechanical equipment: All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened 
from view from the designated highway by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping. All roof-
mounted mechanical equipment shall be properly screened to minimize visual impact, where 
such screening will be effective. Where screening will not be effective, the color of the 
equipment shall be the same as the building. 
6.29.3.3 ?Building facades: Buildings which have their back or side facing the designated highway 
shall be designed and constructed to avoid lengthy, unbroken facades with no scale, detailing, 
or fenestration or they shall be required to plant shade or evergreen trees on 25 foot centers 
within 12 feet of the rear or side of the building, except in front of entrances or signage. In the 
area in front of wall signs, there shall be a row of hedges a minimum of eight feet on center. 
6.29.3.4 ?Service, loading, and equipment storage areas: Service areas, including storage, special 
equipment, maintenance, and loading areas, shall be screened with landscaping and/or 
architectural treatment, so as not to be visible from the highway. Refuse collection areas shall 
be visually screened with a solid perimeter wall consisting of materials and colors compatible 
with those of the adjacent structure and shall be roofed if the contents are visible from the 
highway. 
6.29.3.5 ?Signage: All freestanding and development identification signs shall be ground-mounted 
signs that do not exceed ten feet in height and 200 square feet in sign area. 
6.29.3.6 ?Building heights: No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, measured as the vertical 
distance from the mean grade elevation taken at the fronting street side of a structure. Towers, 
spires, steeples, and enclosed roof top mechanical equipment are not counted in the height 
measurements. 
6.29.3.7 ?Prohibited uses: The following use shall be prohibited in the HVO district: 
A. ?Tower structures. 
6.29.3.8 ?Uses permitted by approval as special exception: The following use is permitted when 
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception as provided by Section 15.4: 
A. ?Alternative tower structure. 


6.30 - DO DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.30.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of this overlay district is to establish higher environmental, aesthetic, and design 
standards for designated areas of Johnson City that includes properties visible from specified 
streets. Building walls should reflect and complement the traditional materials and construction 
techniques of the Johnson City region. They should express the construction techniques and 
structural constraints of traditional, long-lasting, building materials. Because these standards shall 
apply without regard to the underlying use of the land, they are created in a special overlay district 
which can be applied over any zoning district located along a designated street. 
6.30.2 ?APPLICABILITY: 
The Design Overlay District shall be in effect in all zoning districts along designated streets. The 
district as measured extends from a parcel's front property line for a distance of 300 feet. Any parcel 
having area within the overlay is subject to these requirements. As an overlay, this district is applied 
in addition to those standards of the underlying district. Any developments within the geographic 
limits of this district shall conform to the requirements of both districts or the more restrictive of the 
two. Single-family and two-family land uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this overlay. 
6.30.3 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
In the DO district, architectural building elements and/or elevations shall be submitted in conjunction 
with plans for site plan approval depicting sufficient detail to determine conformance with this district. 
The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all development, construction, reconstruction, 
or alteration: 
6.30.3.1 ?Utilities: All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, and TV cable, 
shall be placed underground. With exception for electric power lines in excess of 100 amp, 
three phase, 2500 KVA, which may be placed aboveground. 
6.30.3.2 ?Mechanical equipment: Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located in 
the front yard. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from the 
designated street by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping. All roof-mounted mechanical 
equipment shall be properly screened to minimize visual impact from the designated street, 
where such screening will be effective. Where screening will not be effective, the color of the 
equipment shall be the same as or complementary to the building. 
6.30.3.3 ?Building facades: Buildings shall be designed and constructed to avoid lengthy, unbroken 
facades with no scale, detailing, or fenestration. Examples of architectural details include: 
recessed or articulated wall surfaces; columns and beams; windows and other openings that 
reflect and enhance the character and style of the building; and defined rooflines. The use of 
sloped roofs in combination with flat roofs, may be used to vary the building profile and to 
provide equipment screening. 
Exterior building materials that are prohibited, when visible from the designated roadway or 
abutting residential development, include: corrugated metal siding; vinyl siding; and unpainted 
concrete block. 
A minimum of 75 percent of every exterior building wall, excluding glass, that is visible from a 
public right-of-way or an abutting residential development shall be comprised from the following 
materials: natural clay brick; and/or natural quarried stone products. Secondary façade 
materials, which may be used up to 20 percent on exterior building walls include: hard-coat 
stucco; concrete materials (not limited to architectural split-face block, tilt-up concrete, or 
precast concrete); synthetic stucco (EIFS); fiber-cement siding; and/or other materials as 
approved by the Development Services Director, or his/her designee. Painted smooth-faced 
concrete block, wood, architectural metal, and/or other materials differing from those used as 
primary and secondary materials may be utilized, in an amount not to exceed five percent. 
6.30.3.4 ?Service, loading, and equipment storage areas: Service areas, including storage, special 
equipment, maintenance, and loading areas, shall be screened so as to minimize visibility from 
the designated roadway or abutting residential development. Refuse collection areas shall be 
located in the side or rear yard and shall be screened so as to minimize visibility. If architectural 
elements are employed for screening, they shall be of the same building materials as the 
principal structure. 
6.30.3.5 ?Signage: All signage located within this overlay shall comply with the requirements of the 
underlying zoning unless modified below. 
No freestanding or development identification sign shall exceed 30 feet in height as measured 
from the surface grade at the base of the sign or from the surface grade of the highway to which 
this overlay is applied. The surface grade of the designated highway shall be measured from 
the centerline of the travel lane closest to the sign. No freestanding sign or development 
identification sign shall exceed 200 square feet in sign area. If the distance from the outside 
driving lane of the adjacent right-of-way to the property line is greater than 60 feet, then the 
setback for a permitted freestanding or development identification sign may be reduced to ten 
feet. 
6.30.3.6 ?Parking: A landscaped pedestrian way, a minimum of five feet in width, is encouraged to 
be provided between the rows of parking that lead into the primary customer entrance(s) of the 
business establishment. Parking shall not encroach into the pedestrian way. 
6.30.3.7 ?Lighting: Direct light and glare from lights can be both a hazard and a nuisance to drivers 
and neighboring residential development. Exterior lighting shall not emit any light above a 
horizontal plane. Searchlights, laser source lights, or any similar high intensity light for 
advertising purposes shall be prohibited. The maximum height of lights not located in the public 
right-of-way shall be 35 feet. 
6.30.4 ?PROHIBITED USES: 
The following uses shall be prohibited in the DO district: 
A. ?Adult-oriented businesses; 
B. ?Transmission tower structures; 
C. ?Auto repair, as a primary use; 
D. ?Mobile home sales; and 
E. ?Self service storage, as a primary use; and 
F. ?Salvage and/or junk yards. 
6.30.5 ?GREENWAYS: 
At the time of subdivision or development, whichever comes first, all parcels which abut a flood zone 
shall provide a drainage and transportation easement of up to 15 feet in the flood zone to ensure the 
continued safe flow and unimpeded access. 
6.30.6 ?DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL: 
The construction of storm sewers and storm water management systems shall be in accordance with 
the Johnson City Public Works Department's standards of latest issue. Reseeding or sodding any 
cleared or graded site shall be required where no building activity has occurred within a three-month 
period. Additional reseeding or sodding will be required in the event the initial application(s) are 
unsuccessful. 


6.31 - UPO UNIVERSITY PARKWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.31.1 ?INTENT: 
It is the intent of the Overlay District to ensure that any nonresidential development proposed is 
given the highest standard of review possible by the citizens most affected by the development and 
the civic leaders sworn to serve the residents of the city. Additionally, it is the intent of the city that 
zoning within the University Parkway Overlay District shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, 
and policies of the city's Comprehensive Plan. To ensure this consistency, any rezoning request, 
excluding residential and historic rezoning requests, within the specified overlay district shall be 
deferred until the following procedures are completed. 
6.31.2 ?SCHEDULING OF PUBLIC MEETING AND NOTICE: 
Following the submission of a rezoning request to the Planning Department, the Planning 
Department shall coordinate a public meeting between the Planning Department staff, the petitioner 
seeking the rezoning, and the residents of the University Parkway Overlay District. Notice of the 
meeting shall be given to the property owners within the Overlay District by certified mail no later 
than 14 days prior to the date of the meeting and no longer than 30 days prior to the date of the 
meeting. The petitioner shall be responsible for: (1) obtaining property owners' names and 
addresses as they appear in the records of the Washington County Assessor of Property; (2) 
preparing the letters and envelopes for certified mail delivery; and (3) paying all costs associated 
with the certified mail notification. Prior to the meeting with property owners, the petitioner shall 
provide the Planning Department with a list of all property owners to whom certified letters were sent 
and a map indicating each parcel whose owner was notified. 
6.31.3 ?PUBLIC MEETING OF RESIDENTS AND PETITIONER: 
At the scheduled public meeting, the residents of the Overlay District and the petitioner shall compile 
a list of questions and comments regarding the proposed development. To the best of its ability, the 
petitioner shall within 30 days answer each question proffered at the meeting. The list of questions 
and comments as well as the list of answers proffered by the petitioner shall be provided to the 
Planning Department staff, the Planning Commission, and the City Commission. 
6.31.4 ?PLANNING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING: 
Following the submission of the list of answers by the petitioner to the Planning Department or after 
the expiration of 30 days following the scheduled public meeting between the Overlay District 
residents and the petitioner, whichever is first, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public 
hearing at the earliest convenient regularly scheduled meeting to discuss the proposed rezoning and 
development. At the conclusion of the public hearing, upon motion being properly made, seconded 
and approved by a majority of those present, the Planning Commission may extend the public 
hearing for whatever purpose deemed necessary, said extension shall not exceed 39 days. Re-
opening of the public hearing shall be conducted at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning 
Commission. Once the public hearing is re-opened, the Chairperson shall call for a vote at such time 
it is determined that debate on the rezoning has been exhausted. 
6.31.5 ?PLANNING COMMISSION VOTE: 
A positive vote by the majority of the Planning Commission for the rezoning shall forward the 
rezoning request to the City Commission in ordinance form. A negative vote by the majority of the 
Planning Commission shall terminate the request; however, a negative vote is subject to appeal to 
the City Commission by the petitioner. Passage of the ordinance on three readings shall allow the 
development to proceed in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth by the City 
Commission. 


6.32 - RO-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL-PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 
6.32.1 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the RO-2 Medium Density Residential-Professional Office District the following uses are 
permitted: 
6.32.1.1 ?Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings; 
6.32.1.2 ?Day-care centers, adult day-care centers, and dance schools; 
6.32.1.3 ?Churches, including parish houses and Sunday school buildings; 
6.32.1.4 ?Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for profit; 
6.32.1.5 ?Public utility stations; 
6.32.1.6 ?Municipal, County, State, or Federal buildings or land uses; 
6.32.1.7 ?Elementary and secondary schools, colleges, universities, and similar institutions, public 
or private with or without students in residence; 
6.32.1.8 ?Libraries, museums, and art galleries; 
6.32.1.9 ?Clinics; 
6.32.1.10 ?Office Buildings: government and private office buildings, including professional offices. 
For the purposes of this Section, a permitted office building is defined as a building having not 
less than 50 percent of its total floor area occupied by medical, dental, governmental, private, or 
professional office uses; 
6.32.1.11 ?Drug stores, located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12; 
6.32.1.12 ?Barber and beauty shops, located within a permitted office building as defined in 
Subsection 6.12.1.12; 
6.32.1.13 ?Branch banks, located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12; 
6.32.1.14 ?Accessory structures and uses, provided they are located in the rear yard and setback a 
minimum of seven and one-half feet from all property lines; 
6.32.1.15 ?Bed-and-breakfast inns, provided: 
A. ?There shall be no more than 12 registered adult guests at one time and a current guest 
register must be kept by the owner (or manager); 
B. ?The owner (or manager) must reside on the premises; 
C. ?Parking shall be located at the rear or side of the building and not be visible from any 
public right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjacent property; 
D. ?Reserved. 
E. ?All necessary state and city permits, certifications, or requirements be obtained as a 
condition of a bed-and-breakfast inn service; and 
F. ?No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure safety of the structure, shall 
be made to any building for the purpose of providing bed-and-breakfast; and 
6.32.1.16 ?Residential homes for the aged, subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.6.1.6; 
6.32.1.17 ?Portrait studio, provided: 
A. ?The use shall be located on an arterial or collector street; and 
B. ?Off-street parking shall be provided in either the side or rear yard at one space per 300 
square feet of floor area used in conjunction with the business; and 
6.32.1.18 ?Professional services. 
6.32.2 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following uses are permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Special 
Exceptions as provided by Section 15.4: 
6.32.2.1 ?Restaurants, provided: 
A. ?Food is prepared to be consumed within the principal building only; and 
B. ?The restaurant is located within a permitted office building as defined in Subsection 
6.12.1.12. 
6.32.2.2 ?Mortuary establishments, provided such establishments will not cause undue traffic 
congestion or create a traffic hazard; 
6.32.2.3 ?Hospitals for the treatment of human ailments, provided they are located on an arterial or 
collector street, on a street constructed to industrial or commercial standards, or where a portion 
of the property lies within 500 feet of an arterial or collector street; 
6.32.2.4 ?Group homes subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.6.1.5; 
6.32.2.5 ?Group homes subject to the requirements of Subsection 6.8.2.3; 
6.32.2.6 ?Antique sales and home decorating service; 
6.32.2.7 ?Alternative tower structures; 
6.32.2.8 ?Tearoom provided: 
A. ?The structure shall be located on an arterial street; 
B. ?The use shall be located either in a residential structure or bed-and-breakfast inn with the 
owner residing on the premises of the residential structure of the bed-and-breakfast inn. 
Tearooms not part of a bed-and breakfast inn shall provide a minimum of five off-street 
parking spaces located in the side or rear yard; 
C. ?No exterior alterations designed to increase seating capacity shall be permitted; 
D. ?Kitchen facilities shall meet applicable code requirements; 
E. ?Outside dining shall be screened from adjacent residential uses by a six-foot opaque 
wooden fence, Type 1 buffer, or other acceptable screening approved by the BZA; 
F. ?Operation shall be limited to the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., seven days a week; and 
G. ?Any other conditions deemed appropriate by the BZA to ensure protection of surrounding 
residential uses. 
6.32.2.9 ?Emergency or temporary shelters provided: 
A. ?The shelter houses no more than eight persons for no more than 30 days per person. 
Length of stay may be extended when extenuating circumstances can be shown to the 
Shelter Director; and 
B. ?All other applicable conditions for approval listed in Subsection 6.6.1.7 are met. 
6.32.3 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
All buildings and uses, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall comply with the following 
setback, coverage, and area requirements: 
6.32.3.1 ?Minimum lot size: 
A. ?Minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet. 
B. ?Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet at the front building line. 
6.32.3.2 ?Density: Maximum density shall be 14 dwelling units per acre. 
6.32.3.3 ?Yard area: 
A. ?Front yard: Minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet on an arterial or collector street 
and ten feet on all other streets. Front-facing garages shall have a minimum setback of 25 
feet on all streets. 
B. ?Side yard: Minimum side yard setback shall be eight feet. 
C. ?Rear yard: Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
6.32.4 ?MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: 
The principal building and all accessory buildings shall cover not more than 35 percent of the total lot 
area. 
6.32.5 ?HEIGHT REGULATIONS: 
Principal buildings shall not exceed the height of 65 feet. 
6.32.6 ?SIDEWALK REQUIREMENT: 
Sidewalks shall be required for all adult day care centers, churches, dance schools, day-care 
centers, fraternal organizations, government buildings, hospitals, libraries/museums/art galleries, 
public utility stations, schools, bed-and-breakfast inns, multi-family residential, office, and commercial 
developments along their public street frontages in accordance with the Article IX, Sidewalk 
Regulations, and The Standards of Design for Streets and Drainage. 
6.32.7 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
Each application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by five sets of a concept plan as 
described in Article XIV, Subsection 14.3.1. The review and approval process for such concept plan 
shall be as described in Subsection 14.3.2. 


6.33 - GO GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT 
6.33.1 ?INTENT: 
The purpose of this overlay district is to establish higher environmental, aesthetic, and design 
standards for designated areas of Johnson City that includes properties visible from specified 
streets. Because these standards shall apply without regard to the underlying use of the land, they 
are created in a special overlay district which can be applied over any zoning district located along a 
designated street. 
6.33.2 ?APPLICABILITY: 
The Gateway Overlay District shall be in effect in all zoning districts along designated streets. The 
district as measured extends from a parcel's front property line for a distance of 300 feet. Any parcel 
having area within the overlay is subject to these requirements. As an overlay, this district is applied 
in addition to those standards of the underlying district. Any developments within the geographic 
limits of this district shall conform to the requirements of both districts or the more restrictive of the 
two. Single-family and two-family land uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this overlay. 
6.33.3 ?DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: 
In the GO district, architectural building elements and/or elevations shall be submitted in conjunction 
with plans for site plan approval depicting sufficient detail to determine conformance with this district. 
The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all development, construction, reconstruction, 
or alteration: 
6.33.3.1 ?Utilities: All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, and TV cable, 
shall be placed underground. With exception for electric power lines in excess of 100 amp, 
three phase, 2,500 KVA, which may be placed aboveground. 
6.33.3.2 ?Mechanical equipment: Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located in 
the front yard. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from the 
designated street by the use of walls, fences, or landscaping. All roof-mounted mechanical 
equipment shall be properly screened to minimize visual impact from the designated street, 
where such screening will be effective. Where screening will not be effective, the color of the 
equipment shall be the same as or complementary to the building. 
6.33.3.3 ?Building facades: Buildings shall be designed and constructed to avoid lengthy, unbroken 
facades with no scale, detailing, or fenestration. Examples of architectural details include: 
recessed or articulated wall surfaces; columns and beams; windows and other openings that 
reflect and enhance the character and style of the building; and defined rooflines. The use of 
sloped roofs in combination with flat roofs, may be used to vary the building profile and to 
provide equipment screening. 
Exterior building materials that are prohibited, when visible from the designated roadway or 
abutting residential development, include: corrugated metal siding; vinyl siding; and unpainted 
concrete block. 
A minimum of 70 percent of every exterior building wall, excluding glass, that is visible from a 
public right-of-way or an abutting residential development shall be comprised from the following 
materials: brick; stone; hard-coat stucco; pre-cast concrete; or synthetic stucco (EIFS). Colored 
split-faced block may also be utilized, in an amount not to exceed 25 percent. Painted smooth-
faced concrete block may be utilized, in an amount not to exceed five percent. 
6.33.3.4 ?Service, loading, and equipment storage areas: Service areas, including storage, special 
equipment, maintenance, and loading areas, shall be screened so as to minimize visibility from 
the designated roadway or abutting residential development. Refuse collection areas shall be 
located in the side or rear yard and shall be screened so as to minimize visibility. If architectural 
elements are employed for screening, they shall be of the same building materials as the 
principal structure. 
6.33.3.5 ?Signage: All signage located within this overlay shall comply with the requirements of the 
underlying zoning unless modified below. 
No freestanding or development identification sign shall exceed 30 feet in height as measured 
from the surface grade at the base of the sign or from the surface grade of the highway to which 
this overlay is applied. 
The surface grade of the designated highway shall be measured from the centerline of the 
travel lane closest to the sign. No freestanding sign or development identification sign shall 
exceed 200 square feet in sign area. If the distance from the outside driving lane of the adjacent 
right-of-way to the property line is greater than 60 feet, then the setback for a permitted 
freestanding or development identification sign may be reduced to ten feet. 
6.33.3.6 ?Parking: A landscaped pedestrian way, a minimum of five feet in width, is encouraged to 
be provided between the rows of parking that lead into the primary customer entrance(s) of the 
business establishment. Parking shall not encroach into the pedestrian way. 
6.33.3.7 ?Lighting: Direct light and glare from lights can be both a hazard and a nuisance to drivers 
and neighboring residential development. Exterior lighting shall not emit any light above a 
horizontal plane. Searchlights, laser source lights, or any similar high intensity light for 
advertising purposes shall be prohibited. The maximum height of lights not located in the public 
right-of-way shall be 35 feet. 
6.33.4 ?PROHIBITED USES: 
The following uses shall be prohibited in the GO district: 
A. ?Adult-oriented businesses; 
B. ?Transmission tower structures; 
C. ?Mobile home sales; and 
D. ?Salvage and/or junk yards. 
6.33.5 ?USES PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
When allowed in the underlying district, the following use is permitted when approved by the Board 
of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception as provided by Section 15.4: 
A. ?Self Service Storage, as a primary use: provided that 1) all buildings adhere to the development 
standards; 2) all storage buildings on site are located perpendicular to the primary adjoining 
public right-of-way; 3) decorative fencing (examples: wood, wrought iron, vinyl, aluminum) is 
installed along adjoining right-of-way(s); 4) chain link fencing may be used on side and rear 
property lines, provided that it is not adjoining a public right-of-way or residential use, and the 
fencing is buffered by maintained landscaping; and 5) the colors utilized for all buildings shall be 
compatible earth tones. 
6.33.6 ?GREENWAYS: 
At the time of subdivision or development, whichever comes first, all parcels which abut a flood zone 
shall provide a drainage and transportation easement of up to 15 feet in the flood zone to ensure the 
continued safe flow and unimpeded access. 
6.33.7 ?DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL: 
The construction of storm sewers and storm water management systems shall be in accordance with 
the Johnson City Public Works Department's standards of latest issue. Reseeding or sodding any 
cleared or graded site shall be required where no building activity has occurred within a three-month 
period. Additional reseeding or sodding will be required in the event the initial application(s) are 
unsuccessful. 
Additional reseeding or sodding will be required in the event the initial application(s) are 
unsuccessful. 


6.34 - WWD WEST WALNUT STREET DISTRICT 
6.34.1 ?INTENT: 
The intent of the West Walnut Street District is to promote a compact urban corridor with a mixture of 
commercial, office, and residential uses that promotes bicycling and pedestrian mobility and supports 
the University, the Downtown, and surrounding residential areas. 
6.34.2 ?PERMITTED USES: 
Within the West Walnut Street District, the following uses are permitted: 
6.34.2.1 ?Accessory structures and uses; 
6.34.2.2 ?Amusements and recreation, including theaters; 
6.34.2.3 ?Bakeries; 
6.34.2.4 ?Beer serving/sales establishments; 
6.34.2.5 ?Churches, parish houses, Sunday school buildings, and other church related activities; 
6.34.2.6 ?Cultural, civic, and institutional uses; 
6.34.2.7 ?Financial institutions; 
6.34.2.8 ?Fraternal organizations and clubs, not operated for profit; 
6.34.2.9 ?Graphics, printing, and newspaper publishing facilities; 
6.34.2.10 ?Home occupations (subject to Section 4.13.5); 
6.34.2.11 ?Hotels; 
6.34.2.12 ?Liquor stores; 
6.34.2.13 ?Micro-breweries and distilleries; 
6.34.2.14 ?Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings and uses; 
6.34.2.15 ?Offices, both private and governmental; 
6.34.2.16 ?Outdoor dining, drinking, music, entertainment areas or places designed for 
congregating or gathering of people shall be allowed along the north side of W. Walnut Street. 
Outdoor dining shall be allowed along the south side of W. Walnut Street under the following 
conditions: 
A. ?The outdoor dining area shall be located in the front or side of the building. No outdoor 
dining, drinking, music, entertainment areas or places designed for congregating or 
gathering of people shall be allowed in the rear or roof of the property. The outdoor dining 
area shall not extend beyond the rear of the building; 
B. ?For side yard dining, an eight-foot tall masonry wall or wood fence shall be constructed 
between the outdoor dining area and rear of the property (see Figure 1). When 
architectural elements are employed for screening, they shall be of the same building 
materials as the principal structure; and 
C. ?The serving or consumption of food or alcohol shall not occur after 11:00 p.m. 
6.34.2.17 ?Parking lots and garages with first floor retail encouraged; 
6.34.2.18 ?Personal, business, and professional services; 
6.34.2.19 ?Pharmacies; 
6.34.2.20 ?Public utility stations; 
6.34.2.21 ?Residential dwellings on the upper floors of buildings; 
6.34.2.22 ?Restaurants; 
6.34.2.23 ?Schools, public and private; 
6.34.2.24 ?Stores and shops conducting retail trade; 
6.34.2.25 ?Warehousing associated with a permitted use in the district. 
 
6.34.3 ?USE PERMITTED BY APPROVAL AS SPECIAL EXCEPTION: 
The following use is permitted when approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special 
Exception as provided by Section 15.4. 
6.34.3.1 ?Sidewalk dining in accordance with Section 6.15.3.2. The serving or consumption of food 
or alcohol shall occur within the hours of operation, not to exceed 11:00 p.m. 
6.34.4 ?AREA REGULATIONS: 
6.34.4.1 ?Building placement: All buildings shall be set back no further than 15 feet from the 
adjoining property line of West Walnut Street. There is no setback for other streets (see Figure 
2). 
 
6.34.4.2 ?Exterior building treatment: A minimum of 50 percent and a maximum of 70 percent of the 
street level facade shall be transparent glass. Openings above the street level on the principal 
frontage shall be a minimum of 25 percent and a maximum of 50 percent of that level's wall 
area. (See Figure 3). 
This section applies to the following streets: State of Franklin Road, W. Walnut Street, Ashe 
Street, University Parkway, Buffalo Street, and Watauga Avenue. 
 
6.34.4.3 ?Building facades: Building facades conform to Design Overlay, Section 6.30.3.3. 
6.34.4.4 ?Building height: The maximum height of buildings along the south side of W. Walnut 
Street shall be two stories. There is no height limit for buildings along the north side of W. 
Walnut Street. (See Figure 4). 
 
6.34.5 ?SIGN REGULATIONS: 
The signs in this district shall comply with the B-2, Central Business requirements under Section 
7.3.3. 
6.34.6 ?PARKING: 
Off-premise parking shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be exempt from the 
following provisions of Article 11.4, Off-Premise Parking: 
A. ?The property shall lie within 400 feet of the main entrance of the principal use; 
B. ?The property shall not be separated from the principal use by a collector or arterial street as 
designated on the zoning map and shall be located on the same street as the principal use; and 
C. ?Such spaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the required parking. 
6.34.7 ?PARKING LOT SCREENING: 
When on-site parking is provided for properties along the south side of W. Walnut Street, a minimum 
four foot tall masonry wall or wood fence shall be required along Lynn Street/Lynn Alley whenever a 
new principal building is built or the gross floor area of an existing principal building is expanded by 
25 percent or greater (see Figure 5). When architectural elements are employed for screening, they 
shall be of the same building materials as the principal structure. 
 
When on-site parking adjoins State of Franklin Road, in addition to the landscape requirements 
under Section 12.2, Landscape Yard, a minimum two-foot tall landscaped berm shall be constructed 
with a row of evergreen shrubs spaced a maximum of five feet on center which grow to a minimum 
height of two feet. (See Figure 6). 
 
6.34.8 ?UTILITIES: 
All new utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone, and TV cable, shall conform to 
Section 6.30.3.1. 
6.34.9 ?MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT: 
The installation of mechanical equipment shall conform to Section 6.30.3.2. 
6.34.10 ?SERVICE, LOADING, AND EQUIPMENT STORAGE AREAS: 
Service areas, including storage, special equipment, maintenance, and loading areas, shall be 
screened shall conform to Section 6.30.3.2. 
6.34.11 ?LIGHTING: 
All lighting shall conform to Section 6.30.3.7. The maximum height of lights not located in the public 
right-of-way shall be 15 feet. 
6.34.12 ?SPECIAL USE PERMIT: 
A Special Use Permit, obtained from the Building Division and approved by the City Commission, 
shall be required for outdoor events extending past 11:00 p.m. Outdoor events include, but are not 
limited to, festivals, outdoor music/entertainment, and other similar activities. Sidewalk dining is 
excluded in order to be considered for City Commission approval, a completed Special Use Permit 
shall be received by the Building Division no later than 30 days prior to the City Commission meeting 
at which it is to be considered. 


ARTICLE VII - SIGN REGULATIONS 


7.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
7.1.1 ?PURPOSE: 
The purpose of this Article is to provide a comprehensive system of sign regulations which will 
promote and carry out the objectives of the city of Johnson City, as identified in the Johnson City 
Comprehensive Plan. It is the intent of this Article to establish regulations which: 
A. ?Regulate the number, type, location, and size of signs and other graphic devices within the city; 
B. ?Protect and enhance the scenic beauty of the natural environment and avoid sign clutter in the 
city and the surrounding area; 
C. ?Emphasize the assets of community appearance and high environmental quality in promoting 
industrial recruitment and economic development; 
D. ?Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by prohibiting improperly designed or located 
signs which could distract, confuse, mislead, or obstruct vision; 
E. ?Ensure safe construction and maintenance of signs; 
F. ?Protect and enhance public and private property; and 
G. ?Ensure equity in the distribution of the privilege of using the public visual environment to 
communicate private information; 
H. ?Improve the appearance of the city's business areas, especially along major thoroughfares. 
7.1.2 ?DEFINITIONS: 
Abandoned sign means a sign which identifies or advertises a discontinued business, lessor, owner, 
product, or activity. 
Animated sign means an electronic message board that uses change of lighting to depict motion, 
with a slightly progressive change. The display of video shall be prohibited. 
Awning means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed 
of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework. 
Awning sign means a sign painted on, printed on, or attached to the surface of an awning or canopy. 
For purposes of determining permitted use, area, or location within this Code, an awning sign shall 
be considered a wall sign. 
Balloon means a tethered gas- or air-filled figure used for advertising purposes and not certified for 
flight by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Banner means a temporary sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing 
framework, and displayed outside of a building. This would include feather banners. 
Business sign means a sign which advertises the name, logo, slogan, prices, products, or services 
offered by the business or activity on the premises. 
Canopy means a permanent shelter supported by a framework upon the ground. A canopy may be 
either freestanding or attached to a building. 
Construction sign means a temporary freestanding sign identifying an architect, contractor, 
subcontractor, engineer, financier, and/or material supplier participating in construction on the 
property on which the sign is located. 
Comprehensive development means a single parcel initially under the ownership of a single entity. 
Subdivision may occur within the development with access to public streets or private easements. 
Directional sign means an on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information, such 
as parking, loading, entrance, or exit. The maximum size of each such sign shall be four square feet 
and the maximum height shall be three feet. 
Directional sign—hospital campuses means, in addition to the standard directional signs (four square 
feet maximum), hospital campuses in excess of seven acres may erect one or more larger 
directional signs, provided such signs are approved by the city's Traffic Engineer as part of a site 
plan. Such additional directional signs shall comply with the vision clearance provisions of Section 
4.11. Such additional directional signs for hospital campuses shall be limited to: 
A. ?One directional sign with a maximum height of nine feet and maximum size of 54 square feet to 
be located near the main entrance; and 
B. ?Other directional signs with a maximum height of six feet and a maximum size of 24 square 
feet. 
Directory sign means a sign which gives the names and locations of occupants or uses in a multi-
occupant, nonresidential development, building, or organized merchant association. Such sign shall 
be oriented to the view of pedestrians or to vehicles on the site, rather than to view from the adjacent 
public right-of-way. The maximum size of a directory sign shall not exceed one square foot per listed 
occupant or use. 
Electronic message board means a sign that uses electronic technology to display information. 
Feather banners means a sign typically made of a flexible fabric attached to a long pole in the 
general shape of a feather, teardrop, or similar shape. 
Festoons means a string of ribbons, pennants, streamers, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels. 
Flashing sign means a sign or portion thereof, which exhibits sudden changes in lighting or transitory 
bursts of lighting of less than one second in duration. 
Freestanding sign means a sign supported upon the ground by poles, braces, fences or other 
supports and not attached to any building. 
Government sign means any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, 
county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of, direction to, or 
announcement of activities at any school, hospital, historic site, or other public property or facility. 
This definition shall also include signs giving necessary traffic information or warning, such as 
railroad signs or temporary traffic signs erected by contractors working within or adjacent to a public 
street. 
Ground-mounted sign means a freestanding sign which is mounted directly on the ground, with the 
entire bottom portion of the structure in contact with the ground. 
Human signs means a temporary sign that may be worn as a costume or held or manipulated by a 
human that is used for commercial advertising purposes. 
Mansard means a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
Menu board means a sign associated with drive-thru windows. The sign shall not exceed 32 square 
feet and oriented toward drive-thru window traffic. A permit is required, but such a sign will not be 
counted toward the freestanding sign allowance for the business or property. 
Nit means a unit of measurement of luminous intensity or brightness of electronic message boards 
as determined by the PR-650 SpectraScan Colorimeter or an industry approved alternate. 
Mural means a singular work of art painted or otherwise directly applied on a building, structure, 
fence, or other object within public view. The work does not contain text, graphics, or symbols which 
specifically advertise or promote a business, product, or service. 
Off-premise advertising sign means a freestanding, ground mounted, or wall sign directing attention 
to a business, product, service, or entertainment which: 
A. ?Is not conducted, sold, or offered on the premises where the sign is located, or 
B. ?Is a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is located. 
Political sign means a temporary sign used in connection with a political, religious, or civic, 
noncommercial campaign. 
Portable sign means any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently attached to the 
ground or to a structure or building. 
Projecting sign means a sign attached non-parallel to the wall of a building. A projecting sign may 
extend no more than four feet from that wall or one-half the distance between the wall of the building 
and the curb line of the adjacent street, whichever is less. No such sign shall extend above the roof 
line of its building nor shall it be placed less than ten feet above the sidewalk or ground level. 
Real estate sign means a sign which announces the auction, sale, rental, or lease of the property 
upon which the sign is located 
Real estate signs shall be removed within ten days after the property has been sold, rented, or 
leased. 
Sandwich board means a self-supporting, A-shaped freestanding temporary sign with only two 
visible sides that are situated adjacent to a business, on the sidewalk. The maximum area of a sign 
shall be no more than six square feet per side of sign with the maximum height being 42 inches. 
Scrolling means a type of animated sign that uses change of lighting to create the appearance of 
words, numbers, or objects moving across the face of the sign horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. 
Sign means any device, structure, placard, surface, or fabric using graphics, letters, symbols, 
pictures, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually directing attention to a 
business, product, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on the premises where the 
sign is located and exposed to public view from the outside. 
Sign area means: 
A. ?The area of a wall sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which will enclose the sign 
face and its cabinet. If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as a 
background with no added decoration, the total sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the 
smallest rectangles which enclose each individual letter or symbol. 
 
B. ?The area of a freestanding sign or ground-mounted sign shall be the area of the smallest 
rectangle which encloses the sign and its cabinet, if any. For a sign with two parallel faces, only 
the area of a single face shall be considered. If the faces of a multiple-faced sign are not 
parallel, then the total sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the individual, non-parallel 
faces. 
 
Sign height means the height of a freestanding sign or ground-mounted sign shall be the vertical 
distance from the highest point of the sign and its structure to either (a) the surface grade at the base 
of the sign, or (b) the surface grade of the nearest adjacent street granting access to the property 
upon which the sign is located, whichever is higher. 
Subdivision identification sign means a ground-mounted sign identifying a specific development that 
is located on one or both sides of each principal roadway entrance into the development or in the 
roadway median inside at the entrance to the development. 
Temporary sign means any sign that is intended for temporary use and a limited period. This 
includes, but is not limited to: real estate signs; construction signs, political signs, garage sales or 
any other non-commercial messages. 
Under-awning sign means a sign located under a permitted awning or canopy at the entrance to the 
premises. Such sign shall be perpendicular to the entrance wall of the building, and shall be placed 
at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level so as not to constitute a hazard or impediment 
to pedestrians. The maximum size of an under-awning sign shall be four square feet. 
Unsafe sign means any sign or structure or appurtenance which, in the opinion of the Chief Building 
Official of the city, poses an imminent or potential threat to the public health or safety, whether 
personal or property. 
Video means the display or transmission of moving pictures (not animated) such as television 
images or video recordings. 
Vehicular sign means a sign placed on a vehicle or trailer which is parked or located for the primary 
purpose of displaying said sign. This does not apply to signs or lettering on buses, taxis, or vehicles 
operating during the normal course of business. 
Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 18 inches from the wall of a 
building. This definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet signs located on the outside of 
the building. No such sign shall extend above the roof line of its building or canopy structure. 
Window sign means any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof designed to communicate 
information about an activity, business, commodity, product, sale, or service that is placed inside or 
outside of a window and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
7.1.3 ?MINIMUM STANDARDS AND CONFORMANCE: 
7.1.3.1 ?Minimum Standards: The minimum standards set forth herein shall not be construed as 
relieving any owner or tenant of the responsibility for compliance with other local ordinances, 
codes, and regulations, including established requirements and provisions of the International 
Building Code or National Electrical Code or other authority having jurisdiction. 
7.1.3.2 ?Conformance Required: All signs erected, replaced, reconstructed, expanded, or relocated 
on any property shall conform with the provisions of this Article and with all other pertinent laws 
or ordinances of the city of Johnson City. For the purposes of sign regulation, this Article shall 
supersede the provisions of Article III where the two Articles conflict. Properties located within a 
historic/conservation district shall conform to the Design Guidelines for that district. 
7.1.3.3 ?Electrical Safety: All signs having electric wiring shall bear a seal of approval of a nationally 
recognized electrical testing laboratory. Each sign with electrical wiring must have an external 
disconnect. Where appropriate, label numbers shall be registered with the Building Division at 
the time a sign permit is issued. 
7.1.3.4 ?Setback: The following signs shall be erected no closer than ten feet to any property line or 
public street right-of-way. In addition, such signs shall comply with Section 4.11 of the Zoning 
Code, which deals with vision clearance at street intersections. If the adjoining street right-of-
way is less than 50 feet in width, each such sign shall be located no closer than 35 feet from the 
centerline of the right-of-way. 
A. ?Freestanding signs, except in the B-2 District; 
B. ?Construction signs; 
C. ?Directory signs; 
D. ?Ground-mounted signs; and 
E. ?Temporary signs. 
7.1.3.5 ?Noncommercial Copy: Any sign, display, or device allowed under this ordinance may 
contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message which does not 
direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product or service for sale, provided that 
such sign complies with the size, height, and location requirements of this ordinance or those 
regulations in effect at the time the sign was erected. 
7.1.3.6 ?Sign Maintenance: Every sign and its structure shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, 
and good structural condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts and 
wiring, painting, repainting, cleaning, and other acts required for the general maintenance of 
said sign. Signs not adequately maintained shall result in the owner being cited to court. For the 
purpose of this regulation, repairing or replacing a sign shall be deemed general maintenance. 
7.1.3.7 ?Mural Application Permit: Applications for a mural permit shall provide the following 
information: 
A. ?Address of the property of proposed mural; 
B. ?Written consent from the property owner giving permission to place the mural on the 
building; 
C. ?Contact information of artist/team leader; 
D. ?Scale drawing and color photo of the building showing proposed size and location of the 
mural. Drawings shall include the dimensions, construction supports, sizes, foundation, 
electrical wiring and components, materials of the mural and method of attachment and 
character of structure members to which attachment is to be made. The design, quality, 
materials and loading shall conform to the requirements of the Building Code, as amended; 
E. ?List the type of paints proposed (latex, oil base, acrylic); and 
F. ?A plan for who will be maintaining the mural. 
7.1.4 ?ADMINISTRATION AND PERMITS: 
7.1.4.1 ?The regulations of this Article shall be administered by the Chief Building Official of the city 
of Johnson City. 
7.1.4.2 ?Permit Required: Unless otherwise provided, no sign shall be erected, replaced, 
reconstructed, expanded, or relocated without first securing a permit from the Chief Building 
Official of the city of Johnson City. No permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a 
sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and periodic changes of copy, e.g., reader 
boards with changeable letters, movie theater marquees, and service station price signs. Any 
change in a sign associated with a change of ownership or tenancy shall in all cases require a 
permit. 
7.1.4.3 ?Revocation of Permits: The Chief Building Official is hereby authorized and empowered to 
revoke any permit upon failure of the holder to comply with any provision of this Code or with 
the terms of the permit at the time of its issuance. 
7.1.4.4 ?Inspection of Signs: At any time deemed necessary, the Chief Building Official, or 
designee, shall inspect each sign regulated by this Article to ensure that such sign conforms to 
this Article and to all other ordinances of the city. 
7.1.4.5 ?Expiration of Permit: A sign permit shall expire if the work has not been substantially 
initiated within six months from the date of issuance. 


7.2 - EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS 
7.2.1 ?EXEMPT SIGNS: 
The following signs shall be allowed in any zoning district without permit. However, these signs are 
still subject to the applicable size and setback requirements. 
A. ?Directional signs; 
B. ?Flags of any nation, government, or noncommercial organization; 
C. ?Government signs; 
D. ?Memorial signs, cornerstones, and similar signs containing the name of the building and date of 
erection, provided such signs are permanently installed on the building; 
E. ?Window signs which consist entirely of letters, numerals, and symbols, none of which are 
greater than three inches in height; 
F. ?Noncommercial seasonal displays customarily associated with a national, local, or religious 
holiday, provided such are not used to advertise the name of a product, service, or business. 
Such displays shall be removed promptly after the holiday; and 
7.2.2 ?PROHIBITED SIGNS: 
The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: 
A. ?Abandoned signs: Any sign, or part thereof, that is not conforming to the minimum standards of 
this Article, and which is advertising a discontinued use, occupant, product, or service shall be 
removed or made conforming within 45 days of the discontinuance. If such sign is not removed 
within this period, the Chief Building Official shall cite the property owner to court; 
B. ?Unsafe signs: If the Chief Building Official shall find that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a 
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of 
the provisions of this Article, he shall give written notice to the owner of the sign and/or of the 
property and/or the architect, builder, contractor, or agent for both or either requiring the sign to 
be made safe and secure or to be removed. If the sign is not removed or altered so as to render 
it safe and secure, the Chief Building Official shall proceed with action as provided by law. The 
Chief Building Official may cause any sign which is an immediate danger to persons or property 
to be removed immediately and without notice. The written notice required in this section is not 
required for signs allowed in Subsection 7.2.1 above; 
C. ?Portable signs; 
D. ?Any sign located within, upon, or over the public right-of-way, except government signs, awning 
signs, under-awning signs, sandwich board signs (in the B-2 District), projecting signs, and 
special event banners; 
E. ?Banners, festoons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, pinwheels, balloons, A-frame, sandwich, and 
similar temporary signs, except as permitted in Subsections 7.3.3.1, 7.3.4.2-C, 7.3.4.2-D or 
7.3.4.2-H of this Code; 
F. ?Any sign located on a telephone pole, power pole, or streetlight pole, except special event 
banners in the B-2 (Central Business) district; 
G. ?Any sign which contains flashing or intermittent red, blue, green, or amber illumination; 
H. ?Any sign located on the roof of a building which is not an integral part of the building design and 
construction, except as permitted in Subsection 7.3.4.2-H of this Code; 
I. ?Reserved. 
J. ?Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard; no sign or light shall be positioned and designed to 
appear official where it may interfere with any authorized official traffic sign, signal, or device. 
Neither shall it obstruct the view of an official traffic control device. Nor shall any sign interfere 
with safe navigation of traffic upon any public way. Any such sign or light shall be removed 
immediately at the direction of the Chief Building Official; 
K. ?Vehicular signs; 
L. ?Any sign having or consisting of any rotating, revolving, or otherwise moving parts; 
M. ?Human signs; 
N. ?Off-premises advertising signs; and 
O. ?Any sign not specifically included in these regulations. 


7.3 - REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT 
7.3.1 ?R-1—R-6, RP-2—RP-5, RM-3—RM-5, AND A-1 DISTRICTS: 
The following regulations shall apply in the R-1 through R-6, RP-2 through RP-5, RM-3 through RM-
5, and A-1 zoning districts. 
7.3.1.1 ?Permitted Signs: 
A. ?For single- and two-family dwellings. One nameplate attached to the building, not to 
exceed two square feet in area, shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. 
B. ?For multi-family residential developments, group dwellings, permitted nonresidential uses, 
and legal nonconforming uses. One wall or freestanding sign per street frontage granting 
access to the premises shall be permitted. The maximum size of each sign shall be 32 
square feet. Such sign may be externally illuminated, provided the light is directed so that it 
does not shine into nearby residences. Signs for churches may be internally illuminated. 
C. ?For bed-and-breakfast inns, one wall or freestanding sign shall be permitted. The 
maximum size of such sign shall be 12 square feet in area with a sign height of no more 
than eight feet. Such sign may be externally illuminated, provided the light is directed so 
that it does not shine into nearby residences. 
D. ?For restaurants, museums, and art galleries, one wall or freestanding sign shall be 
permitted. The maximum size of such sign shall be 12 square feet in area with a sign 
height of no more than eight feet. Such sign may be externally illuminated, provided the 
light is directed so that it does not shine into nearby residences. 
E. ?Temporary signs: The maximum area of such signs shall be six square feet. Any sign 
announcing an event shall be removed within 48 hours after the event. 
F. ?Subdivision identification signs: 
1. ?Such sign shall not exceed 52 square feet in area; 
2. ?Ground mounted signs located within the right-of-way of the entrance shall be located 
in a median of not less than 50 feet in length and ten feet in width and be setback at 
least ten feet from the right-of-way line when projected across the entrance. Signs 
located at the side of the entrance must be located on private property within an 
easement; and 
3. ?The petitioner shall provide documentation that a homeowners association has been 
created to maintain sign. 
7.3.1.2 ?No sign shall be internally illuminated, except as provided in Subsection 7.3.1.1.B. 
7.3.2 ?RO-1, MS-1, B-1, MX-1, AND RTP DISTRICTS: 
The following regulations shall apply in the RO-1, MS-1, B-1, MX-1, and RTP districts. 
7.3.2.1 ?Permitted signs: 
A. ?For single- and two-family dwellings. One nameplate, not to exceed two square feet in 
area, shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. 
B. ?For multi-family residential and other permitted group dwellings not otherwise identified. 
One wall or freestanding sign per street frontage granting access to the premises shall be 
permitted. The maximum size of each such sign shall be 32 square feet in area. Such sign 
may be externally illuminated, provided the light is directed so that it does not shine into 
nearby residences. 
C. ?For bed-and-breakfast, one wall or freestanding sign shall be permitted. The maximum 
size of such sign shall be 12 square feet in area with a sign height of no more than eight 
feet. Such sign may be externally illuminated, provided the light is directed so that it does 
not shine into nearby residences. 
D. ?For permitted uses, the following shall be permitted: 
1. ?One directory sign per development. 
2. ?In RO-1, B-1, and RTP districts one wall sign for each building side facing an abutting 
street. An allowable wall sign may be placed either on the building or upon a 
freestanding canopy, if such exists. The maximum area of each such sign shall be 32 
square feet. 
In the MS-1 district each nonresidential building shall be permitted one or more wall 
signs. An allowable wall sign may be placed on the building or upon a freestanding 
canopy, if such exists. Two square feet of wall sign area shall be allowed for each 
horizontal linear foot of exterior wall length. If an exterior wall length is less than 16 
feet, the maximum allowable sign area on the wall shall be 32 square feet. In multiple-
occupant buildings, the owner shall determine how the authorized sign area is 
allocated among the occupants. 
3. ?In RO-1, B-1, and RTP districts each business or premise shall be entitled to one 
freestanding sign, one ground-mounted sign, or one projecting sign for each street 
frontage granting access to the premises. 
In the MS-1 district each comprehensive development shall be permitted one 
freestanding sign, one ground-mounted sign, or one projecting sign per street frontage 
granting access to the parcel or center. If the length of a single street abutting the 
development is greater than 400 feet, the development shall be permitted a second 
freestanding sign along that frontage. In computing the allowable number of signs for 
parcels with more than one qualifying frontage, each frontage shall be considered 
separately. If a development is divided by a street, then only one side of the street is 
used to compute frontage length. 
A permitted sign in RO-1, MS-1, B-1, and RTP districts may be either freestanding or 
ground-mounted. However, a freestanding sign is not permitted in the MX-1 district. 
The maximum height of a ground-mounted sign shall be six feet. The maximum height 
of a freestanding sign shall be as follows: 
RO-
1 
MS
-1 
and 
RTP 
B-1 
MX
-1 
8 
feet 
20 
feet 
20 
feet 
N/A 
 
The maximum areas (measured in square feet) of such freestanding signs shall be as 
follows: 
Fre
est
and
ing 

Gro
und
-
mo
unt
ed 
RO-
1 
32 
32 
(lot
s ? 
100 
ft. 
wid
e)  
64 
(lot
s > 
100 
ft. 
wid
e) 
MS-
1/R
TP 
64 
96 
B-1 
64 
96 
 
Corner lot developments in the MS-1, B-1, and RTP districts may combine their pole 
signage allowance into one larger sign with an area of 96 square feet. 
4. ?One menu board for each permitted drive-thru lane. 
5. ?A comprehensive development having one or more road frontages exceeding 1,200 
feet in length shall be permitted one directional sign (with maximum height of six feet 
and maximum area of 24 square feet) at each entrance along that qualifying frontage, 
in lieu of any other directional signs otherwise permitted. The location, size, height, 
and orientation of all directional signs permitted under this section shall be shown on a 
site plan and reviewed and approved by the City Engineer for traffic safety and vision 
clearance. 
E. ?Temporary signs: The maximum area of such signs shall be 15 square feet. Any sign 
announcing an event shall be removed within 48 hours after the event. 
F. ?Subdivision identification signs: 
1. ?Such sign shall not exceed 52 square feet in area; 
2. ?Ground mounted signs located within the right-of-way of the entrance shall be located 
in a median of not less than 50 feet in length and ten feet in width and be setback at 
least ten feet from the right-of-way line when projected across the entrance. Signs 
located at the side of the entrance must be located on private property within an 
easement; and 
3. ?The petitioner shall provide documentation that a homeowners association has been 
created to maintain sign. 
G. ?Window signs. 
7.3.2.2 ?No residential use/development shall have a sign that is internally illuminated. 
7.3.2.3 ?No sign shall advertise a product, service, or other business not situated on the same 
premises or within the same comprehensive development. 
7.3.3 ?B-2 AND B-3 DISTRICTS: 
In the B-2 Central Business District and B-3, Supporting Central Business District, the following 
regulations shall apply. 
7.3.3.1 ?Permitted Signs: 
A. ?For single and two-family dwellings, one nameplate, not to exceed two square feet in area, 
shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. 
B. ?For multi-family residential and other permitted group dwellings, one wall sign per street 
frontage granting access to the premises shall be permitted. The maximum size of each 
such sign shall be 32 square feet in area. 
C. ?For permitted nonresidential uses, the following shall be permitted. 
1. ?Directory sign: One directory sign per development or merchant association. 
2. ?Wall sign: Each nonresidential building shall be permitted one or more wall signs. Two 
square feet of wall sign area shall be allowed for each horizontal linear foot of exterior 
wall length. If an exterior wall length is less than 32 feet, the maximum allowable sign 
area on that wall shall be 32 square feet. A permitted wall sign must be placed on the 
wall surface for which it is authorized; sign area for two or more walls cannot be 
combined and placed on a single wall. In multiple-occupant buildings, the owner shall 
determine how the authorized sign area is allocated among the occupants. 
3. ?Freestanding sign: 
In the B-2 District, each business or premises shall be entitled to one freestanding 
sign for each street frontage granting access to the premises. The maximum size of 
each freestanding sign shall be determined by its setback distance from the adjoining 
qualifying street, according to the following table: 
Set
bac
k 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Hei
ght 
and 
Are
a 
Les
s 
tha
n 
10 
feet 
7 
feet 
in 
hei
ght, 
12 
feet 
in 
are
a 
10 
feet 
or 
gre
ate
r 
25 
feet 
in 
hei
ght, 
32 
feet 
in 
are
a 
 
In the B-3 District, each business or premises shall be entitled to one freestanding 
sign or one projecting sign for each street frontage granting access to the premises. 
Maximum height of each freestanding sign shall be 25 feet. Maximum area of each 
freestanding sign shall be 100 square feet. No freestanding sign shall be permitted 
which does not meet the required ten-foot setback from any property line or public 
right-of-way. 
4. ?Under-awning sign: Each business or premises shall be permitted one such sign per 
qualifying entrance. 
5. ?Banner: A business or merchant association shall be permitted to erect a temporary 
banner for a maximum of 90 days during any one calendar year. 
6. ?Sandwich board: Each business or premises shall be entitled one sandwich board 
sign for each street frontage granting access to the premises provided the sign does 
not encroach into the four-foot unobstructed pedestrian way. The maximum area of a 
sign shall be no more than six square feet per side of sign with the maximum height 
being 42 inches. The sign material shall be wood and slate. 
7. ?Projecting signs: Each business or premises shall be entitled one projecting sign for 
each street frontage granting access to the premises. A projecting sign may extend no 
more than four feet from that wall or one-half the distance between the wall of the 
building and the curb line of the adjacent street, whichever is less. No such sign shall 
extend above the roof line of its building nor shall it be placed less than ten feet above 
the sidewalk or ground level. Maximum area of each freestanding sign shall be 32 
square feet. 
D. ?Temporary signs: The maximum area of such signs shall be 15 square feet. Any sign 
announcing an event shall be removed within 48 hours after the event. 
E. ?Window sign: The opaque surface of any window sign shall not exceed 25 percent of any 
window pane. 
F. ?Murals. 
G. ?Commercial signs in the B-2 district may be internally or externally illuminated. 
7.3.4 ?B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, BP, AND PB DISTRICTS: 
The following regulations shall apply in the B-3, B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, BP, and PB zoning districts. 
7.3.4.1 ?Permitted signs for residential uses: 
A. ?For single- and two-family dwellings. One nameplate, not to exceed two square feet in 
area, shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. 
B. ?For multi-family residential and other group dwellings. One wall or freestanding sign per 
street frontage granting access to the premises shall be permitted. 
1. ?The maximum size of each sign shall be 32 square feet. 
2. ?The maximum height of a freestanding development identification sign shall be 15 
feet. 
7.3.4.2 ?Permitted signs for nonresidential uses: 
A. ?Wall signs: Each nonresidential building shall be permitted one or more signs. Two square 
feet of wall sign area shall be allowed for each horizontal linear foot of exterior wall length. 
If an exterior wall length is less than 16 feet, the maximum allowable sign area on that wall 
shall be 32 square feet. In multiple-occupant buildings, the owner shall determine how the 
authorized sign area is allocated among the occupants. 
For a business utilizing a building and a freestanding canopy, the maximum allowable wall 
sign area shall be based on either the length of the exterior wall or the length of the 
canopy, but not both combined. The maximum allowable wall sign area may be 
apportioned between wall and the canopy as the owner chooses. 
A permitted wall sign must be placed on the wall surface for which it is authorized; sign 
areas for two or more walls cannot be combined and placed on a single wall. 
B. ?Freestanding signs, ground-mounted signs, or projecting signs: Each business or premises 
in a B-3, I-1, I-2 district or each comprehensive development in the B-4, B-5, BP, or PB 
district shall be permitted one freestanding sign or one projecting sign for each street 
frontage under the following conditions: 
1. ?Number of signs: A parcel in a B-3, I-1, or I-2 district or a comprehensive development 
in a B-4, B-5, BP, or PB district is permitted one freestanding sign or one projecting 
sign per street frontage, not including Interstate 26 and State of Franklin Road 
between Sunset Drive and the Bristol Highway. If the length of a single street frontage 
is greater than 400 feet, the parcel or center shall be permitted a second freestanding 
sign along that frontage. 
In computing the allowable number of signs for parcels with more than one qualifying 
frontage, each frontage shall be considered separately. 
Any freestanding sign allowed under this section may be exchanged for two ground-
mounted signs which do not exceed ten feet in height nor 200 square feet in area. 
2. ?Height: The maximum height of each freestanding sign shall be determined by its 
setback distance from the adjoining qualifying street, according to the following table: 
Set
bac
k 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Hei
ght 
10 
to 
25 
feet 
20 
feet 
plu
s 
set
bac
k 
dist
anc
e 
25 
feet 
or 
gre
ate
r 
45 
feet 
 
The maximum height of each ground-mounted sign shall be ten feet. 
3. ?Sign area: The maximum area of each freestanding sign shall be determined by its 
setback distance from the adjoining qualifying street, according to the following table: 
Set
bac
k 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Are
a 
10 
to 
45 
feet 
100 
squ
are 
feet 
+ 
(th
e 
set
bac
k 
dist
anc
e - 
10 
feet 
x 2) 
45 
feet 
or 
gre
ate
r 
250 
squ
are 
feet 
 
The maximum area of a ground-mounted sign authorized under Section 7.3.4.2(B)(1) 
shall be 200 square feet. 
C. ?Banners: A parcel in a B-3, I-1, or I-2 district or a comprehensive development in a B-4, B-
5, BP, or PB district shall be permitted to erect a temporary banner for a maximum of 90 
days during any one calendar year. 
D. ?Festoons, pennants, ribbons, and streamers: Such temporary devices may be erected in a 
B-3, B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, or PB district without limit on the frequency or duration. 
E. ?Directory signs: One directory sign per development, shopping center, or merchant 
association shall be permitted. 
F. ?Under-awning signs: Each business or premises shall be permitted one such sign per 
qualifying entrance. 
G. ?One menu board for each permitted drive-thru lane. 
H. ?Balloons: A balloon shall be allowed to be displayed on the premises of a permitted use for 
a maximum of seven days per event and not more than four events per calendar year for 
any premise. The maximum height of any balloon shall not exceed the height permitted for 
a freestanding sign at the same location, according to the provisions of Subsection 
7.3.4.2(B)(2) of this Code. The maximum allowable size of a balloon shall be determined 
by first calculating the largest plane projection of the balloon on a vertical axis, in square 
feet. This calculated area shall not exceed the maximum area permitted for a freestanding 
sign at the same location, according to the provisions of Subsection 7.3.4.2(B)(3) of this 
Code. Balloons shall be permitted to be placed either on the ground or on the roof of a 
building. 
I. ?Temporary signs: The maximum area of such signs shall be 25 square feet. Any sign 
announcing an event shall be removed within 48 hours after the event. 
J. ?Subdivision identification signs: 
1. ?Such sign shall not exceed 52 square feet in area; 
2. ?Ground mounted signs located within the right-of-way of the entrance shall be located 
in a median of not less than 50 feet in length and ten feet in width and be setback at 
least ten feet from the right-of-way line when projected across the entrance. Signs 
located at the side of the entrance must be located on private property within an 
easement; and 
3. ?The petitioner shall provide documentation that a homeowners association has been 
created to maintain sign. 
K. ?Window signs: 
L. ?Commercial signs in the B-3, B-4, B-5, I-1, I-2, BP, and PB districts may be internally or 
externally illuminated. 
7.3.4.3 ?No sign shall have or consist of any rotating, revolving, or otherwise moving part or depict 
or describe any "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in Article 
II of this Code. 
7.3.5 ?MX DISTRICT: 
In the MX Mixed Use District, the following regulations shall apply. 
7.3.5.1 ?Permitted signs: 
A. ?For single-family and two-family dwellings, one nameplate, not to exceed two square feet 
in area, shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. 
B. ?For multi-family residential and other permitted group dwellings, one wall or freestanding 
sign per street frontage granting access to the premises shall be permitted. The maximum 
size of each sign shall be 32 square feet in area. Such sign may be externally illuminated, 
provided the light is directed so that it does not shine into nearby residences. 
C. ?Permitted signs for permitted nonresidential uses: 
1. ?Directory sign: One directory sign per development or merchant association. 
2. ?Wall sign: Each nonresidential building shall be permitted one or more wall signs. Two 
square feet of wall sign area shall be allowed for each horizontal linear foot of exterior 
wall length. If an exterior wall length is less than 16 feet, the maximum allowable sign 
area on that wall shall be 32 square feet. An allowable wall sign may be placed either 
on the building or upon a freestanding canopy, if such exists. A permitted wall sign 
must be placed on the wall for which it is authorized; sign areas for two or more walls 
cannot be combined and placed on a single wall. In multiple-occupant buildings, the 
owner shall determine how the authorized sign area is allocated among the 
occupants. 
3. ?Freestanding signs, ground-mounted signs, or projecting signs: Each principal building 
in an MX district shall be permitted one freestanding, one ground-mounted sign, or 
one projecting sign per street frontage granting access to the site under the following 
conditions: 
General retail and service developments as referenced in Subsection 6.25.2.6 shall 
be permitted one freestanding sign, one ground-mounted sign, or one projecting sign 
which shall have a maximum sign area of 96 square feet. Freestanding signs shall 
have a maximum height of 20 feet as measured from the surface grade at the base of 
the sign or from the surface grade of the nearest adjacent street. Ground-mounted 
signs shall have a maximum height of ten feet as measured from the surface grade at 
the base or from the surface grade of the nearest adjacent street. 
All other development in the MX district shall be entitled to one freestanding sign, one 
ground-mounted sign, or one projecting sign which shall have a maximum sign area of 
32 square feet and a maximum height of 20 feet. 
4. ?Under-awning sign: Each business shall be permitted one such sign per qualifying 
entrance. 
5. ?Banner: A business or merchant association shall be permitted to erect a temporary 
banner for a maximum of 90 days during any one calendar year. 
6. ?Development identification sign: General retail and service developments as 
referenced in Subsection 6.25.2.6 shall be permitted one such sign per development. 
The maximum size shall be 200 square feet, the maximum height shall be 45 feet, 
and it shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way line. 
D. ?Subdivision identification signs: 
1. ?Such sign shall not exceed 52 square feet in area; 
2. ?Ground mounted signs located within the right-of-way of the entrance shall be located 
in a median of not less than 50 feet in length and ten feet in width and be setback at 
least ten feet from the right-of-way line when projected across the entrance. Signs 
located at the side of the entrance must be located on private property within an 
easement; and 
3. ?The petitioner shall provide documentation that a homeowners association has been 
created to maintain sign. 
E. ?Temporary signs: In addition to the other signs identified in this subsection, temporary 
freestanding signs may be posted on any lot in a residential district at any given time. This 
category includes, but is not limited to: real estate signs; construction signs, political signs, 
garage sales or any other non-commercial messages. The maximum area of such signs 
shall be 25 square feet. Any sign announcing an event shall be removed within 48 hours 
after the event. 
F. ?Window signs: 
G. ?Commercial signs in the MX district may be internally or externally illuminated. 


7.4 - ANIMATED SIGNS 
Animated signs shall be allowed in the following commercial districts: B-4 (Planned Arterial Business); B-5 
(Planned Community Business); and PB (Planned Business) only along and facing designated arterial 
streets as identified on the Zoning Map and only on parcels with a minimum arterial road frontage of 300 
feet. Those properties fronting on arterial streets where animated signs shall be allowed are depicted on 
Figure 1 and include: (1) the Bristol Highway extending northeast from Spring City Drive to Green Valley 
Drive; and (2) North Roan Street extending north from properties adjoining Canary Street to properties 
abutting Oakland Avenue. Developments or parcels which are allowed multiple signs, including wall 
signs, shall be allowed only one electronic message board/animated sign, which shall be counted towards 
the total allowable signage for the development (including wall signs). Animated signs shall not be 
permitted in the Corridor Overlay District or the Design Overlay District or on any existing billboard/off-
premise sign. Properties located within a historic/conservation district shall conform to the Design 
Guidelines for that district. Electronic message boards that are animated shall include an automatic 
dimmer. The maximum allowable brightness of an electronic message board/animated sign shall not 
exceed 4,000 Nits during the hours between sunrise and sunset and 1,000 Nits after sunset and before 
sunrise. No permit for an electronic message board/animated sign shall be issued for any sign display 
that interferes with traffic signal devices as determined by the City Traffic Engineer. Animated signs shall 
not be used for off-premise advertising, but may be used for noncommercial copy (see Section 7.1.3.5). 
The maximum area of an animated wall sign is 62.5 square feet. The minimum area of a freestanding 
animated sign is 32 square feet. The maximum area of a freestanding animated sign is 32 square feet, or 
25 percent of the maximum sign area allowed, whichever is greater. The maximum freestanding sign area 
allowed is determined by its setback distance from the adjoining qualifying street, according to the 
following table: 
Set
bac
k 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Are
a 
10 
to 
45 
feet 
32 
squ
are 
feet 
+ 
(th
e 
set
bac
k 
dist
anc
e - 
10); 
not 
to 
(ex
cee
d 
62.
5 
squ
are 
feet
) 
45 
feet 
or 
gre
ate
r 
62.
5 
squ
are 
feet 
 
7.4.1 ?Nonconforming animated signs which have received building permits prior to the effective date of 
the ordinance from which this Article is derived shall be grandfathered. 


7.5 - ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS 
Electronic message boards that are not animated shall be allowed in the following districts: B-3 
(Supporting Central Business); B-4 (Planned Arterial Business); B-5 (Planned Community Business); PB 
(Planned Business); MX (Mixed Use); MS-1 (Medical Services); I-1 (Light Industrial); I-2 (Heavy 
Industrial) and RTP (Research/Technology Park) only along and facing collector and arterial streets as 
designated on the Zoning Map and only on parcels with a minimum road frontage of 100 feet. 
Developments or parcels which are allowed multiple signs, including wall signs, shall be allowed only one 
electronic message board, which shall be counted towards the total allowable signage for the 
development (including wall signs). Properties located within a historic/conservation district shall conform 
to the Design Guidelines for that district. Electronic message boards that are not animated shall include 
an automatic dimmer. The maximum allowable brightness of an electronic message board shall not 
exceed 4,000 Nits during the hours between sunrise and sunset and 1,000 Nits after sunset and before 
sunrise. No permit for an electronic message board shall be issued for any sign display that interferes 
with traffic signal devices as determined by the City Traffic Engineer. Any display on an electronic 
message board shall be for a minimum of ten seconds in duration. Electronic message boards shall not 
be used for off-premise advertising, but may be used for noncommercial copy (see Section 7.1.3.5). 
The maximum area of an electronic message board wall sign is 62.5 square feet. The maximum area of 
an electronic message board on a billboard, not regulated by the state, shall be 62.5 square feet. The 
maximum area of a freestanding electronic message board is 32 square feet, or 25 percent of the 
maximum sign area allowed, whichever is greater. The maximum freestanding sign area allowed is 
determined by its setback distance from the adjoining qualifying street, according to the following table: 
Set
bac
k 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Are
a 
10 
to 
45 
feet 
32 
squ
are 
feet 
+ 
(th
e 
set
bac
k 
dist
anc
e - 
10); 
(no
t to 
exc
eed 
62.
5 
squ
are 
feet
) 
45 
feet 
or 
gre
ate
r 
62.
5 
squ
are 
feet 
 
7.5.1 ?Nonconforming electronic message boards which have received building permits prior to the 
effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived shall be grandfathered. 


ARTICLE VIII - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 


8.1 - PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
8.1.1 ?FINDINGS OF FACT: 
8.1.1.1 ?The Board of Commissioners of the city of Johnson City wishes to maintain eligibility in the 
National Flood Insurance Program and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations found 
in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Ch. 1, Section 60.3 and subsequent 
amendments. 
8.1.1.2 ?Areas of Johnson City are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life 
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, 
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, 
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
8.1.1.3 ?These flood losses are primarily caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in 
floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and by uses in flood hazard areas 
which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or 
otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
8.1.2 ?PURPOSE: 
It is the purpose of the Floodplain Regulations to promote the public health, safety, and general 
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. The 
Floodplain Regulations are designed to: 
8.1.2.1 ?Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water or erosion hazards, or which cause 
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities; 
8.1.2.2 ?Require uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, to be protected against 
flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
8.1.2.3 ?Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective 
barriers which accommodate flood waters; 
8.1.2.4 ?Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or 
flood damage; 
8.1.2.5 ?Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood 
waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
8.1.2.6 ?Protect karst drainage systems from sedimentation and debris; and 
8.1.2.7 ?Protect groundwater resources from contamination due to pollution runoff into karst 
drainage systems. 
8.1.3 ?OBJECTIVES: 
The objectives of the Floodplain Regulations are: 
8.1.3.1 ?To protect human life and health, and property; 
8.1.3.2 ?To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
8.1.3.3 ?To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally 
undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
8.1.3.4 ?To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
8.1.3.5 ?To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, 
telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood prone areas; 
8.1.3.6 ?To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of 
flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize blight in flood areas; 
8.1.3.7 ?To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodable area; and 
8.1.3.8 ?To maintain eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 


8.2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
8.2.1 ?BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: 
The areas of special flood hazard within Johnson City, Tennessee, Community Number 475432 are 
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Flood Insurance Studies (FIS) 
and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for Washington, Carter and Sullivan Counties. These 
special flood hazard areas are shown more specifically for Washington County Map Panel Numbers 
47179C0045D, 47179C0055D, 4179C0061D, 47179C0062D, 47179C0063D, 47179C0064D, 
47179C0066D, 47179C0067D, 47179C0068D, 47179C0069D, 47179C0086D, 47179C0088D, 
47479C0089D, 47179C0151D, 47179C0152D, 47179C0153D, 47179C0154D, 47179C0156D, 
47179C0157D, 47179C0158D, 47179C0159D, 47179C0167D, 47179C0169D, 47179C0176D, 
47179C0177D, 47179C0178D, 47179C0179D, 47179C0181D, 47179C0186D, 47179C0187D, 
47179C0188D, effective dates September 29, 2006; for Carter County Map Panel Numbers 
47019C0154E, 47019C0158E, 47019C0165E, 47019C0170E, effective dates September 26, 2008; 
and for Sullivan County Map Panel Number 47163C0290D, effective date September 29, 2006. 
These Flood Insurance Studies and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, subsequent map amendments and 
revisions that have been approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and all other 
supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this Article. 
8.2.2 ?ESTABLISHMENT OF A SINKHOLE OVERLAY ZONE: 
The city of Johnson City administratively establishes the geographic limits of application of this policy 
to any portion of the city through the use of a Sinkhole Overlay Zone. Properties with karst or 
sinkhole topography or development/redevelopment of properties that drain either partially or 
exclusively to karst or sinkhole topography, shall follow the applicable rules and procedures of this 
Article. 
8.2.3 ?REQUIREMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: 
A development permit shall be required in conformity with this Article prior to the commencement of 
any development activity. 
8.2.4 ?INTERPRETATION: 
In the interpretation and application of the Floodplain Regulations, all provisions shall be: (1) 
considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) 
deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Tennessee statutes. 
8.2.5 ?WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY: 
Conformance with this policy does not relieve the developer and his engineer from making sound 
engineering judgment and taking measures which go beyond the scope of this policy where 
necessary. The degree of flood protection required by the Floodplain Regulations is considered 
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger 
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or 
natural causes. The Floodplain Regulations do not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood 
Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. The 
Floodplain Regulations shall not create liability on the part of the city of Johnson City, Tennessee or 
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on the 
Floodplain Regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. This policy is a 
regulations instrument only, and is not to be interpreted as an undertaking by the city to design any 
structure or facility. 
8.2.6 ?ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS: 
The Chief Building Official's duties and responsibilities regarding the administration and enforcement 
of the Floodplain Regulations are provided in this Article and Article XVI, Penalties and Remedies. 


8.3 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 
8.3.1 ?PERMIT PROCEDURES: 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Chief Building Official on forms furnished 
by the city of Johnson City prior to any development activity. The development permit may include, 
but is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, 
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill 
placement, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the limits of the floodplain and 
floodway, with base flood elevations, across the property. Specifically, the following information is 
required: 
8.3.1.1 ?Application stage: 
A. ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor of all buildings where 
base flood elevations (BFE's) are available, or to the highest adjacent grade or to the 
normal flow elevation of an adjacent stream when applicable under this Article. (See 
Subsection 8.3.1.2.) A copy of the Certification of Elevation is included in the Floodplain 
Development Permit Guide. 
B. ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be flood-
proofed, where base flood elevation data is available, or to the highest grade or to the 
normal flow elevation of an adjacent stream when applicable under this Article. 
C. ?A FEMA flood proofing certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that 
the proposed nonresidential flood-proofed building will meet the flood-proofing criteria in 
Subsection 8.3.1.2, where base flood elevation data is available. A copy of the flood 
proofing-certificate is included in the Floodplain Development Permit Guide. 
D. ?Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result 
of proposed development. 
8.3.1.2 ?Construction stage: Within unnumbered A Flood Zones, where flood elevation data is not 
available, the Chief Building Official shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the 
development permit. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement 
of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade or to the normal flow 
elevation of an adjacent stream. The elevation of the highest grade adjacent to the structure 
and the normal flow elevation of the stream shall also be recorded. USGS Quadrangle maps 
may be utilized when no more detailed reference exists to establish reference elevations. 
Within all flood zones where base flood elevation data are utilized, for all new construction and 
substantial improvements the Chief Building Official shall require: (a) that prior to installation the 
proposed elevation for the lowest floor or flood-proofing is verified as correct, (b) that upon 
completion of the lowest floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, whichever is 
applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Chief Building Official an as-
built certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or flood-proofed elevation, whichever is 
applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by, or 
under the direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, or architect 
and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential building, said 
certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer or 
architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification 
shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Chief Building Official shall review the above-referenced 
certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the 
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted allowed to 
proceed. Failure to submit the certification survey or failure to make said corrections required 
hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project, and/or deny issuance of a 
Certificate of Occupancy. Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data is not 
available, the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing shall be determined as the 
measurement of the lowest floor or flood-proofing of the building relative to the highest adjacent 
grade or the normal flow elevation of an adjacent stream. 
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency to ensure accuracy of community flood maps 
through the Letter of Map Revision Process. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an 
altered or relocated portion of any water course is maintained. 
8.3.2 ?PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION: 
8.3.2.1 ?General standards: In flood prone areas the following provisions are required: 
A. ?New construction and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be anchored to 
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
B. ?Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or 
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-
the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent 
with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
C. ?New construction and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be constructed 
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
D. ?New construction or substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be constructed by 
methods and practices that minimize flood damage: 
1. ?Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel 
to the directions of flood flow; and 
2. ?So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow 
lines as those of adjoining structures. 
E. ?All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service 
facilities shall be designed and/or located one foot above the base flood elevation (or as 
specified by flood-proofing requirements) to prevent water from entering or accumulating 
within the components during conditions of flooding; 
F. ?New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
G. ?New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood 
waters; 
H. ?On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to 
them or contamination from them during flooding by the base flood; 
I. ?Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a building, which is in compliance 
with the Floodplain Regulations, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as 
contained in the Floodplain Regulations; and 
J. ?Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a building, which is not in 
compliance with the provision of the Floodplain Regulations, shall be undertaken only if 
said non-conformity is not extended or replaced; 
K. ?Any new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall provide copies of all 
Federal and State permits, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
L. ?All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall meet the standards of 
Section 8.3.2.2; 
M. ?When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are partially located in an 
area of special flood hazard, the entire structure shall meet the standards for new 
construction; 
N. ?When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple 
flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple Base Flood Elevations, 
the entire structure shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone 
and the highest Base Flood Elevation. 
8.3.2.2 ?Specific standards: These provisions shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard as 
provided herein. In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been 
provided, including flood zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, and A99, and has provided a regulatory 
floodway, as set forth in Subsection 8.2.1, the following provisions are required: 
A. ?Residential construction: Where base flood elevation is available, new construction or 
substantial improvement of any residential building or manufactured home shall have the 
lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood 
elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings 
sufficient to facilitate equalization of the flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior 
walls and to ensure the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in 
accordance with the standards of Subsection 8.3.2.2.C. 
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and 
where alternative data is not available, the Chief Building Official shall require the lowest 
floor of a building to be elevated or flood-proofed to a level of five and one-half feet above 
the normal flow elevation of the adjacent stream channel or three feet above the highest 
adjacent grade, whichever is greater. All applicable data including elevations or flood 
proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in Section 8.3.1. 
B. ?Nonresidential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any 
commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, when BFE data is available, shall have 
the lowest floor elevated or flood-proofed no lower than one foot above the level of the 
base flood elevation. 
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and 
where alternative data is not available, the Chief Building Official shall require the lowest 
floor of a building to be elevated or flood-proofed to a level of five and one-half feet above 
the normal flow elevation of the adjacent stream channel or three feet above the highest 
adjacent grade, whichever is greater. All applicable data including elevations or flood 
proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in Section 8.3.1. 
Buildings located in all A-zones may be flood-proofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided 
that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls 
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural 
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the 
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the 
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice 
for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Chief Building 
Official as set forth in Section 8.3.1. 
C. ?Elevated building: New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings, 
that include fully-enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the 
base flood elevation, or required height above the highest adjacent grade, shall be 
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of 
flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
1. ?Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional 
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(a) ?Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one 
square inch per square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b) ?The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(c) ?Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or 
devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in both directions. 
2. ?Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of 
vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection 
with the premises (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or 
elevator); and 
3. ?The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into 
separate rooms in such a way which impedes the movement of flood waters and all 
such partition shall comply with the provisions of Subsection 8.3.2.2. 
D. ?Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: 
1. ?All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or 
parcels, (2) in expansions of existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (3) 
in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall meet 
the requirements of new construction, including elevations and anchoring. 
2. ?All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured 
home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(a) ?(1) ?When base flood elevations are available the lowest floor of the 
manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation no lower than 
one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(2) ?Absent base flood elevations the manufactured home chassis is elevated 
and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of 
equivalent strength) five and one-half feet above the normal flow elevation 
of the adjacent stream channel or three feet above the highest adjacent 
grade at the building site, whichever is greater. 
(b) ?All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored 
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and 
(c) ?In or outside of an existing or new manufactured home park or subdivision, or in 
an expansion of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, on which a 
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any 
manufactured home placed or substantially improved shall meet the standards of 
Subsections 8.3.2.2.D.2(a) and 8.3.2.2.D.2(b). 
3. ?All recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
(a) ?Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(b) ?Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for 
highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site 
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached structures or additions; 
(c) ?The recreational vehicle shall meet the requirements for new construction, 
including anchoring, and elevation requirements of Subsections 8.3.2.2.D.1 or 
8.3.2.2.D.2(a) and 8.3.2.2.D.2(b) above if on the site for longer than 180 
consecutive days; 
(d) ?In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data or floodway 
data have not been provided, the provisions of Subsection 16.2.6.8 shall be 
utilized for requirements relative to the base flood elevation or flood ways. 
8.3.2.3 ?Standards for subdivisions and other proposed new development proposals: Subdivisions 
and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed 
to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision 
proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall 
be reviewed to ensure that: 
A. ?All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
B. ?All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, 
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood 
damage; 
C. ?All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to minimize or reduce 
exposure to flood hazards; and 
D. ?Base flood elevation data shall be shown on plats and plans for subdivision proposals and 
for other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
When base flood elevations have not been established for subdivisions that are greater 
than two lots or other proposed developments that are greater than one acre, the 
developer shall provide an engineering study with certification by a registered professional 
engineer, which will establish base flood elevations and designate floodway locations. The 
engineering study should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard 
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering principles. 
8.3.2.4 ?Standards for areas of special flood hazard with established base flood elevation and with 
floodways designated: Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in 
Subsection 8.2.1, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely 
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the 
area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood 
without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions apply: 
A. ?Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial 
improvements, or other developments within the regulatory floodway. Development may be 
permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses 
performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of 
the proposed encroachments or new development, when combined with all other existing 
and anticipated development, shall not result in any increase of the water surface elevation 
of the base flood level, velocities or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood 
discharge at any point within the community. A registered professional engineer must 
provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
B. ?New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall comply with all applicable 
flood hazard reduction provisions of Subsection 8.3.2.2. 
8.3.2.5 ?Standards for areas of special flood hazard zones AE with established base flood 
elevations but without floodways designated: Located within the areas of special flood hazard 
established in Subsection 8.2.1, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where 
no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
A. ?No encroachments, including fill material, new structures, or substantial improvements 
shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless an engineering study with 
certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the 
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and 
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood 
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering study should be 
supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydrologic and hydraulic 
engineering principles. 
B. ?New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-
proofed to elevations established in accordance with Subsection 8.3.2.2. 
8.3.2.6 ?Standards for streams without established base flood elevations or floodways (A Zones): 
Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Subsection 8.2, where streams 
exist, but no base flood data has been provided (A Zones), or where a Floodway has not been 
delineated, the following provisions shall apply: 
A. ?When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance 
with Subsection 8.2, then the Chief Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably 
utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a 
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Subsection 8.3.2. 
Only if data is not available from these sources, then the following provisions, B and C may 
apply. B and C shall not be applied, if the size of the water shed above the development 
site is greater than 500 acres. If the water shed above the development site is greater than 
500 acres, then the following provision D shall apply. 
B. ?No encroachments, including fill material, new structures, or substantial improvements 
shall be located closer than three times the average width of the stream as it traverses the 
site or 30 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the centerline of the stream. The 
determination of the floodway limits is illustrated in the Floodplain Development Permit 
Guide. The width of the stream should be measured at all locations deemed appropriate to 
accurately reflect the variations in width along the length of the affected area. In floodway 
areas where the natural topography prevents the floodway from being equally distributed 
on each side of the stream, this estimated floodway width shall be shifted in the direction of 
lower elevations. A registered professional engineer shall determine the magnitude of the 
floodway shift, and the shift shall be based on actual ground elevations at the site. 
C. ?In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction or 
substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest 
enclosed area elevated or flood-proofed five and one-half feet above the normal flow 
elevation of the adjacent stream channel or three feet above the highest adjacent grade at 
the building site, whichever is greater. This situation is depicted in the Floodplain 
Development Permit Guide. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of 
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of Subsection 8.3.2.2.C, 
"Elevated Buildings". 
D. ?If the size of the water shed above the development site is greater than 500 acres, then an 
engineering study with certification by a registered professional engineer must be provided, 
which establishes base flood elevations and designates the location of the floodway. The 
study must demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when 
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water 
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
The engineering study should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard 
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering principles. 
8.3.2.7 ?Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones): Located within the areas of 
special flood hazard established in Subsection 8.2.1 are areas designated as shallow flooding 
areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to 
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is 
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
A. ?All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential 
buildings shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least one foot above the flood depth 
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above the highest 
adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least 
three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic 
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance 
with the standards of Subsection 8.3.2.2.C, and "Elevated Buildings". 
B. ?All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings may be 
flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary 
facilities must be flood proofed and designed watertight to be completely flood-proofed to 
at least one foot above the specified Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) flood level, with 
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components 
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of 
buoyancy. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be flood proofed to at least 
three feet above the highest adjacent grade. A registered professional engineer or architect 
shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted 
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this Article and shall provide such 
certification to the Chief Building Official as set forth above and as required in Subsection 
8.3.1. 
C. ?Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide flood waters around 
and away from proposed structures. 
D. ?The Chief Building Official shall certify the elevation or the highest adjacent grade, where 
applicable, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
8.3.2.8 ?Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99 Zones): Located within the 
areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 8.2, are areas of the 100-year floodplain 
protected by a flood protection system, but where base flood elevations and flood hazard 
factors have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 Zones) all provisions of Subsection 
8.3 and Subsection 8.3.2.1 shall apply. 
8.3.2.9 ?Standards for unmapped streams: Located within Johnson City, Tennessee are unmapped 
streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to 
such streams the following provisions shall apply: 
A. ?In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no encroachments including fill material, 
new structures, or substantial improvements shall be located no closer than three times the 
average width of the stream as it traverses the site or 30 feet, whichever is greater, 
measured from the centerline of the stream. The determination of the floodway limits is 
illustrated in the Floodplain Development Permit Guide. The width of the stream should be 
measured at all locations deemed appropriate to accurately reflect the variations in width 
along the length of the affected area. In floodway areas where the natural topography 
prevents the floodway from being equally distributed on each side of the stream, this 
estimated floodway width shall be shifted in the direction of lower elevations. A registered 
professional engineer shall determine the magnitude of the floodway shift, and the shift 
shall be based on actual ground elevations at the site. 
B. ?In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, new construction or substantial 
improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area 
elevated or flood-proofed five and one-half feet above the normal flow elevation of the 
adjacent stream channel or three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site, 
whichever is greater. This situation is depicted in the Floodplain Development Permit 
Guide. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be 
provided in accordance with the standards of Subsection 8.3.2.2.C, "Elevated Buildings". 
C. ?If the size of the water shed above the development site is greater than 500 acres, then an 
engineering study with certification by a registered professional engineer must be provided, 
which establishes base flood elevations and designates the location of the floodway. The 
study must demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when 
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water 
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
The engineering study should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard 
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering principles. 
8.3.2.10 ?Standards for wet weather conveyances: Located throughout Johnson City, Tennessee 
are wet weather conveyances, which are flow paths that stormwater will follow during rainfall, 
and for a period of time after rainfall has stopped. Adjacent to wet weather conveyances the 
following provisions shall apply: 
A. ?If the wet weather conveyance is a man-made channel with a well-defined top of bank or 
rim on each side of the channel, and has been designed, constructed and maintained such 
that it has the capacity to contain the runoff generated from a 100-year, 24-hour storm 
within the channel, then the lowest floor for an adjacent structure shall be no lower than 
one foot above the lowest rim of the channel. 
B. ?If the wet weather conveyance is a man-made channel with a well-defined top of bank or 
rim on each side of the channel, but the channel design is unknown, or has been designed 
for a storm that is less than the 100-year, 24-hour storm, then the lowest floor for an 
adjacent structure shall be no lower than two feet above the lowest rim of the channel. 
C. ?If the wet weather conveyance is a man-made channel without a well-defined top of bank 
or rim on each side of the channel, and has been designed, constructed and maintained 
such that it has the capacity to contain the runoff generated from a 100-year, 24-hour 
storm, then the lowest floor for an adjacent structure shall be no lower than one foot above 
the elevation at the boundary of the 100-year flow path determined for the channel. 
D. ?If the wet weather conveyance is a man-made or natural channel without a well-defined 
top of bank or rim on each side of the channel and with no known design, then the lowest 
floor for an adjacent structure shall be no lower than four feet above the lowest elevation in 
the channel cross section adjacent to the structure. 
E. ?If the wet weather conveyance is a man-made channel that is constructed to divert flow 
across a slope, then structures above the channel will be elevated as described in A, B, C 
or D. If a structure is located below the channel, then the following provisions shall apply: 
1. ?Structures with no basement shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one 
foot above the highest adjacent grade. 
2. ?Structures with a basement shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot 
above the lowest adjacent grade, and the next floor above the lowest floor shall be no 
lower than one foot above the highest adjacent grade. Openings in the basement 
walls shall be no lower than one foot above the adjacent grade, at the opening. 


8.4 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE SINKHOLE REGULATIONS 
8.4.1 ?OVERVIEW: 
Certain areas of the city and surrounding areas drain exclusively or predominantly to sinkhole 
systems. As such, these sinkhole systems must remain available for the temporary storage and 
drainage of surface runoff in a manner similar to established riparian floodways and floodplains. 
Sinkhole areas are also known to be unstable for construction and drainage. Structures placed on 
soil foundations in sinkhole areas may be subject to flooding, settling or collapse. All sinkholes are 
herein defined to have 25-year "no-build" and 100-year "floodplain" line locations and elevations 
which will restrict or modify development adjoining or draining to sinkholes. Some of these locations 
and elevations have been established by the city as part of its master planning or sinkhole 
investigation process. For those sinkholes that have not been evaluated, a person developing 
contiguous to or within the watershed draining to such sinkholes shall establish these elevations in 
accordance with the procedures described herein. 
It is not possible to determine a generalized rule for sinkhole capacity. Each sinkhole behaves 
differently from all other sinkholes, and the discharge from each is a function of unknown 
subterranean stream configurations. Sinkholes must not be used as an integral part of the drainage 
system unless no other outlet is feasible, as shown in a study by a licensed professional with 
expertise in karst topography. The location of structures surrounding sinkholes shall be regulated. 
More strict requirements may be imposed if analysis demonstrates the possibility of water backing up 
through a sinkhole. 
Sinkholes are also known to be part of fragile drainage systems. Any substance or object, including 
construction siltation, placed within a sinkhole has the potential of clogging the throat of the sinkhole 
and/or polluting groundwater. The immediate area surrounding a sinkhole must be disturbed as little 
as possible. Extreme care should be taken in planning, constructing and operating such land uses as 
may store and handle potential groundwater pollutants (such as gas stations) or in the design and 
construction of septic systems. 
8.4.2 ?PURPOSE: 
The purposes of the sinkhole policy are: to supplement the policies established in the Floodplain 
Regulations, to protect existing and future development from flooding due to sinkhole overflow and 
backup, to protect underground drainage systems from clogging due to sediment and debris, to 
protect the structural integrity of buildings and roads built near sinkholes, and to work with the State 
of Tennessee to protect groundwater resources from contamination due to pollutant runoff into 
sinkholes. 
8.4.3 ?APPLICABILITY: 
This policy shall be applicable to all areas of the city which drain either partially or totally to a 
sinkhole or underground karst system and which involves alterations to existing developments, the 
construction of new developments, disruption of the vegetative covering for land clearing activities, 
topographic alterations, or utility construction projects. 
8.4.4 ?PERMIT PROCEDURES: 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Chief Building Official prior to any 
development activity. The development permit may include, but is not limited to, the following: plans 
in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimension, and elevations of all pertinent 
features of the area in question, existing and/or proposed structures, storage of materials or 
equipment, drainage facilities, the location of the 25-year no-build line and the 100-year floodplain 
elevation or hydrologic and hydraulic calculations supporting methods to alter the flood elevation 
line(s), evidence of appropriate off-site easements, and evidence of the determination of need for a 
State of Tennessee permit. Specifically, the following information is required: 
8.4.4.1 ?Application stage: 
A. ?A generalized site plan with all pertinent information, including the location and extent of all 
sinkholes involved, existing and proposed drainage structures, and the elevation in relation 
to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
B. ?All plans and corresponding calculations shall be produced by a licensed professional 
having expertise in karst topography; 
C. ?If the site relies on any sinkhole(s) for any portion of its drainage, a hydrogeologic study 
will be required as part of the grading and drainage plan; 
D. ?For those sinkholes that have been previously evaluated, the location and limits of the 25-
year no-build line(s) and the 100-year floodplain line(s); 
E. ?For those sinkholes that have not been previously evaluated, calculations supporting the 
establishment of 25-year no-build lines and 100-year floodplain elevations; 
F. ?For those sinkholes that have been previously evaluated and re-evaluation is desired, 
hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to support the alteration of the established flood 
elevation lines; 
G. ?Evidence of appropriate off-site easements for sites relying either partially or completely on 
off-site sinkholes for drainage; 
H. ?Description and location of all erosion and sedimentation control measures to be used, 
both on-site and off-site; 
I. ?Copies of applications submitted to the State Department of Environment and Conservation 
shall be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of grading or drainage permits. Permit 
issuance by the city may be made contingent on prior approval by the State; and 
J. ?Any additional supporting information deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official to 
ensure the protection of the site, surrounding properties, or the sinkhole system. 
8.4.4.2 ?Construction stage: 
A. ?All disturbed areas covered by this policy shall provide adequate structural and non-
structural erosion and sedimentation controls both on-site and around the perimeter of any 
sinkhole inlet receiving drainage to reduce the potential for sediment entering and clogging 
the sinkhole. On-site controls shall be initiated prior to commencement of clearing 
operations. Sinkhole perimeter controls shall be established prior to the initiation of any 
clearing and grubbing operations. All controls shall be inspected by a qualified and 
responsible party periodically and within 48 hours after heavy precipitation events. 
Adequate structural controls include but are not limited to: entrenched and staked straw 
bale barriers, synthetic filter fabric barriers, slope protection, temporary sediment traps and 
basins, improved sinkhole outlets with elevated openings, or other inlet protection and 
diversions. Adequate nonstructural controls shall include but are not limited to: limitation of 
clearing, temporary seeding, erosion control blankets and/or mulching, construction timing, 
location of debris and trash piles, and proper storage of construction related chemicals and 
petroleum products. All sinkhole openings shall be inspected and cleaned out after 
completion of construction and after establishment of permanent vegetative cover. 
B. ?The Chief Building Official shall require that, upon placement of the lowest floor, it shall be 
the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Chief Building Official a certification of the 
elevation of the lowest floor, as-built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall 
be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor, professional 
engineer, or architect and certified by same. The Chief Building Official shall review the 
floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be 
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being 
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections 
required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project, and/or deny 
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
8.4.5 ?GENERAL STANDARDS: 
8.4.5.1 ?No person shall place or cause to be placed any substances or objects, other than 
stormwater runoff, in any sinkhole or in the depression of any sinkhole relied on for stormwater 
drainage, or place or cause to be placed any substances or objects in such a way so as to allow 
such substances or objects to be washed into a sinkhole inlet during storm events. 
8.4.5.2 ?No person shall fill or obstruct the outlet to a sinkhole or system of sinkholes, or fill over a 
spring or sink outlet without first defining the flow area to that outlet or spring and ascertaining, 
through dye tracing or other means, the areas that rely on the outlet for drainage and that filling 
of such outlet or spring will not increase flooding in the sink system through denial of use of the 
system or sink outlet. 
8.4.5.3 ?Extreme care should be taken in planning, constructing and operating such land uses as 
may store and handle potential groundwater pollutants (such as gas stations) or in design and 
construction of septic systems. 
8.4.5.4 ?The immediate area around a sink must be disturbed as little as possible. The use of 
mechanized equipment near the subterranean drain shall be done with caution. 
8.4.5.5 ?Flow exiting from culverts or other concentrated drainage should be carried by riprap or 
concrete drain to the drain inlet, with the inclusion of energy dissipators as appropriate. Where 
an identified throat exists which is to be improved, a steel grate of adequate proportions should 
encase the inlet to prevent debris stoppage. The city must approve throat improvement 
methods and designs prior to construction. 
8.4.5.6 ?The city strongly recommends that appropriate geotechnical studies be done and 
measures taken to insure structure foundations are designed to take into account potential 
sinkhole locations and instability. Such studies should account for potential foundation problems 
for both undisturbed sink areas and those previously filled by others. In addition, the placement 
of fill material within sinkholes is generally undesirable because the placement of fill reduces the 
volume within the sink available for stormwater storage. 
Geotechnical studies for sites within karst terrain routinely include, but are not limited to, drilling 
to assess subsurface conditions, recommendations for site preparation, and a discussion of 
specific geologic hazards such as sinkhole collapse and subsidence. The impact on foundation 
alternatives, such as shallow or deep foundations, may be presented as a cost versus risk 
decision to the property owner/developer. 
8.4.6 ?ESTIMATED NO-BUILD AND FLOODPLAIN LINE LOCATIONS: 
8.4.6.1 ?An estimated "no-build line" shall be established and indicated on all preliminary and final 
plans and drainage easements dedicated which indicates the level to which water would rise 
assuming no outflow for the four percent probability (25-year return period), six-hour storm. This 
runoff volume is to be calculated by assuming that the four percent (25-year), six-hour storm 
depth of four inches over the whole drainage basin to the sink flows into the sink with no 
outflow. The area encompassed by this line shall be defined as a "no-build" zone for all 
structures. No portion of any development can be located within this zone. 
8.4.6.2 ?An estimated sinkhole one percent storm (100-year storm) floodplain line shall be 
delineated on all preliminary and final plans which indicates the level to which water would rise, 
assuming no outflow for the one percent (100-year), six-hour storm. This runoff volume is to be 
calculated by assuming that the one percent (100-year), six-hour storm depth of five inches over 
the whole site flows into the sink with no outflow. The lowest habitable floor elevation for any 
habitable structure shall be located a minimum of one foot above this floodplain elevation. 
8.4.6.3 ?Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service 
facilities shall be designed and/or located at least one foot above the one percent storm 
floodplain line (or as specified by flood-proofing requirements) to prevent water from entering or 
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
8.4.6.4 ?The estimated no-build and floodplain line locations must be established after volume lost 
to anticipated fill or structure placement within the sink has been removed. If the established 
lines overtop the sink and there is a surface outflow the line shall be approximately located one 
foot above the sink top. 
8.4.6.5 ?These estimated line locations shall remain intact unless adjusted and potentially lowered 
using the analysis procedure given in Subsection 8.4.7. 
8.4.7 ?ADJUSTMENTS TO NO-BUILD AND FLOODPLAIN LINE LOCATIONS: 
8.4.7.1 ?Two basic methods to potentially lower the line elevations and reduce the building setback 
are discussed in the following paragraphs. The methods require the routing of watershed runoff 
hydrographs through the sink areas in a manner similar to detention pond design. The runoff 
hydrographs shall be developed using the SCS 24-hour storm and curve number methodology. 
The city reserves the right to approve runoff flow and timing factors. The methods can be used 
alone or in combination. 
8.4.7.2 ?Any applicable software may be used. However, the use of software with which the city is 
familiar will expedite review. In any case the designer must submit the following information: 
rainfall amounts, curve number and time-of-concentration tabulations, inflow and outflow 
hydrograph (in graphical and tabular form), stage-discharge curves (in tabular form) based on 
site topographic survey with control mapping included, site layout sketch plan showing the four 
percent (25-year) and one percent (100-year) setback lines and elevations, the location and 
elevations (ground and first habitable floor where applicable) of all adjacent structures, and 
sketch plan of the sinkhole system showing the outlet points and giving pertinent information on 
increased flow rates and downstream system capacity. 
8.4.7.3 ?The no-build and floodplain limits can be reduced through the provision of a surface 
overflow to a suitable receiving point or points. In such cases, to establish the applicable 
delineated zones, the runoff hydrograph from the (four percent) 25-year, 24-hour and (one 
percent) 100-year, 24-hour storms shall be routed through the sinkhole calculating the surface 
overflow in a manner similar to detention pond design routing. Other engineering means to 
lower the floodplain line can also be used such as: upstream manmade holding ponds 
(retention), detention, diversions, storm drain piping and pump stations. Full buildout conditions 
in the entire watershed draining to the sink shall be used for all routing analyses. 
8.4.7.4 ?The establishment of the no build and floodplain line limits may also rely on outflow from 
the sink and routing of the runoff hydrographs from the four percent (25-year), 24-hour and one 
percent (100-year), 24-hour storms. This can be done only if no flooding would occur with total 
sink blockage for the four percent (25-year), six-hour storm; the developer submits a 
hydrogeologic study which indicates, using appropriate methods, the calculated flow rates 
(stage-discharge curve) through the sinkhole considering the possibility of high groundwater 
table or downstream flow backing into the sink to reduce or stop outflow during wet or flood 
conditions; the outlet point(s) from the sink is (are) established through dye tracing; full buildout 
conditions for the entire watershed draining to the sink are used for all routing analyses; the 
throat of the sink has been permanently improved in a manner approved by the city; State 
approvals (if necessary) are obtained; and the city grants permission to use the sink outflow. 
8.4.8 ?OFF-SITE SINKHOLES: 
8.4.8.1 ?For flow into an offsite sinkhole, the developer must perform the routing analysis contained 
in Subsection 8.4.7 using either existing or improved sink conditions (if permission for sink 
improvement or modification is granted by the property owner). There are two cases which may 
occur. Either existing qualified structures are located within the four percent chance (25-year) 
storm no-build line or below the one percent chance (100-year) elevation, or no existing 
qualified structure is so located. 
8.4.8.2 ?In the case where existing structures are located within the limits of the no-build or 
floodplain lines a development may not increase flow elevations to sinks which are located on 
another's property without obtaining the written permission of the sink owner. All other 
requirements shall apply for use of such offsite sink. Full buildout conditions shall be used for all 
routing analysis. If such permission cannot be obtained the upstream property owner must 
design his site such that the peak flow elevations within the sink are no greater than at 
predevelopment conditions. This can normally be accomplished using on-site detention or 
retention or finding another suitable outlet site. 
8.4.8.3 ?In the case where no structures are located within the calculated lines no controls are 
required as long as the proposed development would not expand the no-build and floodplain 
lines established by routing according to Subsection 8.4.7. 


ARTICLE IX - SIDEWALK REGULATIONS 


9.1 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Article is to provide a comprehensive system of sidewalk regulation that will 
implement the policies of the city of Johnson City as identified in the Johnson City General Plan. 
Specifically, these policies seek to promote improved pedestrian safety and interaction, expanded 
opportunity for recreational walking and running activities, more cohesive neighborhoods, and easier 
access to shopping and other commercially related pursuits. 


9.2 - REQUIREMENTS 
9.2.1 ?LOCATION: 
Sidewalks shall be required as specified by the following, except as provided by Subsection 9.2.2, 
Exceptions: 
9.2.1.1 ?Sidewalks shall be constructed along the public street frontage, excluding limited access 
highway frontage, of all commercial, office, and multi-family residential developments. 
9.2.1.2 ?Sidewalks shall be constructed along the collector and arterial public street frontages of all 
industrial developments. 
9.2.1.3 ?Sidewalks shall be constructed whenever a new principal building is built or an existing 
principal building is renovated or expanded sufficiently to increase its value by 25 percent 
before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. 
9.2.2 ?EXCEPTIONS: 
Under the following circumstances, exceptions to required construction of sidewalks under 
Subsection 9.2.1 are permitted. 
9.2.2.1 ?Optional Fee in Lieu of Construction: 
A. ?For required sidewalks under Subsection 9.2.1, the developer may choose to pay a fee in 
lieu of construction, except when one or more of the following circumstances exists: 
1. ?The location is specified for sidewalks in the city's adopted Sidewalk Plan; 
2. ?The location is within 1,000 feet of an existing sidewalk on the same side of the street; 
3. ?The development is expected to generate significant numbers of pedestrians. 
Examples of such facilities include, but are not limited to schools, day-care centers, 
office buildings, churches, multi-family residential, and other residential facilities (i.e. 
group homes, nursing homes, and residential homes for the aged); 
4. ?The development contains retail uses expected to attract customers from residences, 
retail areas, places of employment, or places of public assembly within 1,500 feet of 
the development; 
5. ?The development is within 1,500 feet (street distance) of a regular Johnson City 
Transit stop; or 
6. ?The development is within one-half mile (street distance) of an existing or proposed 
school. 
B. ?The developer shall be required to grade the location of the proposed future sidewalk, 
unless waived by the Public Works Director. 
C. ?The fee shall be calculated as a fixed amount per linear foot. This amount shall be 
established by the City Commission by resolution upon the recommendation of the Public 
Works Director and reviewed periodically. 
D. ?The fee shall be paid before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
E. ?All funds collected in lieu of construction shall be in addition to all other sidewalk funding 
and shall be placed in a separate account to be used only for new sidewalk construction. 
9.2.2.2 ?Street construction plan: 
A. ?When the adjoining public street does not have curbing and is scheduled for improvement 
within five years, as outlined in the Public Works Street Construction Plan, the developer 
shall pay a fee in lieu of construction. 
B. ?The fee shall be calculated as a fixed amount per linear foot. This amount shall be 
established by the City Commission by resolution upon the recommendation of the Public 
Works Director and reviewed periodically. 
C. ?The fee shall be paid before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 
D. ?The fee shall be held by the city's Finance Department in an interest-bearing escrow 
account to be used for sidewalk construction to be done at the time of street 
reconstruction. To cover the cost of inflation, all accrued interest shall be applied to the 
cost of sidewalk construction. 


9.3 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN 
9.3.1 ?CONSTRUCTION DETAILS: 
9.3.1.1 ?Construction of sidewalks shall be in accordance with General Requirements and 
Standards of Design of the Subdivision Regulations. 
9.3.1.2 ?The office of the City Engineer shall be responsible for inspection of sidewalks during 
construction. Completion of sidewalk construction shall be required, to the satisfaction of the 
City Engineer, before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. 
9.3.1.3 ?Insufficient Right-of-Way: 
A. ?When the sidewalk is to be built at the time of development and there is insufficient right-
of-way for the sidewalk, the dedication of an additional width for a transportation and 
drainage easement shall be required. An easement agreement shall be entered into by the 
city and the property owner. The agreement, provided by the city's Staff Attorney, shall 
stipulate guaranteed public access in perpetuity and shall be recorded with the appropriate 
county Register of Deeds. 
B. ?When the sidewalk is to be built after the time of development and the right-of-way width is 
less than the standard for that street's designation (minor, collector, or arterial), dedication 
of additional right-of-way to the width standard for that street, as measured from the center 
line, shall be required. Such right-of-way dedication shall be platted at the time of 
development and shall be approved by the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission. 
Said plat shall remain on file with the Planning Department and a copy shall be filed with 
the appropriate county Register of Deeds. 
9.3.2 ?DESIGN DEVIATION: 
9.3.2.1 ?In certain circumstances it may be desirable or necessary to adjust the standards for 
sidewalk construction to conform to the unique characteristics of a site. Economic benefit alone 
is not sufficient grounds for deviation; unusual or exceptional topographic, physical, or natural 
conditions must be present to justify a design deviation. 
9.3.2.2 ?Any deviation from established sidewalk design standards must be reviewed and approved 
by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer denies the deviation, the applicant may appeal to the 
Planning Commission for approval of the design deviation. The Planning Commission shall hear 
the appeal for design deviation and make its recommendation to the City Commission, which 
shall have final authority to grant or deny any design deviation. 


9.4 - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
9.4.1 ?A variance to the sidewalk regulations shall be granted only upon approval by the Board of 
Zoning Appeals provided that the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be appealed to the 
proper court of jurisdiction either by the applicant or the city. 
9.4.2 ?Prior to applying for a variance, the applicant shall make a bona fide attempt to identify and 
design an alternative method to provide for pedestrian access and movement, according to the 
provisions of Section 9.3.2 of this Code. 
9.4.3 ?The general procedures and powers authorized and stated in the Zoning Code, Article XV, Board 
of Zoning Appeals, shall apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals when considering sidewalk variances. 
Decisions of the Board must be based solely on the findings contained in the record. 
9.4.4 ?In considering a sidewalk variance request, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply the following 
criteria, all of which must be satisfied before a variance may be granted. The burden of proof shall be 
on the applicant to demonstrate that the criteria are satisfied before a variance may be granted. 
9.4.4.1 ?A variance may be granted only where exceptional physical conditions (such as rock, 
extreme slope, or other natural or manmade obstacle) exist. Said condition must cause the 
installation of a standard sidewalk to be extremely difficult or prohibitively expensive. In 
considering this question, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall balance the present or future need 
for the sidewalk with the additional cost of installation. 
9.4.4.2 ?Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall be the minimum adjustment 
necessary, and every attempt shall be made to ensure that the needs of pedestrians are 
accommodated to the maximum extent possible. 
9.4.4.3. ?The granting of a variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the 
Zoning Code and the Sidewalk Element of the General Plan. No variance may be granted which 
is injurious to the neighborhood or detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 


ARTICLE X - TRANSMISSION TOWER REGULATIONS 


10.1 - PURPOSE 
The purposes of the following regulations are to: facilitate the provision of wireless service facilities and 
services to the community; minimize adverse visual effects of towers through design, siting, landscaping, 
and innovative construction techniques; avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower 
structure failure through structural standards and setback requirements; maximize the use of existing and 
approved tower structures and facilities to accommodate new wireless transmission facilities to reduce 
the number of tower structures needed to serve the community; and ensure removal of abandoned 
structures. 


10.2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
The following regulations shall apply to all tower structures, including alternative tower structures, 
antenna arrays, co-location, city-owned utility towers, and location on existing structures. 
10.2.1 ?USES: 
Tower structures may be considered as either principal or accessory uses. 
10.2.2 ?EXEMPT STRUCTURES: 
The following structures shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article: 
A. ?City-owned utility towers; and 
B. ?Facilities used for amateur radio antennas which are under 30 feet in height. 
10.2.3 ?TEMPORARY FACILITY: 
A temporary transmission tower or antenna array may be erected at a location where an existing 
transmission tower or antenna array is out-of-service due to construction or repair of the 
transmission tower, antenna array, or facility at which the transmission tower or antenna array is 
located. The temporary facility may be used for a maximum of six months and shall be removed 
within six months of installation, unless an extension is granted by the Chief Building Official. 
Maximum height shall be 100 feet. Temporary facilities shall be subject to Administrative Review. 
10.2.4 ?BUILDING CODES: 
To ensure the structural integrity of tower structures, tower structures shall be maintained in 
compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and the applicable standards for 
tower structures of latest edition as published by the Electronic Industries Association. 
10.2.5 ?HEIGHT: 
The maximum height of any tower structure shall be based on the potential number of users for each 
tower. A tower structure with the ability for only one user shall not exceed 100 feet in height. A tower 
structure with the ability for two users shall not exceed 125 feet in height. A tower structure with the 
ability for three or more users shall not exceed 150 feet in height. A tower structure or antenna array 
placed on an existing structure, such as a building, water tank, or light pole, shall not increase the 
height of said structure by more than 30 feet. An antenna array placed on an existing tower structure 
shall not exceed the maximum height permitted for said structure. 
10.2.6 ?SETBACK: 
The following setback requirements shall apply to tower structures, excluding alternative tower 
structures and the co-location of an antenna array on an existing tower structure: 
10.2.6.1 ?The minimum setback of a tower structure from all property lines which does not abut a 
residential zone shall be 50 feet; 
10.2.6.2 ?The minimum setback of a tower structure from all property lines which abuts a residential 
zone shall be two times the height of said tower structure; 
10.2.6.3 ?All support buildings and equipment, including guy wires, shall be subject to the minimum 
setback requirements for a primary use of the zoning district where the tower structure is 
located; and 
10.2.7 ?LIGHTING: 
Tower structures shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), city of Johnson City, or other applicable authority. 
10.2.8 ?POWER: 
Auxiliary power from a generator may be used as a back-up power source only during emergency 
situations on a temporary basis. 
10.2.9 ?SIGNS: 
No commercial advertising signs shall be located on any tower structure. 
10.2.10 ?LANDSCAPING: 
Excluding an alternative tower structure, all tower structures and support buildings and equipment 
shall be screened on all sides by a Type 1 buffer. 
10.2.11 ?SUPPORT BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT: 
Support buildings and equipment associated with a tower structure shall not exceed a maximum 
height of 15 feet and a maximum square footage of 400 square feet. 
10.2.12 ?SURETY BOND: 
The tower structure owner shall post a cash bond for the amount of the tower structure's demolition 
as determined by an engineering report submitted by the applicant and approved by the City 
Engineer after all approvals and prior to the issuance of a building permit. An engineering report shall 
be submitted annually to the Chief Building Official stating the tower continues to be in operation. 
10.2.13 ?INSPECTION: 
If, upon inspection by the Chief Building Official or designee, a tower structure fails to comply with 
applicable building and zoning codes, the owner of the tower structure has 30 days to bring it into 
compliance with such codes. Failure to bring it into compliance within 30 days shall constitute 
grounds for removal by the city at the expense of the tower structure owner. If the tower is not 
removed by the tower structure owner, the city shall revoke the bond to pay for its removal. 
10.2.14 ?ABANDONMENT: 
If any tower structure is not in use for 12 consecutive months, it shall be deemed abandoned by the 
Chief Building Official and be removed by the owner of the tower structure. Failure to remove the 
tower structure within 90 days shall constitute grounds for removal by the city at the expense of the 
owner of the tower structure. If the tower is not removed by the tower structure owner, the city shall 
revoke the bond to pay for its removal. 


10.3 - SUBMITTAL AND REVIEW 
10.3.1 ?ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW: 
10.3.1.1 ?The following uses shall be subject to administrative review by the Chief Building Official: 
A. ?The co-location of an antenna array on an existing tower structure or existing structure 
such as a building, water tank, or light pole. The existing tower structure must meet the 
latest standards for wind and ice loads; 
B. ?The placement of additional support buildings or equipment; 
C. ?A replacement tower structure which does not exceed the height of the existing tower 
structure. If the existing tower structure encroached into the minimum setback, the 
replacement tower structure shall conform to minimum setbacks; 
D. ?A temporary facility; and 
E. ?Any modification to an existing tower structure which is not a "substantial change". 
10.3.1.2 ?The following shall be submitted to the Chief Building Official for administrative review: 
A. ?A site plan drawn to scale indicating the location and height of the tower structure and any 
new improvements including any additional site and tower structure modifications; and 
B. ?Review fee. 
10.31.3 ?Within 30 days of receiving an application, the Chief Building Official shall determine if the 
application is complete. If the application is deemed incomplete, it must be stated what specific 
provisions of the code are deficient. Once new information is submitted, the city has ten days to 
determine if the new information completes the application. Second or subsequent notices that 
the application is incomplete may not specify missing information not contained in the original 
notice of incompleteness. 
10.3.1.4 ?Within 60 days of receiving a complete application, the Chief Building Official shall notify 
the applicant of approval or reason for denial. If the Chief Building Official fails to notify the 
applicant within 60 days of receiving a completed application, the application shall be deemed 
approved. 
10.3.2 ?SPECIAL EXCEPTION REVIEW: 
10.3.2.1 ?The following uses shall be subject to review by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special 
Exception: 
A. ?A new tower structure; 
B. ?An alternative tower structure; and 
C. ?A replacement tower structure which exceeds the height of the existing tower structure. 
10.3.2.2 ?The following information shall be submitted for tower structures: 
A. ?If there are any tower structures within one mile of the proposed tower structure, the 
applicant shall submit a report by a registered engineer citing one of the following factors 
why the other tower structure(s) are not suitable: 
1. ?Existing tower structures are not of sufficient height or do not have sufficient structural 
strength to support additional equipment; 
2. ?The applicant's proposed tower structure would cause electromagnetic interference 
with existing tower structures; 
3. ?Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the tower structure owner are 
financially or contractually prohibitive; or 
4. ?The applicant demonstrates other limiting factors which make the other tower 
structure unsuitable. 
B. ?A report by a registered engineer stating the total number of potential users for the tower 
structure; 
C. ?A site plan drawn to scale indicating setback distances, height, landscaping, ingress and 
egress, support buildings and equipment, and parking areas; 
D. ?Elevation drawing of the tower structure including materials, color, and height; 
E. ?Any additional conditions required by the Board of Zoning Appeals to promote compatibility 
with the surrounding neighborhood; and 
F. ?Review fee. 
10.3.2.3 ?The following information shall be submitted for alternative tower structures: 
A. ?If there are any tower structures within one mile of the proposed tower structure, the 
applicant shall submit a report by a registered engineer citing one of the following factors 
why the other tower structure(s) are not suitable: 
1. ?Existing tower structures are not of sufficient height or do not have sufficient structural 
strength to support additional equipment; 
2. ?The applicant's proposed tower structure would cause electromagnetic interference 
with existing tower structures; 
3. ?Fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the tower structure owner are 
financially or contractually prohibitive; or 
4. ?The applicant demonstrates other limiting factors which make the other tower 
structure unsuitable. 
B. ?A report by a registered engineer stating the total number of potential users for the tower 
structure; 
C. ?A site plan drawn to scale indicating setback distances, height of the proposed structure, 
materials, and color; 
D. ?Elevation drawing of the tower structure demonstrating that the proposed structure is 
compatible with the surrounding area, buildings, and vegetation; 
E. ?Any additional conditions required by the Board of Zoning Appeals to promote compatibility 
with the surrounding neighborhood; and 
F. ?Review fee. 
10.3.2.4 ?Within 60 days of receiving a complete application, the Chief Building Official shall notify 
the applicant of approval or reason for denial. If the Chief Building Official fails to notify the 
applicant within 60 days of receiving a completed application, the application shall be deemed 
approved. 


ARTICLE XI - PARKING REGULATIONS 


11.1 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure adequate parking is provided and maintained throughout 
the city. Parking shall be provided in the amount specified by this section, at the time of erection of any 
structure, or at the time when any main structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling 
units, guest rooms, seats or floor area; or before conversion from one zoning use or occupancy to 
another. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the B-2 Central Business District. 


11.2 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
11.2.1 ?Parking spaces provided to meet the requirements of this section shall not be reduced in size or 
number, modified, eliminated, or assigned to another use at the same time, except as allowed by 
these regulations. The use of required parking for the display of equipment, material, or supplies, or 
for the sale, repair, or dismantling of vehicles shall not be permitted. 
11.2.2 ?Excluding single-family and two-family residential uses, parking for residential uses shall not be 
located between the right-of-way line and the front building line. On corner lots, parking shall not be 
located between the building and any right-of-way line, excluding alleys. 
11.2.3 ?Each required parking space, aisle, and drive shall be paved and provide paved vehicular 
access to a public or private street or alley. Each parking space shall be unobstructed and 
independently accessible from an aisle or drive. 
11.2.4 ?With the exception of required spaces for single-family and two-family dwelling units, adequate 
on-site turning space shall be provided so that no vehicle will be required to back into the street. 
11.2.5 ?Each required parking space shall be marked by painted lines extending the full length of the 
space. 
11.2.6 ?Parking requirements may be reduced up to a total of ten percent by one, or a combination, of 
the following: 
11.2.6.1 ?One space per one bike locker or one space per ribbon rack; or 
11.2.6.2 ?One space per two Type 1 shade trees in excess of the minimum required amount. 
11.2.7 ?When several uses occupy a single structure or lot, the total required parking shall be the sum of 
the requirements of the individual uses or as specified herein. 
11.2.8 ?The minimum pavement specifications for required parking areas and accesses thereto shall 
conform to the following: 
11.2.8.1 ?Concrete: The minimum thickness shall be four inches for residential structures and five 
inches for all other uses. 
11.2.8.2 ?Bituminous: The minimum thickness shall be four inches of compacted crushed stone 
base with a one and one-half-inch compacted asphaltic concrete surface for residential use and 
a five-inch compacted crushed stone base with a two-inch compacted asphaltic concrete 
surface for other uses. 
11.2.8.3 ?Pervious parking surfaces: The use of alternative, pervious (permeable) parking surfaces 
excluding gravel surfaces are permitted and encouraged. Such surfaces shall be accompanied 
by an underlying drainage system which meets stormwater requirements as determined by the 
City Engineer. Such surfaces may include, but are not limited to, porous concrete, porous 
asphalt, and concrete pavers. All pervious parking shall be subject to the approval of the City 
Engineer. 
11.2.9 ?Parking areas and loading facilities shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in a clean and 
orderly condition, free of debris and other foreign substances. Parking and loading areas shall be 
properly maintained, pavement markings periodically repainted, and on-site traffic signs properly 
maintained, as necessary to maintain a clear and safe identification of individual parking spaces and 
to facilitate the safe movement of pedestrian and automobile traffic. 
11.2.10 ?When calculations indicate a percentage of one space is required, one additional full space 
shall be required. 
11.2.11 ?Each parking space and aisle shall have the minimum dimensions specified by the following 
standards and illustrations. 
PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 
Type of 
Space 
Par
kin
g 
Ang
le 
*** 
Mi
nim
um 
Spa
ce 
Wi
dth 
Mi
nim
um 
Spa
ce 
De
pth 
Mi
nim
um 
Aisl
e 
Wi
dth
* 
(1-
Wa
y 
Dri
ves
) 
Mi
nim
um 
Aisl
e 
Wi
dth 
(2-
Wa
y 
Dri
ves
) 
Automob
ile  
Parking  
Spaces 
0°  
par
alle
l 
9' 
25' 
15' 
20' 

15° 
9' 
23' 
15' 
20' 

30° 
9' 
22' 
15' 
20' 

45° 
9' 
21' 
15' 
20' 

60° 
9' 
20' 
18' 
20' 

75° 
9' 
19' 
22' 
24' 

90° 
9' 
18' 
24' 
24' 
Han
dic
app
ed  
Spa
ces 
Sta
nda
rd 
** 
14'
***
* 
18'
—
25'
** 
** 
** 

Van  
Acc
essi
ble 
** 
17'
***
* 
18
—
25'
** 
** 
** 
Motorcy
cle 
Spaces 
** 
4 ½' 
7' 
** 
** 
 
?* ?Measured perpendicular to traffic flow in aisle. 
?** ?Same as requirements for automobiles. 
?*** ?Use the graph below to determine parking angle. 
?**** ?Includes nine-foot parking spaces and five-foot access aisle for standard spaces and eight-foot 
access aisle for van accessible spaces. Access aisles may be shared by two adjacent spaces. 
PARKING SPACE AND TRAVEL AISLE ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
11.2.12 ?For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be interpreted 
by the Director of Planning based upon requirements for similar uses established herein or upon 
acceptable standards. 
11.2.13 ?All space requirements which are based upon employment shall be computed on the basis of 
the greatest number of persons employed at any one period during the day or night. 
11.2.14 ?Any use which is required by this Code to provide off-street parking spaces may reduce the 
total number of required parking spaces by the number of qualified on-street parking spaces which 
are adjacent to the property containing the use in question. On-street parking spaces shall meet the 
following conditions to qualify for credit under this section: 
A. ?Proposed on-street parking shall be shown on a site plan and approved by the City Traffic 
Engineer. All such spaces shall comply with all applicable city Codes; 
B. ?Each qualifying on-street parking space shall be adjacent to the property for which the parking 
is intended; 
C. ?Any street where on-street parking will be credited shall be curbed and shall be a minimum of 
20 feet wide as measured from face of curb to face of curb; 
D. ?On-street parking shall not be located within 30 feet from any intersection; within ten feet from 
any driveway; or within eight feet from any side of a fire hydrant; 
E. ?Each space shall be a minimum of 25 feet in length; 
F. ?On-street parking shall not be marked by or be used exclusively for the use for which it is being 
credited; and 
G. ?Required handicap parking spaces shall not be located on-street and shall be appropriately 
marked and located in an off-street parking lot. 


11.3 - REQUIRED PARKING SPACES 
Resident
ial 
Spaces 
Required 
Bed-and-
breakfast 
inns/hou
se 
One 
parking 
space 
per guest 
room 
plus two 
addition
al 
parking 
spaces 
for the 
permane
nt 
residenc
e. 
Elderly 
housing, 
assisted 
living 
One 
space 
per unit 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e on the 
largest 
shift. 
Elderly 
housing, 
congrega
te care 
One-half 
space 
per bed 
or one 
space 
per 
bedroom 
whichev
er is 
greater 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e on the 
largest 
shift. 
Elderly/r
etiremen
t housing 
One and 
one-
quarter 
spaces 
per unit. 
Resident
ial 
Spaces 
Required 
Home 
occupati
on 
Two 
spaces 
for the 
dwelling 
unit plus 
one 
space 
per 100 
square 
feet of 
floor 
area 
devoted 
to the 
home 
occupati
on. 
Manufac
tured 
(mobile) 
home 
parks 
Two 
spaces 
per 
dwelling 
unit. 
Multi-
family 
units in 
the R-6 
District 
with four 
or more 
bedroom
s 
One and 
one-
tenth 
spaces 
per bed. 
Multi-
family, 
one 
bedroom 
multi-
family 
dwelling 
unit with 
floor 
area of 
425 
square 
feet or 
less 
One and 
one-
quarter 
spaces 
per 
dwelling 
unit. 
Multi-
family, 
one 
bedroom 
multi-
family 
dwelling 
units 
with a 
floor 
area 
greater 
than 425 
square 
feet 
One and 
one-half 
spaces 
per 
dwelling 
unit. 
Multi-
family, 
two or 
more 
bedroom 
multi-
family 
dwelling 
unit 
Two 
spaces 
per 
dwelling 
unit. 
Residenti
al 
facilities 
for 
develop
mentally 
disabled 
Two 
parking 
spaces 
for the 
first 
dwelling 
unit and 
one 
addition
al 
parking 
space 
provided 
for each 
addition
al 
dwelling 
unit. 
Rooming 
and 
boarding 
houses, 
excludin
g bed 
and 
breakfast 
houses 
One 
space 
per 
rented 
bedroom 
plus two 
spaces 
for the 
permane
nt 
residenc
e. 
Single-
family 
and two-
family 
dwelling 
units 
Two 
spaces 
per 
dwelling 
unit. 
Commer
cial 
Spaces 
Required 
Adult 
day-care 
centers 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e and 
one 
space 
per five 
persons 
enrolled 
in the 
program. 
Automob
ile repair 
garages 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e plus 
one 
space 
per 250 
square 
feet of 
floor 
area 
used for 
repair 
work. 
Automob
ile sales 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e plus 
one 
space 
per 250 
square 
feet of 
floor 
area for 
service 
area, 
plus one 
space 
per 
1,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
building 
area 
(exclusiv
e of 
service 
area). 
Barber/b
eauty 
shop 
(other 
than 
home 
occupati
on) 
Three 
spaces 
per chair 
or 
beauticia
n station 
for the 
first two 
chairs or 
station, 
plus two 
spaces 
for each 
addition
al chair 
or 
station. 
Bowling 
lanes 
Four 
spaces 
per lane 
plus any 
addition
al spaces 
required 
for other 
uses. 
Child 
day-care 
centers 
One 
space 
per 400 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Commer
cial 
Spaces 
Required 
Commer
cial 
centers, 
including 
office, 
retail, 
and 
restaura
nts not 
exceedin
g 20,000 
square 
feet 
One 
space 
per 150 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Commer
cial 
recreatio
nal and 
amusem
ent 
places 
not 
otherwis
e 
specified 
One 
space 
per 250 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Convenie
nce 
centers 
One 
space 
per 150 
square 
feet of 
retail 
area plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Dance/g
ymnastic 
schools 
One 
space 
per 250 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Fraternal 
organizat
ions, 
lodges, 
and 
clubs 
One 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Funeral 
home or 
mortuary 
One 
space 
per four 
seats in 
the 
chapel 
plus four 
addition
al spaces 
per 100 
square 
feet of 
floor 
area in 
each 
viewing 
room, 
and one 
space 
per 
vehicle 
operated 
by the 
establish
ment. 
Gasoline 
service 
stations 
Two 
spaces 
per bay 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Golf and 
country 
clubs, 
swimmin
g clubs, 
tennis 
clubs, 
and 
other 
similar 
recreatio
nal 
activities 
One 
space 
per five 
families 
with 
member
ship in 
the club. 
Golf 
course 
48 
spaces 
for a par 
three 
course; 
96 
spaces 
for an 
executiv
e or 
regulatio
n golf 
course; 
and one 
space 
per 
employe
e and 
one 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area of 
the pro 
shop and 
snack 
bar. 
Golf 
driving 
ranges 
One 
space 
per tee, 
plus one 
space 
per 
putting 
green, 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Health/fi
tness 
club 
One 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Kennels 
One 
space 
per 500 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Motels, 
hotels 
One 
space 
per 
rental 
unit, plus 
one 
space for 
each two 
employe
es, plus 
one 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area 
devoted 
to eating 
and 
entertain
ment. 
Movie 
theatre 
One 
space 
per four 
seats. 
Commer
cial 
Spaces 
Required 
Night 
clubs 
One 
space 
per 100 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Outdoor 
sales 
areas not 
otherwis
e 
specified 
One 
space 
per 500 
square 
feet of 
sales 
area, 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Personal, 
business, 
or 
professio
nal 
services 
not 
otherwis
e 
specified 
One 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Plant 
nurseries 
One 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area, 
plus one 
space 
per 
4,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
acreage. 
Restaura
nts 
A.?Sit-
down: 
One 
space 
per 100 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 

B.?Carry-
out only: 
One 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 

C.?Drive-
thru 
only: 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e. 

D.?
Restaura
nts 
located 
inside 
retail 
malls 
with an 
excess of 
400,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
leasable 
area 
(GLA) 
shall be 
calculate
d at the 
same 
rate as 
the 
remaind
er of the 
mall. 
Retail 
sales, 
general 
One 
space for 
each 200 
square 
feet of 
retail 
area. 
Retail 
sales, 
specialty 
One 
space for 
each 400 
square 
feet of 
retail 
area. 
Retail 
sales, 
bulk 
One 
space 
per 500 
square 
feet of 
retail 
area, or 
one 
space 
per 
1,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area, 
whichev
er is 
greater. 
Retail 
mall 
Retail 
malls 
having in 
excess of 
400,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
leasable 
area 
(GLA), 
accordin
g to the 
table 
below: 

Squ
are 
Fee
t  
of 
GLA 
(SF
GLA
) 
Spa
ces 
Req
uire
d  
(pe
r 
1,0
00 
SFG
LA) 

400
,00
0—
500
,00
0 
5 

500
,00
0—
600
,00
0 
4.9 

600
,00
0—
700
,00
0 
4.8 

700
,00
0—
800
,00
0 
4.7 

800
,00
0—
900
,00
0 
4.6 

900
,00
0+ 
4.5 
Office 
Spaces 
Required 
Wholesal
e 
business 
One 
space 
per 
3,000 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e 
Call 
centers 
One 
space 
per two 
employe
es in the 
largest 
shift. 
General 
offices 
One 
space 
per 300 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Medical 
and 
dental 
offices 
Five 
spaces 
per 
doctor 
plus one 
space 
per 
employe
e or one 
space 
per 200 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area, 
whichev
er is 
greater. 
Non-
residenti
al 
substanc
e abuse 
treatmen
t facility 
One off-
street 
space 
per 100 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Industry 
Spaces 
Required 
Industry 
One 
space 
per two 
employe
es in the 
largest 
shift. 
Warehou
ses 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Institutio
nal 
Spaces 
Required 
Ambulan
ce 
service 
One 
space for 
each 
ambulan
ce plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Animal 
hospitals
, 
veterinar
y clinics 
One 
space 
per 300 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Churches
, chapel, 
mosque, 
synagog
ue, or 
other 
place of 
worship 
One 
space 
per four 
seats in 
the main 
sanctuar
y, a seat 
being 
defined 
as at 
least 18 
inches of 
row 
seating 
or each 
individua
l chair. 
Commun
ity 
center 
One 
space 
per 300 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Emergen
cy or 
tempora
ry 
shelters 
One and 
one-half 
spaces 
per five 
persons 
staying 
at the 
shelter. 
Fraternit
y or 
sorority 
houses 
One 
space 
per bed. 
Group 
homes 
for the 
mentally 
retarded, 
mentally 
handicap
ped, or 
physicall
y 
handicap
ped 
Three 
spaces 
for the 
first ten 
residents
, plus 
two 
addition
al spaces 
for 
facilities 
with 11 
to 15 
residents
. 
Hospitals 
One 
space 
per two 
beds 
(exclusiv
e of 
bassinets
) plus 
one 
space 
per two 
staff or 
visiting 
physician
s plus 
one 
space 
per 
employe
e. 
Institutio
nal 
Spaces 
Required 
Libraries, 
museum
s, and art 
galleries 
One 
space 
per 400 
square 
feet of 
gross 
floor 
area. 
Places of 
public 
assembly 
One 
space 
per four 
seats in 
the 
principal 
assembly 
room. 
Public 
utility 
buildings 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e plus 
one 
space 
per 
company 
vehicle. 
Schools 

A.?
Element
ary 
school 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e or staff 
plus one 
space 
per 25 
students. 
B.?
Middle 
school 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e or staff 
plus one 
space 
per 25 
students. 
C.?High 
school 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e or staff 
plus one 
space 
per four 
students. 
D.?
Colleges, 
universiti
es, 
technical 
schools 
One 
space 
per 
employe
e or staff 
plus one 
space 
per three 
students. 
Stadium 
One 
space 
per four 
seats. 
 


11.4 - OFF PREMISES PARKING 
If the required parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot as the principal use, the Board of 
Zoning Appeals may, as a Special Exception, permit such spaces to be located on other property, 
provided; 
11.4.1 ?The property used for parking shall lie within 400 feet of the property line of the principal use. 
11.4.2 ?The property used for parking shall not be in an R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B or R-2C zoning district. 
11.4.3 ?The property used for parking shall not be separated from the principal use by a collector or 
arterial street as designated on the zoning map. 
11.4.4 ?The property used for parking shall meet all buffering requirements of the district in which the 
principal use is located. 
11.4.5 ?The parking shall be buffered from any local streets with a Type 1 buffer, including an eight-foot 
opaque wooden fence or masonry wall. 
11.4.6 ?Such spaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the required parking. Off-premises parking shall be 
paved and striped. 
11.4.7 ?Ingress and egress to the parking lot shall not be through a local residential street and is 
provided through the property of the non-residential principal use. 
11.4.8 ?When off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot where the principal use is located, 
the applicant shall submit an instrument duly executed and acknowledged along with the application 
for a building permit which requires the lot to be available for parking as long as required by the 
principal use. The applicant shall deposit the necessary fee and upon the issuance of a building 
permit, the Chief Building Official shall cause said instrument to be registered in the Office of the 
Registrar of Deeds. 


11.5 - JOINT USE OF PARKING SPACES 
Required parking spaces may be shared cooperatively by two or more nonresidential uses by Special 
Exception approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The BZA, in approving an arrangement, shall make a 
determination that the uses involved can be adequately served by the same parking spaces by reason of 
the characteristics of the land uses and different hours of operation. The BZA is authorized to require 
restrictions on the use and hours of operation of any uses which share parking spaces, and may require 
appropriate instruments to be filed in the Office of the Register of Deeds to ensure the availability of the 
shared parking spaces. 


11.6 - HANDICAP PARKING 
Except for single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings offered for sale, all uses shall provide 
off-street parking spaces for handicapped persons. 
11.6.1 ?The number of handicapped parking spaces required shall be based on the total number of 
parking spaces according to the following table: 
Tot
al 
Spa
ces 
Req
uir
ed 
Nu
mb
er 
to 
be 
Res
erv
ed 
for 
the 
Ha
ndi
cap
ped 
Up 
to 
25 
1 
26 
to 
50 
2 
51 
to 
75 
3 
76 
to 
100 
4 
101 
to 
150 
5 
151 
to 
200 
6 
201 
to 
300 
7 
301 
to 
400 
8 
401 
to 
500 
9 
501 
to 
1,0
00 
2% 
of 
tot
al 
Ove
r 
1,0
00 
20 
plu
s 1 
for 
eac
h 
100 
ove
r 
1,0
00 
 
11.6.2 ?Each handicapped parking space shall be identified by an above-grade sign conforming to the 
requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Each sign shall be no less than 
seven feet in height to the bottom of the sign, and the sign itself shall be 12 inches in width by 18 
inches in height. Other methods identifying handicapped parking spaces, such as painting on asphalt 
surfaces, shall not be considered as acceptable alternatives to the required signage, but may be 
installed in addition to these requirements. 
11.6.3 ?Handicap spaces shall be provided at the closest possible location to the entrance of the 
building, and shall be connected to that entrance by a paved surface no less than five feet in width, 
which does not exceed one foot rise or fall per 12 feet of length. In no case shall a handicapped 
individual, in proceeding from a handicapped parking space to an entrance, be required to walk or 
wheel behind non-handicapped parking. 


11.7 - MOTORCYCLE PARKING 
11.7.1 ?Any off-street parking facility of 50 or more spaces may install, as an option, motorcycle parking 
spaces in lieu of required automobile parking. The maximum percentage of such spaces that may be 
counted toward the required parking requirement shall be one percent, with fractions being rounded 
to the nearest whole number. 
11.7.2 ?Any such spaces provided shall be grouped in the parking area and at the ends of parking aisles 
where possible. 
11.7.3 ?Motorcycle spaces shall be identified by above grade signs, no less than seven feet in height to 
the bottom of the sign as being reserved for such use. The sign itself shall be 12 inches in width by 
18 inches in height. Other methods of identification, including painting of asphalt surfaces, shall not 
be considered as acceptable alternatives to the required signage, but may be installed in addition to 
these requirements. 


11.8 - LOADING AREAS 
All nonresidential uses shall provide an area outside of the public right-of-way sufficient for loading and 
unloading goods; excluding uses located in the B-2 Central Business District. 


11.9 - STACKING LANES FOR DRIVE-UP WINDOWS 
11.9.1 ?A required stacking space shall be an area measuring nine feet by 18 feet with direct forward 
access to an order window or device of a drive-through facility. A required stacking space shall be 
located to minimize any vehicle from extending into the public right-of-way. Stacking spaces for 
drive-through or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces. 
11.9.2 ?Stacking spaces begin at the ordering device of a drive-through facility. Uses providing drive-up 
or drive-through services shall provide stacking spaces as follows: 
11.9.2.1 ?For a drive-through restaurant with indoor seating, a minimum of seven stacking spaces 
shall be provided; 
11.9.2.2 ?For each drive-up window of a bank or other financial institution, a minimum of five 
stacking spaces shall be provided per service window or device. 
11.9.2.3 ?For other uses, a minimum of three stacking spaces shall be provided per service 
window. 


ARTICLE XII - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 


12.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
12.1.1 ?INTENT: 
It is the intent of these regulations to make Johnson City a more beautiful, environmentally sound, 
and more memorable place through the requirement of new landscaping and the preservation of 
existing landscaping. The landscaping of parking areas, street yards, and buffer yards is intended to 
break-up large expanses of asphalt to reduce heat build-up, control erosion, modify the rate of storm 
water run-off, increase groundwater recharge, filter the air, control water and light pollution, and 
lessen the impact of high intensity uses on the community. 
12.1.2 ?APPLICABILITY: 
A. ?All new development, excluding active agricultural use and the individual development of one 
single-family or two-family detached dwelling unit, shall comply with Section 12.1, Landscape 
Regulations. All development located in the MX zone shall be subject to the landscape 
provisions of the MX zone. 
B. ?Any parking lot constructed as a result of the expansion of an existing development shall 
comply with Section 12.1, Landscape Regulations. 
C. ?Expansion of all existing development which, after the passage of the ordinance from which this 
Article is derived, exceeds 25 percent of the existing gross floor area (G.F.A.) or any change of 
use which results in the property becoming a higher impact use, shall comply with the following: 
1. ?The site shall be modified to provide at least 25 percent of the amount of landscaping 
which would be required for a comparable new development. The placement of the 
landscaping shall not be required to meet Section 12.1. If it is not feasible to meet the 
quantity or placement requirements, the required landscaping with the approval of a 
detailed landscape plan by the City Forester of designee. 
2. ?Any change in use, which results in a higher impact, shall require buffers as specified in 
section 12.4. 
12.1.3 ?LANDSCAPE PLAN: 
A. ?A generalized landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan and shall contain 
adequate information to determine compliance with this Code. The following elements shall be 
shown on the landscape site plan: 
• ?Title, name of owner, date, graphic scale, and north arrow; 
• ?Name and phone number of person or firm responsible for landscape plan; 
• ?Common name and size of plant materials to be used; 
• ?Boundary lines and lot dimensions; 
• ?Zoning of site and adjoining properties; 
• ?Proposed contours at five feet intervals or less; 
• ?Proposed building locations; 
• ?Location of existing and proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks, and parking areas; 
• ?Location, sizes, and spacing of plant material; 
• ?Size and location of landscaped areas, islands, screening, and buffers; 
• ?Planting detail(s); 
• ?Location, species, size diameter breast height (dbh), and location of root zone protection 
area of any tree(s) to be preserved; 
• ?The location and extent of utilities, including electric, telephone, cable TV, natural gas, utility 
poles, and interior lighting poles. 
B. ?Landscape plans shall be designed to assure adequate sight distance and maintain appropriate 
clear sight triangles at all entrances and exits to developments and parking areas. 
C. ?Review fee. 
12.1.4 ?TREE PRESERVATION: 
It is the goal of the city to encourage and facilitate the preservation of healthy trees wherever 
possible. The following incentives are designed to achieve that goal: 
A. ?Preservation of healthy trees, six inches dbh or greater, shall be credited toward the required 
number of trees per the following ratio: for every six inches of diameter preserved, a credit of 
one tree shall be granted, provided credit is limited to 25 percent of required trees. The City 
Forester shall approve any tree to be preserved for which credit is to be given. 
B. ?Existing trees with a diameter greater than six inches dbh, may be relocated within the site and 
shall be credited toward the required number of trees per the following ratio: for every four 
inches of diameter preserved, a credit of one tree shall be granted, provided credit is limited to 
50 percent of required trees. The City Forester shall approve any tree to be relocated for which 
credit is to be given. 
C. ?To facilitate the preservation of a specimen tree, setback requirements may be reduced up to 
25 percent by the Development Coordinator or designee. 
D. ?To facilitate the preservation of a specimen tree in the subdivision of land, lot sizes may be 
reduced up to 25 percent of the minimum lot size for that district, provided no lot is reduced so 
as to require a variance to be buildable, and the required density of the district is maintained for 
each phase. 
12.1.5 ?TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION: 
In order to receive credit for an existing tree or grove of trees, a critical root zone (CRZ) shall be 
established. The critical root zone shall have a minimum area equal to the distance from the trunk to 
the dripline or the distance derived from the CRZ calculation, whichever is greater. 
CRZ calculation = (tree dbh in inches * .75 feet) 
Example: A tree with a 30 inch dbh would require a minimum CRZ of 22.5 feet or the distance from 
the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. 
 
In this example the CRZ is determined to be the distance from the trunk to the dripline due to the fact 
that the distance derived from the CRZ calculation is less than the distance to the dripline. 
The critical root zone shall not be disturbed by construction activity, excluding sodding or the 
placement of other landscape materials. This area shall be barricaded and marked with signage 
during construction. Curbing placed around preserved trees shall be located no closer than the edge 
of the critical root zone. Damage to trees, including injuries resulting from chemical poisoning, 
concrete wash water, construction equipment, soil compaction, grading, paving and/or other 
mechanical injuries to the roots, trunk, or branches of the tree that will result in their death within one 
year of construction shall negate any credit given for preservation. 
12.1.6 ?MIXTURE OF TREES: 
Sites with required new trees of ten or more, excluding buffer trees, shall provide the following 
variety of trees: 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
Req
uir
ed 
Tre
es 
Mi
nim
um 
Req
uir
ed 
Var
iety 
of 
Tre
es 
Ma
xim
um 
Per
cen
t 
of 
Any 
Var
iety 
10
—
19 
2 
65
% 
20
—
29 
3 
50
% 
30
—
39 
4 
40
% 
40+ 
5 
35
% 
 
12.1.7 ?LISTS OF ACCEPTABLE TREES: 
The City Forester shall keep a list of acceptable shade trees and buffer trees. Shade trees and 
Evergreen buffer trees are separated into two groups, Type 1 and Type 2. Type 1 trees are those 
that have a mature height of 30 feet or more. Type 2 trees are those that have a mature height of 
less than 30 feet. A petition, stating justification, may be made to the Tree and Appearance Board to 
add or remove a tree from the approved lists. 
12.1.8 ?SIZE AND SPACING REQUIREMENTS: 
At the time of planting, Type 1 shade trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches 
measured at six inches above ground level. Type 2 shade trees shall have a minimum trunk 
diameter of one and one-half inches above ground level. Type 1 buffer trees shall have a minimum 
height of five feet. Type 2 buffer trees shall have a minimum height of four feet. All required shade 
trees and buffer trees shall have a minimum horizontal separation from other required trees of ten 
feet. All trees shall be placed no closer than four feet from any curb or sidewalk. All newly planted 
trees shall have a minimum radius of three feet located around the base of the trunk containing 
mulch. 
Screen and buffer shrubs shall have a minimum height of two and one-half feet and shall have a 
maximum spacing of five feet. Screen and buffer shrubs shall have a mature height of between six 
and 12 feet. The minimum size of shrubs used to create a parking lot screen shall be 18 inches and 
shall be able to achieve a minimum mature height of four feet. 
12.1.9 ?PLANT QUALITY STANDARDS: 
Plant material installed to satisfy the requirements of this Article shall conform to the plant quality 
standards of the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1), 
published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Trees with co-dominant stems shall not count 
toward meeting the requirements of this Article. 
12.1.10 ?MAINTENANCE: 
A. ?Failure to maintain landscaped areas as required shall be considered a violation of this Article. 
The property owner shall be responsible for the routine maintenance of all required plant 
material. Maintenance activities include but are not limited to watering, pruning, mulching, 
mowing, weeding, and fertilizing. All landscaped areas must present a healthy, neat and orderly 
appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and weeds. Trees or shrubs that are dead, 
diseased, or otherwise deemed by the City Forester to be in an unsafe condition shall be 
removed by the property owner and replaced with new plantings provided that the new plantings 
are in compliance with this Article. 
B. ?Walls and fences used as screening structures shall be repaired or replaced so that they remain 
in a structurally sound condition. 
C. ?Shrubs used to create a parking lot screen shall not be pruned to a height less than three feet. 
Shrubs used in buffer yards shall not be pruned to a height less than five feet. 
D. ?Tree topping of any required tree is prohibited and may, at the determination of the City 
Forester, negate a tree from being used to satisfy the requirements of this Article. 
12.1.11 ?REMOVAL OF REQUIRED PLANT MATERIAL: 
A property owner shall notify and receive approval from the City Forester or designee before any 
healthy tree or shrub is removed. Notification is not required for the removal of dead or diseased 
plant material. All plant material must be replaced in accordance with the requirements of Article XII. 
12.1.12 ?MODIFICATIONS: 
The City Forester shall have the authority to grant a request for modification of any requirements in 
this Article upon receipt of a written request, which outlines the rationale for the modification. The 
City Forester shall review each request and grant a modification only: under unusual circumstances 
such as extreme topography or geology, which cause an unreasonable hardship; or, when an 
innovative or alternative approach can be made which still meets the intent and purpose of this 
Article. 
12.1.13 ?APPEALS: 
Any person aggrieved by the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this Section may 
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of a decision of the City Forester or designee. 
12.1.14 ?VIOLATIONS: 
Any violation of the terms of this Article shall be a violation of the zoning ordinance, and shall be 
subject to the penalties established for violations established in the zoning ordinance. 


12.2 - LANDSCAPE YARDS 
12.2.1 ?APPLICABILITY: 
Landscape Yards are required in all zones, excluding single-family and two-family detached dwelling 
units. 
12.2.2 ?PLANTING REQUIREMENTS: 
A landscape yard shall be established along all abutting streets. Minimum width shall be ten feet, 
excluding those zones where the front yard setback is less than ten feet, in which case landscape 
yard width shall equal the front yard setback or ten feet, whichever is less. One Type 1 shade tree 
from the approved list, or two Type 2 shade trees shall be provided per 50 linear feet, or any fraction 
thereof, of street frontage. Trees may be spaced or grouped at the discretion of the developer in the 
landscape yard. Required trees shall not be placed in street rights-of-way. When the landscape yard 
occurs near utility lines, Type 2 shade trees, specified for use near power lines, shall be planted at a 
rate of one tree for each 50 feet of frontage occurring near utility lines. 
12.2.3 ?EXCEPTION: 
When parking spaces in a parking lot abut a street right-of-way, the landscape yard may be replaced 
by a parking lot screen, which is a minimum of four feet in width with tire stops in the parking lot to 
prevent vehicles from overhanging the curb and damaging the landscaping. Parking spaces adjacent 
to the parking lot screen may be reduced by two feet in length. The screen shall include one Type 1 
shade tree for every 100 feet of frontage. The trees may be situated in a landscape island which is 
connected to the landscape yard and shall have a minimum area of 160 square feet. Parking lot 
screens shall be provided in one of the following configurations: 
A. ?A brick or masonry wall which, measured from the edge of the parking lot, is a minimum of three 
feet in height. 
B. ?A row of evergreen shrubs spaced a maximum of five feet on center. The entire landscape yard 
containing shrubs used as a parking lot screen shall be mulched and shall not have a slope 
exceeding a ratio of 2:1. 
 
C. ?Adequate access for pedestrians to enter the development shall be provided in the form of 
walkways at appropriate intervals. 


12.3 - PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING 
12.3.1 ?APPLICABILITY: 
Off-street parking areas of ten spaces or more, excluding parking garages, shall be landscaped in all 
zoning districts. 
12.3.2 ?PLANTING REQUIREMENTS: 
Thirty-five square feet of interior landscaped area shall be provided per parking space. One Type 1 
shade tree shall be provided per ten parking spaces, or any fraction thereof. A maximum of 30 
percent of the required Type 1 shade trees may be replaced by Type 2 shade trees at a ratio of one 
and one-half Type 2 trees for each Type 1 tree replaced. 
12.3.3 ?LANDSCAPED AREA REQUIREMENTS: 
Parking area landscaping shall be located within the parking area or the area abutting the parking 
area not extending more than 15 feet beyond any paved surface including sidewalks. All interior 
landscaped areas shall be a minimum of 320 square feet except that those landscape islands which 
terminate a single row of parking abutting the building or the edge of the parking lot may be a 
minimum of 160 square feet in area. The minimum dimension of any portion of an interior 
landscaped area shall be nine feet. All measurements for landscape islands shall be made from the 
back of the curb. A minimum of one required tree shall be located in each landscaped area. All 
landscaped areas shall be surrounded with a six-inch high concrete raised curb. Small curb breaks 
are encouraged for drainage into or out of a planted area. If asphalt, concrete, or sub-base exists 
where the landscaped area is to be located, it shall be removed down to uncompacted soil prior to 
planting. 
12.3.4 ?LOCATION: 
No vehicle parking space shall be located more than 75 feet from the trunk of one shade tree. A tree, 
preserved in accordance with Subsection 12.1.5, may be used to satisfy this requirement. 
12.3.5 ?HEAD-ON PARKING: 
Where two rows of head-on parking are separated by a landscaped area, not less than nine feet 
wide, or where parking spaces abut a perimeter landscaped area, said parking spaces may be 
shortened by two feet from the Parking Design Standards found in this Code. 
12.3.6 ?LANDSCAPE INCENTIVE: 
Landscaping provided in excess of that required by this Code shall reduce the required parking in 
Section 11.2 by the following amount: one parking space may be eliminated for every Type 1 shade 
tree provided in excess of the required amount. Reduction of parking shall not exceed ten percent of 
the total required parking. 
12.3.7 ?MULTI-FAMILY PARKING SCREENING: 
A visual screen in the form of a masonry wall, wood fence, or a landscaped area with a minimum 
width of four feet capable of creating an opaque screen with shrubs spaced a maximum of five feet 
on center shall be provided for all multi-family residential parking areas to prevent public view from 
any street right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjoining residential property. 


12.4 - BUFFER YARDS 
12.4.1 ?APPLICABILITY: 
Buffer Yards are required where the development of a higher impact use abuts a lower impact use, 
as classified in Subsections 12.4.4 and 12.4.5. The Board of Zoning Appeals, the Johnson City 
Regional Planning Commission, or the Johnson City Board of Commissioners may increase Buffer 
Yard requirements where it has approval authority. 
12.4.2 ?EXCEPTIONS: 
Any property with a zoning designation of B-2 or MX is exempt from the requirements of Section 12.4 
where it abuts the same zoning district. 
12.4.3 ?IMPACT CLASSIFICATION: 
A. ?No Impact (N): All permitted uses in the following zones are considered to have no impact, 
unless a specific use is listed elsewhere; A-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, and RP-2. The 
following uses shall be considered to have no impact, regardless of zoning classification; 
cemeteries, golf courses without night lighting, parks, single-family and two-family residential. 
B. ?Low Impact (L): All permitted uses in the following zones are considered to have a low impact, 
unless a specific use is listed elsewhere; B-1, MX-1, R-3, R-4, R- 5, R-6, RM-3, RM-4, RM-5, 
RO-1, RO-2, RP-3, RP-4, RP-5, and RTP. RM-3, RM-4, and RM-5, shall comply with 
Subsection 6.11.2.3. The following uses shall be considered to have a low impact, regardless of 
zoning classification; churches, day-care centers, community recreational facilities, 
neighborhood recreational facilities, public buildings, schools, and swim clubs. 
C. ?Medium Impact (M): All permitted uses in the following zones are considered to have a medium 
impact, unless parking total exceeds 450 spaces or a specific use is listed elsewhere; B-2, B-3, 
B-4, B-5, PB, BP, I-1, MS-1, and MX. The following uses shall be considered to have a medium 
impact, regardless of zoning classification; gasoline service stations, neighborhood convenience 
stores and centers, parking garages (without first floor retail or office), and self-storage or mini-
warehouses. 
D. ?High Impact (H): All permitted uses in the following zone are considered to have a high impact, 
unless a specific use is listed elsewhere; I-2. The following uses shall be considered to have a 
high impact, regardless of zoning classification; junk yards, outdoor storage yards, any property 
with parking for more than 450 cars, and off-site parking areas located in residential zones. 
12.4.4 ?BUFFER TYPE: 
Required buffer types are determined according to the following chart: 


Pro
pos
ed 
Use 
Cla
ssifi
cati
on 


N
 
L
 
M
 
H
 
Adj
oini
ng 
Use 
Cla
ssifi
cati
on 
N 
n
o
n
e
 
1
 
2
 
3
 

L 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
1
 
2
 

M 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
1
 

H 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
n
o
n
e
 
 
Example: A new strip shopping center located in a B-4 zone is considered a medium impact use. 
Directly behind the shopping center is a residential neighborhood zoned R-2, a no impact use. The 
shopping center is required to provide a Type 2 buffer yard. 
12.4.5 ?LOCATION REQUIREMENTS: 
A buffer yard shall be provided by the Proposed Use along the rear and side property lines abutting a 
lesser impact Adjoining Use. Where a development occurs on only a portion of a tract, the City 
Forester may approve the placement of the buffer yard at the edge of the development or at a 
location between the property line and the development that maximizes the effectiveness of the 
buffer yard. Buffer yards shall not exceed a 2:1 slope. 
12.4.6 ?PLANTING REQUIREMENTS: 
Buffer plantings shall be spaced so that a uniform screen is provided. All wood fences shall have the 
finished side facing outward. The following chart describes the planting requirements for every 100 
feet, or fraction thereof, of buffer yard: 
Minimu
m Buffer 
Require
ments 
for Every 
100 Feet 
of Buffer 
Yard 
B
uf
fe
r 
T
y
p
e 
B
uf
fe
r 
W
id
th 
(f
t.
) 
? 
Pl
a
nt 
M
at
er
ia
l 
O
pt
io
n
s 
T
Y
P
E 
1 
1
5 
a) 
1
0 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 

1
0 
b) 
6 
ft. 
W
o
o
d 
F
e
n
c
e 
or 
M
as
o
nr
y 
W
al
l 
a
n
d 
6 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 
T
Y
P
E 
2 
2
0 
a) 
1
4 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 

1
5 
b) 
6 
ft. 
W
o
o
d 
F
e
n
c
e 
or 
M
as
o
nr
y 
W
al
l 
a
n
d 
8 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 
T
Y
P
E 
3 
3
5 
a) 
1
8 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 

2
5 
b) 
8 
ft. 
W
o
o
d 
F
e
n
c
e 
or 
M
as
o
nr
y 
W
al
l 
a
n
d 
1
2 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 
T
Y
P
E 
4 
3
5 
a) 
8 
ft. 
W
o
o
d 
F
e
n
c
e 
or 
M
as
o
nr
y 
W
al
l 
a
n
d 
1
8 
T
y
p
e 
1 
E
v
er
gr
e
e
n 
Tr
e
es 
 
12.4.7 ?BUFFER TREE SUBSTITUTIONS: 
Type 2 evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs may be used to substitute a maximum of 50 percent 
of the required number of Type 1 evergreen trees. Type 1 evergreen trees shall be substituted at a 
rate of one Type 1 evergreen tree for every one and a half Type 2 evergreen trees or three 
evergreen shrubs. Deciduous trees can be used to substitute up to 35 percent of the total number of 
required buffer trees. Deciduous trees used to replace Type 1 evergreen trees shall be selected from 
the Type 1 shade tree list. Deciduous trees used in place of Type 2 evergreen trees shall be selected 
from the Type 2 shade tree list. A maximum of 50 percent of the required buffer shrubs may be 
replaced by deciduous shrubs provided that they meet the mature plant height requirements stated 
in Section 12.1.8. 
12.4.8 ?MIXTURE OF BUFFER TREES: 
Sites with required buffer trees of ten or more shall provide the following variety of trees: 
Nu
mb
er 
of 
Req
uir
ed 
Buf
fer 
Tre
es 
Mi
nim
um 
Req
uir
ed 
Var
iety 
of 
Buf
fer 
Tre
es 
Ma
xim
um 
Per
cen
t 
of 
Any 
Var
iety 
10
—
40 
2 
65
% 
41
—
100 
3 
50
% 
101
+ 
4 
35
% 
 
12.4.9 ?BUFFER YARD DIAGRAMS: 
A buffer planting plan can be configured in many ways. Plant selection and spacing should be based 
on each plant's growing habit and site characteristics. The following illustrations are examples of 
buffer configurations based on the type of buffer required: 
 
 
 
12.4.10 ?NATURAL BUFFER: 
The City Forester may approve the use of existing vegetation to satisfy the buffer yard requirements. 
The vegetation shall be in healthy condition and consist of native, non-invasive species. The existing 
vegetative buffer shall be of substantial depth as to provide a natural screen. The City Forester may 
require additional plantings to areas of the natural buffer where the screening effect is deficient. 


12.5 - PROTECTIVE SCREENING 
12.5.1 ?APPLICABILITY: 
Excluding mechanical equipment of individual single-family or two-family detached dwelling units, 
protective screening shall be provided in all zones. 
12.5.2 ?PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT SCREENING REQUIREMENTS: 
A protective screen to prevent public view from any street right-of-way (excluding alleys) or adjoining 
property shall be provided for the following: 
A. ?Dumpsters: If visible from any street right-of-way or residentially zoned property, screening shall 
be required on three sides by either a seven-foot masonry wall or wood fence. Where screening 
is required, the dumpster shall be oriented so that the enclosure opening is not visible from any 
street right-of-way and shall be accessible to waste management collection. If this orientation is 
not possible, then a gate shall be required on the enclosure opening to prevent view from the 
street right- of-way. 
B. ?All mechanical equipment, which is larger than five feet by five feet by four feet high, shall be 
screened on three sides by either a masonry wall or wood fence. Said fence or wall shall 
exceed the height of the mechanical equipment by a minimum of six inches. The maximum 
height of a required fence or wall shall be seven feet. The mechanical equipment may also be 
screened by a minimum of one row of evergreen shrubs as listed in the Screening and Buffer 
List. 
12.5.3 ?PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES SCREENING REQUIREMENTS: 
Public utility facilities include any public or private building or structure used for the production, 
storage, transmission, distribution, and recovery of communications, water, sewage, gas, energy, 
and other similar utilities. 
Utilities which exceed four feet in height, excluding sanitary sewer plants, water treatment facilities, 
and any utilities located within the public right-of-way shall be screened on three sides by either a 
masonry wall or wood fence. Said fence or wall shall exceed the height of the mechanical equipment 
by a minimum of six inches. The mechanical equipment may also be screened by a minimum of one 
row of evergreen shrubs as listed in the Screening and Buffer List. 
12.5.4 ?MAINTENANCE: 
All required screening shall be maintained by the property owners. 
Screening and Buffer List  
(This list is not all-inclusive; other shrubs may be used  
with approval of the City Forester) 
1. 
Ne
edl
epo
int 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x 
cor
nut
a 
'Ne
edl
epo
int') 
6. 
Co
mm
on 
Abe
lia  
(Ab
elia 
x 
gra
ndif
lora
) 
2. 
Sch
ipk
a 
Lau
rel  
(Pr
unu
s 
laur
oce
ras
us 
'Sch
ipk
aen
sis') 
7. 
Hic
ks 
Ye
ws  
(Ta
xus 
x 
me
dia 
'Hic
ksii'
) 
3. 
Sea 
Gre
en 
Juni
per  
(Ju
nip
eru
s 
chi
nen
sis 
'Se
a 
Gre
en') 
8. 
Rus
sian 
Oliv
e  
(Ela
eag
nus 
x 
ebb
ing
ei) 
4. 
Lea
the
rlea
f 
Vib
urn
um  
(Vib
urn
um 
hyti
dop
hyll
um) 
9. 
Dw
arf 
Bur
for
d 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x 
cor
nut
a 
'Bu
rfor
dii 
Na
na') 
5. 
Pra
gen
se 
Vib
urn
um  
(Vib
urn
um 
x 
pra
gen
se) 
10. 
Wa
x 
Lea
f 
Priv
et  
(Lig
ustr
um 
jap
oni
cu
m) 
 
? 
Type 1 Buffer Tree List  
(Evergreen trees with an average mature height of 30 feet or more) 
1. 
Ala
ska 
Ced
ar  
(Ch
am
aec
ypa
ris 
noo
tkat
ens
is) 
7. 
Ori
ent
al 
Spr
uce  
(Pic
ea 
orie
ntal
is) 
2. 
Jap
ane
se 
Cry
pto
me
ria  
(Cr
ypt
om
eria 
jap
oni
ca) 
8. 
Col
ora
do 
Spr
uce  
(Pic
ea 
pun
gen
s) 
3. 
Leyl
and 
Cyp
ress  
(x 
Cup
ress
ocp
aris 
leyl
and
ii) 
9. 
Wh
ite 
Pin
e  
(Pin
us 
stro
bes
) 
4. 
Am
eric
an 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x 
opa
ca) 
10. 
Aus
tria
n 
Pin
e  
(Pin
us 
nigr
a) 
5. 
Sou
the
rn 
Ma
gno
lia  
(M
agn
olia 
gra
ndif
lora
) 
11. 
Gia
nt 
Arb
orvi
tae  
(Th
uja 
Plic
ata) 
6. 
Nor
wa
y 
Spr
uce  
(Pic
ea 
abi
es) 
12. 
Can
adi
an 
He
mlo
ck  
(Ts
uga 
can
ade
nsis
) 
 
? 
Type 2 Buffer Tree List  
(Evergreen trees with an average mature height of less than 30 feet) 
1. 
Ne
edl
epo
int 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x 
cor
nut
a 
'Ne
edl
epo
int') 
6. 
Roc
ky 
Mo
unt
ain 
Juni
per  
(Ju
nip
eru
s 
sco
pul
oru
m)  
•?
'Wi
chit
a 
Blu
e', 
'Mo
ffet
ii', 
'Col
ogr
een
', 
'Sut
herl
and
', 
'Pat
hfin
der' 
cult
ivar
s 
onl
y 
2. 
Gre
enl
eaf 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x 
opa
ca 
'Gr
een
leaf
') 
7. 
Am
eric
an 
Arb
orvi
tae  
(Th
uja 
occi
den
tali
s)  
•?
'Nig
ra', 
'Wi
nte
rgr
een
', 
'Em
eral
d', 
'Tec
hny
' or 
'Bra
ndo
n' 
cult
ivar
s 
onl
y 
3. 
Fos
ter 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x x 
att
enu
ata 
'Fos
teri'
) 
8. 
Littl
e 
Ge
m 
Ma
gno
lia  
(M
agn
olia 
gra
ndif
lora 
'Litt
le 
Ge
m') 
4. 
Nell
ie 
R. 
Ste
ven
s 
Holl
y  
(Ile
x x 
'Nel
lie 
R. 
Ste
ven
s') 
9. 
Cap
itat
a 
Jap
ane
se 
Ye
w  
(Ta
xus 
cus
pid
ata 
'Ca
pita
ta') 
5. 
Chi
nes
e 
Juni
per  
(Ju
nip
eru
s 
chi
nen
sis)  
•?
'Sp
art
an', 
'Mo
unt
bat
ten'
, or 
'Fai
rvie
w' 
cult
ivar
s 
onl
y 

 
? 
Type 1 Shade Tree List  
(Deciduous trees with an average mature height of 30 feet or more) 
1. 
Red 
Ma
ple  
(Ac
er 
rub
ru
m) 
16. 
Sca
rlet 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
coc
cen
ia) 
2. 
Sug
ar 
Ma
ple  
(Ac
er 
sac
cha
ru
m) 
17. 
Ove
rcu
p 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
lyra
ta) 
3. 
Riv
er 
Birc
h  
(Be
tula 
nigr
a)  
•?
10 
ft. 
min
imu
m 
hei
ght 
for 
mul
ti-
ste
m 
tre
es 
18. 
BU
R 
OA
K 
(Qu
erc
us 
ma
cro
car
pa) 
4. 
Gre
en 
Ash  
(Fra
xin
us 
pen
nsyl
van
ica) 
19. 
Nut
tall 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
nut
talli
i) 
5. 
Gin
kgo  
(Gi
nkg
o 
bilo
ba)  
•?
Mal
e 
tre
es 
onl
y 
20. 
Pin 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
pal
ustr
is) 
6. 
Ho
ney
loc
ust  
(Gl
edit
sia 
tric
ant
hos 
var. 
iner
min
s) 
21. 
Will
ow 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
phe
llos
) 
7. 
Sw
eet
gu
m  
(Liq
uid
am
bar 
styr
acif
lua)  
•?
'Rot
und
ilob
a' is 
a 
frui
tles
s 
cult
ivar 
22. 
Nor
the
rn 
Red 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
rub
ra) 
8. 
Yell
ow 
Pop
lar  
(Liri
ode
ndr
on 
tuli
pife
ra) 
23. 
Shu
mar
d 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
shu
mar
dii) 
9. 
Bla
ckg
um  
(Ny
ssa 
sylv
atic
a) 
24. 
Pon
d 
Cyp
ress  
(Ta
xod
ium 
asc
end
ens
) 
10. 
Da
wn 
Red
wo
od  
(M
eta
seq
uoi
a 
gly
pto
sto
boi
des
) 
25. 
Bal
d 
Cyp
ress  
(Ta
xod
ium 
dist
ich
um) 
11. 
Syc
am
ore  
(Pla
nta
nus 
occi
den
tali
s) 
26. 
Littl
ele
af 
Lin
den  
(Tili
a 
cor
dat
a) 
12. 
Lon
don 
Pla
net
ree  
(Pla
nta
nus 
x 
ace
rifo
lia) 
27. 
Silv
er 
Lin
den  
(Tili
a 
to
me
nto
sa) 
13. 
Sa
wto
oth 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
acu
tissi
ma) 
28. 
Lac
eba
rk 
Elm  
(Ul
mu
s 
par
vifl
ora
) 
14. 
Wh
ite 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
alb
a) 
29. 
Jap
ane
se 
Zel
kov
a  
(Zel
kov
a 
serr
ata) 
15. 
Sw
am
p 
Wh
ite 
Oak  
(Qu
erc
us 
bic
olor
) 

 
? 
Type 2 Shade Tree List  
(Deciduous trees with an average mature height of less than 30 feet) 
1. 
Trid
ent 
Ma
ple  
(Ac
er 
bue
rge
rian
um)
* 
13. 
Gol
den 
Rai
ntr
ee  
(Ko
elre
ute
ria 
pan
icul
ata) 
2. 
He
dge 
Ma
ple  
(Ac
er 
ca
mp
estr
e)* 
14. 
Cre
pe 
My
rtle  
(La
ges
tro
mia 
indi
ca)
*  
•?
6ft. 
min
imu
m 
hei
ght, 
do 
not 
use 
dw
arf 
or 
se
mi-
dw
arf 
cult
ivar
s 
3. 
Jap
ane
se 
Ma
ple  
(Ac
er 
pal
mat
um)
*  
•?
Use 
onl
y 
non
-
diss
ect
ed 
typ
es 
15. 
Sw
eet
bay 
Ma
gno
lia  
(M
agn
olia 
virg
inia
na)  
•?6 
ft. 
min
imu
m 
hei
ght 
4. 
Ser
vice
ber
ry  
(A
mel
anc
hier 
spp
.)* 
16. 
Cra
bap
ple  
(M
alus 
spp
.)* 
5. 
Col
um
nar 
Hor
nbe
am  
(Ca
rpin
us 
bet
ulu
s 
'Fas
tigi
ata'
)* 
17. 
Oka
me 
Che
rry  
(Pr
unu
s 
ca
mp
anu
lata 
'Ok
am
e')* 
6. 
Am
eric
an 
Hor
nbe
am  
(Ca
rpin
us 
car
olin
ian
a)* 
18. 
Sar
gen
t 
Che
rry  
(Pr
unu
s 
sar
gen
ttii) 
7. 
Red
bud  
(Ce
rsis 
can
ade
nsis
)* 
19. 
Ori
ent
al 
Che
rry  
(Pr
unu
s 
serr
ulat
a)*  
•?
'Kw
anz
an' 
and 
'Sn
ow
goo
se' 
are 
pop
ular 
cult
ivar
s 
8. 
Dog
wo
od  
(Co
rnu
s 
flor
ida)
* 
20. 
Hig
an 
Che
rry  
(Pr
unu
s 
sub
bhir
tell
a)*  
•?
Use 
non
-
pen
dul
a 
typ
es, 
'Au
tu
mn
alis' 
for 
exa
mpl
e 
9. 
Kou
sa 
Dog
wo
od  
(Co
rnu
s 
kou
sa)
* 
21. 
Yos
hin
o 
Che
rry  
(Pr
unu
s x 
yed
oen
sis)
* 
10. 
Coc
ksp
ur 
Ha
wth
orn  
(Cr
ata
egu
s 
cru
sgal
li 
var. 
ine
mis
)* 
22. 
Call
ery 
Pea
r  
(Pyr
us 
call
ery
ana
)  
•?
'Bra
dfo
rd', 
'Cle
vel
and 
Sel
ect'
, 
'Ari
sto
crat
', 
'Ne
w 
Bra
dfo
rd' 
are 
pop
ular 
cult
ivar
s 
11. 
Wi
nte
r 
Kin
g 
Ha
wth
orn  
(Cr
ata
egu
s 
vird
is 
'Wi
nte
r 
Kin
g')* 
23. 
Jap
ane
se 
Sno
wb
ell  
(Sty
rax 
jap
oni
cus
)* 
12. 
Car
olin
a 
Silv
erb
ell  
(Hal
esia 
tetr
apt
era)
* 
24. 
Jap
ane
se 
Tre
e 
Lila
c  
(Syr
ing
a 
reti
cul
ata)
* 
*Trees 
appropri
ate for 
use 
within 20 
feet of 
over-
head 
electric 
utility 
lines 
 


ARTICLE XIII - LIGHTING REGULATIONS 


13.1 - PURPOSE 
Outdoor lighting enables people to see essential detail for work or recreation, facilitates the safety or 
security of persons or property, emphasizes features of architectural or historical significance, lights parks 
and gardens, promotes products or services, or calls attention to commercial premises. But, with the 
benefits of lighting also comes a need to protect travelers or adjacent properties from the use of 
inappropriate lighting practices and systems. The reduction of glare, light trespass, and excess 
illumination can maximize the effectiveness of site lighting, and conserve energy and resources. Through 
the regulation of the placement, orientation, distribution patterns and fixture types of electronically-
powered illuminating devices, it is the intent of this Code to encourage better lighting practices and 
systems to reduce visual glare and conserve energy without decreasing safety or utility. 


13.2 - APPLICABILITY 
These regulations shall apply to all exterior lighting fixtures including, but not limited to, boundary, parking 
lot, landscape, building (architectural), product display area, and driving lane lighting. It shall also apply to 
externally-lighted advertising signs. The following lighting applications, are specifically exempted from 
these regulations: 
13.2.1 ?Communication towers or motion sensor devices controlling not more than 300 watts total 
connected load; 
13.2.2 ?Temporary construction or emergency lighting provided it is discontinued immediately upon 
completion of the required work; 
13.2.3 ?Special event lighting including circus, fair, carnival or civic uses, and fireworks displays; 
13.2.4 ?Permanent emergency or security lighting for buildings or uses, provided it is required by 
building or electrical codes, or government regulation; 
13.2.5 ?Exterior lighting for public monuments; 
13.2.6 ?Exterior lighting fixtures for single-family and duplex residential dwelling units, provided that the 
maximum intensity of directional lighting (the center of the light beam) is not directed off-site; 
13.2.7 ?Incandescent lighting fixtures of 160 watts or less, or any other light fixture (metal halide, HPS, 
fluorescent, etc.) of 50 watts or less; 
13.2.8 ?Internally-illuminated signs where the bare bulb cannot be seen directly; 
13.2.9 ?Transportation lighting, including street lighting, automobiles, traffic signals, aircraft, trains and 
railroad signals; 
13.2.10 ?State, federal, or municipal facilities. However, voluntary compliance with the intent of this 
Code is encouraged; 
13.2.11 ?Temporary exemptions that may be approved by the Chief Building Official, as outlined below; 
and 
13.2.12 ?Free-standing, antique or ornamental-style parking lot or private street lighting fixtures, using 
HPS or LPS lamps having no more than 150 watts output per lamp, or any fixtures using HPS or 
LPS lamps with no more than 100 watts output per lamp, provided that the light emitted above the 
horizontal plane be restricted to no more than 25 percent of the lamp's total output, that no more 
than two such lamps shall be located within 50 feet of each other, and that all illumination standards 
from Section 13.4.1 are met. 


13.3 - TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS 
Any person may submit a written request to the Chief Building Official for a temporary exemption to these 
regulations. A temporary exemption request shall contain the following information: the specific exemption 
requested, the type and use of outdoor fixture involved, the duration of the requested exemption, the type 
and wattage of the luminaires, calculated lumens and/or estimated footcandle levels, the proposed 
location and mounting height, the type of baffling or shielding to be provided, and any other data or 
information that may be deemed necessary by the Chief Building Official. A temporary exemption, if 
approved, shall be valid for not more than 30 days from the date of issuance. The approval may be 
renewable at the discretion of the Chief Building Official, and any renewed exemption shall also be valid 
for not more than 30 days. 


13.4 - GENERAL STANDARDS 
13.4.1 ?All non-exempt exterior lighting and illuminated signs shall be designed, installed, and directed 
in such a manner to prevent glare beyond the property line. The horizontal and vertical illuminance 
standards established by this Code shall be observed during the design, construction, and 
subsequent modification of any fixture. 
Maximum Illumination Levels (fc)* 
Horizontal Illuminance 
General site lighting, open parking facilities\15 fc 
Building entrances, security areas, drive-thrus, fuel pump islands, active storage areas such as 
lumber yards and automobile sales displays, and general advertising signs\40 fc 
Vertical Illuminance 
Light trespass along a residentially-zoned property or a street (excluding the possible contribution of 
off-site sources such as street lighting)\1.5 fc 
*Based on initial footcandle values. The use of initial footcandle levels usually results in field 
measurements that are less intense over the life of a lamp, sometimes as much as 30 percent lower. 
13.4.2 ?Exterior lighting fixtures, except as otherwise allowed, shall be recessed or flush-mounted, or 
otherwise properly shielded to reduce glare on-premises and eliminate glare off-site. 
13.4.3 ?All exterior lighting shall, as a minimum, be full cut-off fixtures, not allowing any distribution of 
light above the horizontal plane. Excepted is floodlighting, if it is properly shielded to prevent glare or 
light trespass. 
13.4.4 ?A minimum uniformity ratio of 10:1 between the maximum level of illumination and the minimum 
level is recommended for open parking facilities, to reduce eye adaptation difficulty between lighter 
and darker areas. 
13.4.5 ?It is recommended all non-essential lighting be turned off after business hours, excluding lighting 
for security purposes. 
13.4.6 ?Single-family or duplex residential directional lighting, such as floodlighting, that has the center 
of its light beam directed off-site is prohibited. 
13.4.7 ?Luminaires shall not have a mounting height in excess of 40 feet. 
13.4.8 ?Except as allowed in Subsection 13.4.6, the cut-off angle for exterior lighting fixtures shall not 
extend beyond the property line, unless proper shielding, baffling, or buffering techniques are 
employed. When buffering techniques are employed, allowances are not to be made for potential 
buffer growth and the Code requirements must be immediately met. 
13.4.9 ?Any buffering approved and installed to facilitate compliance with the provisions of this section 
shall be deemed to be a required buffer under Section 12.4 and must be maintained as a required 
buffer. 


13.5 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
An exterior lighting plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted for review and approval for all developments 
utilizing non-exempted exterior lighting. Included in the plan shall be, as a minimum: 
13.5.1 ?The location, mounting height, and orientation of all exterior lighting fixtures; 
13.5.2 ?The make, model, lamp type, and wattage of each lighting fixture; 
13.5.3 ?Initial footcandle data calculated by the point method (using horizontal illuminance calculations) 
for all lighted areas, using isofootcandle calculations on a 30-foot or less grid spacing or 
isofootcandle lines; 
13.5.4 ?Vertical illuminance calculations along all property lines; 
13.5.5 ?Technical specifications for all luminaires, including the beam angle, field angle, isofootcandle 
diagrams, and cut-off angle of individual luminaires; and 
13.5.6 ?Any baffles, shielding, or other light protection measures to be employed. 


13.6 - COMPLIANCE 
13.6.1 ?Modifications to exterior lighting fixtures shall not be made without the approval of the Chief 
Building Official. The upgrading of a fixture to a higher wattage or higher illumination lamp shall be 
considered a modification. 
13.6.2 ?Approval of a lighting plan does not relieve the property owner or developer of responsibility 
should any lighting fixture fail to perform as approved. The Chief Building Official may require 
modifications to installed lighting if a violation is determined to exist. The city reserves the right to 
conduct post-installation inspections and/or illuminance measurements to verify compliance, and to 
require timely remedial action at the expense of the landowner or other responsible person. 
13.6.3 ?Any use existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article is derived that 
does not fully comply with the requirements pertaining to lighting then in effect shall be abated 
forthwith. 


ARTICLE XIV - AMENDMENTS 


14.1 - PROCEDURE 
Such regulations, restrictions, and boundaries as provided for in this Code may be amended, 
supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed. All changes and amendments shall be effective only after 
approval by the Board of Commissioners. 


14.2 - INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS 
14.2.1 ?An amendment to the Zoning Map may be initiated by one of the following three methods: (1) a 
petition by a property owner or anyone having a contractual interest in the property; (2) a resolution 
of the Planning Commission; (3) a resolution of the Board of Commissioners; or (4) a proposal from 
the Planning Department. If a Concept Plan is required with the rezoning request, the application is 
not considered complete until the required Concept Plan is submitted. 
An amendment to the text of the Zoning Code may be initiated by one of the following four methods: 
(1) a petition by a property owner of the city; (2) a resolution of the Planning Commission; (3) a 
resolution of the Board of Commissioners; or (4) a proposal from the Planning Department. 
A petitioner is encouraged to meet with planning staff prior to the initiation of an amendment. In the 
submission of a text amendment, the petitioner shall provide the staff with proposed language 
desired to be added or deleted from the Code. 
No Zoning Code, zoning classification, or approval process or plan related to the Zoning Code 
creates a property right in the owner of the property or any other person. The City of Johnson City 
has the sole and exclusive authority to establish and modify all land use classifications within its 
jurisdiction. 
14.2.2 ?APPLICATION, FEE, AND CONCEPT PLAN: 
Citizens wishing to have the Code amended shall complete the application process according to the 
regulations of the Planning Commission. To partially defray the administrative cost and cost of giving 
public notice, the applicant shall pay the appropriate filing fee to the City of Johnson City when 
requesting an amendment to the Zoning Map or an amendment to the text of this Code. When 
required, the applicant shall prepare a Concept Plan demonstrating compliance with the applicable 
zoning district as well as the following: 
A. ?Use(s), or the number of dwelling units in each building; 
B. ?Buffers and/or screening; 
C. ?Building location, size and height, with setbacks; 
D. ?Parking, vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns; 
E. ?Location of swimming pools, tennis courts and clubhouses, when it applies; and 
F. ?Any additional information requested by the Planning Commission or the Board of 
Commissioners. 


14.3 - CONCEPT PLAN 
14.3.1 ?CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED: 
A Concept Plan shall be required for the rezoning requests specified below: 
A. ?For all rezoning requests that abut a single-family neighborhood or single-family district; 
B. ?For all other rezoning requests where a Concept Plan is required as part of the district 
regulations. 
14.3.2 ?REVIEW AND APPROVAL FOR CONCEPT PLAN: 
A. ?The Concept Plan shall be reviewed by city staff in conjunction with the rezoning request. 
B. ?The Concept Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in conjunction with the 
rezoning request (with staff comments) for consideration. 
C. ?Following approval by the Planning Commission, the rezoning request and Concept Plan shall 
be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for consideration. Should the Planning 
Commission recommend denial of the rezoning request and Concept Plan, the request does not 
move forward to the Board of Commissioners. The petitioner may appeal the recommendation 
for denial in writing to the City Manager within 60 days of the Planning Commission meeting on 
which denial occurred. 
D. ?Upon approval of the Concept Plan by the Board of Commissioners, all development of the 
subject property shall be in conformance with the approved Concept Plan. No site plan shall be 
approved except in conformance with the approved Concept Plan. Any significant amendment 
to an approved Concept Plan as determined by staff, i.e., change in use, increase in intensity or 
density, substantial change in building location, ingress and egress, or other changes that would 
negatively impact the surrounding properties shall be resubmitted to the Planning Commission 
and the Board of Commissioners for reconsideration and approval. 


14.4 - NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING AND NOTIFICATION 
The developer/petitioner shall hold a neighborhood meeting to inform property owners within 200 feet of 
the proposed development/rezoning prior to the Planning Commission meeting. Property owners within 
200 feet of the proposed development/rezoning shall be notified in writing by the petitioner at least ten 
days prior to the neighborhood meeting. The neighborhood meeting shall be held prior to Planning 
Commission consideration of the rezoning request and Concept Plan. In addition, if the property abuts a 
neighborhood association recognized by the Johnson City Police Department then the president of that 
neighborhood association shall also be notified in writing at least ten days prior to the neighborhood 
meeting. 
The purpose of this meeting is for the developer/petitioner to inform property owners of the proposed plan 
and to provide an opportunity for the neighborhood to express its issues and concerns. The 
developer/petitioner may take these concerns into consideration; however, if the developer/petitioner 
modifies the Concept Plan or other plan in response to neighborhood concerns or suggestions, those 
changes are not to be construed by those participating in a neighborhood meeting or any other person as 
creating an entitlement from either the developer/petitioner or the city in any way whatsoever. Although 
neighborhood consensus is desirable, it is not necessary for Planning Commission/Board of 
Commissioners consideration and approval or rejection of the request. When a Concept Plan is approved 
by the City Commission, the developer/petitioner is obligated only to the city (not the neighborhood) to 
construct the project in accord with the Concept Plan, if the project is developed. However, there is no 
obligation for the petitioner/developer to construct the approved Concept Plan without reconsideration 
and approval by the Planning Commission and City Commission. 
If the developer/petitioner finds for any reason that the approved project becomes unfeasible, not viable, 
or undesirable to construct, the developer/petitioner may request to amend a previously approved 
Concept Plan or may request to amend the current zoning of the property. A request to amend the current 
zoning of the property shall require the submission of the appropriate rezoning fee. A neighborhood 
meeting shall be required for either amendment. 


14.5 - APPROVAL PROCESS 
14.5.1 ?Per T.C.A. 13-7-204, no amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance, zoning map, or 
approval of a Concept Plan shall become effective until it is first submitted to the Planning 
Commission for consideration. If approved, the request shall be forwarded to the Board of 
Commissioners for consideration. If the Planning Commission recommends denial, the petitioner 
may appeal the recommendation in writing to the City Manager within 60 days of the Planning 
Commission meeting on which the denial occurred. An approval of an appeal must receive the 
favorable vote of at least three members of the Board of Commissioners. 
14.5.2 ?Per T.C.A. 13-7-203, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on all rezonings 
and text amendments. At least 15 days prior to the public hearing by the Board of Commissioners, 
notice of the time and place thereof shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
City of Johnson City. 


14.6 - REAPPLICATION 
No reapplication shall be accepted within six months of final action by the Board of Commissioners, but 
this in no way shall restrict the initiation of applications by the Planning Commission or Board of 
Commissioners. A re-application is an application with the same rezoning request relating to all or a part 
of the same property involved in the previous application. A request involving a change to a different 
zoning classification, a portion of the property different than the previous request, or a significant change 
to the Concept Plan, as determined by the staff, shall not be considered a reapplication; however, 
Planning Commission consideration is required prior to consideration by the Board of Commissioners. 


ARTICLE XV - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 


15.1 - CREATION AND APPOINTMENTS 
15.1.1 ?A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established in accordance with Section 13-207 of the 
Tennessee Code Annotated. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members, who may 
be members of the Johnson City Regional Planning Commission, and shall be appointed by the 
Chief Executive, and confirmed by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners. The term of 
membership shall be three years. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term by appointment by 
the Chief Executive and confirmed by the Board of City Commissioners. 


15.2 - PROCEDURE 
15.2.1 ?Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such 
other times as the Board may determine. The chairman or, the acting chairman, may administer 
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. 
The Board shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records or applications and action thereon, 
which shall be a public record. 


15.3 - APPEALS: HOW TAKEN 
15.3.1 ?An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation 
aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board, or bureau affected by any decision of 
the Chief Building Official based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this Code. An appeal must 
be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the date of the decision of the Chief 
Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall send written notice of the decision to the aggrieved 
party on the date the Chief Building Official renders a decision, specifying the grounds, thereof. The 
Chief Building Official shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the 
action appealed was taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give 
public notice thereof, at least five days but not more than 15 days prior to the date of the meeting, as 
well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the 
hearing any person or party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
15.3.2 ?To insure that all interested parties will be notified in the case of variances and special 
exception, the applicant shall prepare and submit with his application, in stamped unsealed 
envelopes, to be mailed by the Chief Building Official's office letters of notification to each resident 
and property owner within 200 feet of the property for which variance or special exception is sought. 
15.3.3 ?When a request has been made for a variance or special exception, a sign shall be posted on 
the property to be considered. Said sign shall comply with the following. 
A. ?The following information shall be on the notification sign: the reason (variance or special 
exception), time, and location of the meeting. 
B. ?Be posted 15 days prior to the public hearing date given on the sign. 
C. ?Be placed to face the public street right-of-way on which the property fronts and be within 25 
feet from said right-of-way with letters which measure at least two inches in height. 
15.3.4 ?To partially defray administration cost and cost of giving public notice, the applicant shall pay a 
filing fee to the city of Johnson City. 


15.4 - POWERS 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers: 
15.4.1 ?ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW: 
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order 
requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the Chief Building Official or other 
administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this Code. Applications 
for Administrative Review shall be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days of the date of 
the decisions of the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall send written notice of the 
decision to the aggrieved party on the date the Chief Building Official renders a decision, specifying 
the grounds, thereof. 
15.4.2 ?SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: 
To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this Code, requests for special exceptions, 
and for decisions on other special questions upon which the Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized 
to pass by this Code. Any special exception shall be subject to such conditions as the Board may 
require to preserve and promote the character of the district in which the use is located and 
otherwise promote the purpose of this Code. Only those special exceptions listed in Article VI as 
Uses Permitted By Approval As Special Exceptions may be acted upon by the Board; and the Board 
must observe any conditions imposed by this Code regarding any special exception use permitted. 
15.4.3 ?VARIANCE: 
To hear and decide applications for variance from the terms of this Code, but only where by reason 
of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, which at the time of 
the adoption of this Code, was a lot of record; or where, by reason of exceptional topographic 
conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a piece of property, the strict 
application of the provisions of this Code would result in practical difficulties to or undue hardship 
upon the owner of such property, provided that such relief may be granted without substantial 
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Code. 
In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, 
character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in 
furtherance of the purposes of this Code. 
15.4.3.1 ?Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or conditions (such as 
exceptional narrowness, topography, or siting) fully described in the findings of the Board, do 
not apply generally in the district. 
15.4.3.2 ?Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded from the particular 
district in which requested; nor shall a variance be granted which will alter the density standards 
established by this Code. 
15.4.3.3 ?For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the Board, the aforesaid circumstances or 
conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this Code would deprive the 
applicant of any reasonable use of his land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance; there 
must be a deprivation of beneficial use of land. 
15.4.3.4 ?Any variance granted under the provisions of this Section shall be the minimum 
adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. 
15.4.3.5 ?The granting of any variance is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this 
Code and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, or in 
conflict with the comprehensive plan for development. 
15.4.3.6 ?The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no authority to consider a variance which would 
reduce the number of trees or the total area of landscaping required under Article VI or Article 
XII of this Code. 
15.4.4 ?VARIANCE (EXCLUSIVELY IN REGARDS TO ARTICLE VIII, FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS): 
Conditions for Variances: Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the 
minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a 
determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary not to destroy the historic character 
or design of the building. Variances shall be issued only upon: a showing of good and sufficient 
cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and a 
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional 
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or 
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. Any applicant to whom a 
variance is granted shall be given written notice by the Chief Building Official that the issuance of a 
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level may result in increased premium rates 
for flood insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and 
property. The Chief Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any 
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
15.4.4.1 ?In passing upon such applications the Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all 
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of the Floodplain Regulations, the 
Zoning Code's general requirements for variances, and: 
A. ?The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others; 
B. ?The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion; 
C. ?The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
D. ?The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
E. ?The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent 
facility; 
F. ?The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the 
proposed use; 
G. ?The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain 
management program for that area; 
H. ?The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
I. ?The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood 
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
J. ?The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including 
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and 
water systems, and streets such as bridges. 
15.4.4.2 ?The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no authority to consider variances within any 
designated floodway or sinkhole "no-build" line, if any increase in flood levels during the base 
flood discharge would result. 
15.4.4.3 ?Exclusively in regards to Article VIII, Floodplain Regulations, the Board of Zoning Appeals 
shall have authority to consider variances for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures 
upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's 
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the 
historic character and design of the structure. 
15.4.4.4 ?Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this Article, the Board 
of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems 
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Article. 
RULES OF PROCEDURE 
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
Article I  
Officers 
Sec. 1 ?The Board shall organize and elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman annually in the month of 
January. 
Sec. 2 ?The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Board and have the duties 
normally conferred by parliamentary procedure on such officers. He shall have the privilege of 
discussing all matters before the Board and to vote thereon. The Vice-Chairman shall assume the 
duties of the Chairman in his absence. In the event of the absence of both the Chairman and the 
Vice-Chairman, the members may elect a temporary Chairman for that meeting and proceed with the 
order of business. 
Sec. 3 ?The secretary of the Board, who shall be the City Manager or his designee(s), shall conduct all 
official correspondence and keep the minutes and records of the Board, give adequate notice to all 
property owners within 200 feet of any variance or special exception request, and keep a file on each 
request which comes before the Board, and attend to such other duties as are normally the function 
of a secretary. 
Sec. 4 ?Nomination of officers shall be made from the floor. The nominees for each office receiving a 
majority vote of the membership of the Board present and voting shall be declared elected. All 
officers shall be elected for a term of one year and shall serve until their successors are elected and 
shall be eligible to succeed themselves. Vacancies on the Board should be filled at the next regular 
meeting by the Board of Commissioners after the vacancy occurs for the unexpired term by regular 
election procedures. 
Article II  
Meetings 
Sec. 1 ?Meetings of the Board of Zoning appeals shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 
9:00 a.m. in the Commission Chambers of the Municipal and Safety Building, unless no cases are 
pending, in which case no meeting shall be held. Meetings may be canceled by the Chairman for 
good cause. 
Sec. 2 ?Special meetings may be called by the Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may 
determine. It shall be the duty of the Chairman to call a meeting when requested to do so in writing 
by two members of the Board. 
Sec. 3 ?The secretary shall provide adequate notice to all members of the Board in advance of a special 
meeting. Adequate public notice shall also be given prior to the date of the meeting. 
Sec. 4 ?The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the 
attendance of witnesses. 
Sec. 5 ?All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. 
Sec. 6 ?A majority of the Board, three members, shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be present 
before any business is transacted. 
Sec. 7 ?All actions and recommendations of the Board shall be approved by a majority of those present 
and voting. 
Sec. 8 ?When a member of the Board has a conflict of interest in a matter brought before the Board, it is 
customary that he or she declare that conflict of interest prior to considering whether to vote upon the 
matter. 
Sec. 9 ?A record of the vote of each member on each question shall be kept as a part of the minutes. 
Sec. 10 ?The order of business at all regular meetings of the Board shall be as follows: (a) call to order, 
(b) approval of minutes of previous meeting or meetings, (c) reports of officers or committees, (d) old 
business, (e) new business, and (f) adjournment. 
Sec. 11 ?At the time of the meeting the applicant may appear in his own behalf or be represented by 
counsel or agent. Failure of the applicant, counsel, or agent to appear may result in the case being 
continued or such other action as the Board deems appropriate. 
Sec. 12 ?On each item, the staff's recommendation shall be made first, followed by the applicant's 
statement, and the statement of any private citizen for or against the proposal. 
Article III  
Member Attendance 
In order for the Board to carry out its duties and responsibilities, it is necessary for all members to attend 
the Board's meetings. When any member has been absent for three consecutive meetings, the secretary 
shall notify such member in writing of such absences, and if such member fails to attend the next regular 
meeting following such notification, the Board may take such action as it deems proper. 
Article IV  
Applications 
Sec. 1 ?Applications to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be made by any person affected by any 
decision of the zoning administrator, by applicants for a special exception, or by applicants for a 
variance. All Applications must be signed by a vested party, either the owner or someone with a 
signed contract to represent the owner. Applications shall be filed with the secretary of the Board on 
the forms provided by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Secretary of the Board will transmit all 
records of the application to each member of the Board prior to the meeting. 
Sec. 2 ?All application for matters to be brought before the Board shall be made in accordance with 
established regulations and procedures. Incomplete applications will not be accepted. 
Sec. 3 ?The applicant shall provide the secretary with all information requested on the form or forms 
prescribed by the Board of Zoning Appeals, and any such additional information and data as may be 
requested by the secretary in order to advise the Board fully with reference to the application. No 
application will be considered by the Board unless it is made on the form required. All requests shall 
include a site plan drawn to scale depicting all lot lines, existing and proposed structures and building 
setback lines. 
Sec. 4 ?Applications must be filed on or before the fifteenth day of the month preceding the month in 
which the request is to be considered. If the fifteenth day of the month falls on a weekend or on a 
legal holiday observed by the City of Johnson City, then such application shall be filed before 9:00 
a.m. (Eastern Time) on the next regular working day following the fifteenth. 
Sec. 5 ?Appeals from the final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals are made to the appropriate 
court pursuant to Tennessee Law. However, the Board, Planning Commission, or City Commission 
may initiate a reapplication at any time. A reapplication is an application relating to all or a part of the 
same property involved in the previous application, for the same purpose and requesting the same 
relief. 
Article V  
Deferrals 
Sec. 1 ?Requests to defer matters to be considered by the Board should be made to the secretary. 
Sec. 2 ?Deferral requests will be honored unless property owner notifications have been made or the 
agenda has been distributed to the Board. In such cases, the request will remain on the agenda for 
Board consideration. 
Article VI  
Limits of Authorization 
Sec. 1 ?Variances or special exceptions granted by the Board are based upon conditions and evidence 
presented at the time of the granting of the variance or special exception. The granting of a variance 
or special exception does not entitle an owner or developer to extend or construct additional facilities 
that would require an additional variance or special exception, since the specific circumstances may 
have changed from the time when the original variance or special exception was granted. In such a 
case, an additional variance or special exception would be required. 
Sec. 2 ?Upon the expiration of three years from the authorization hereunder of any variance or special 
exception for consideration which has not been completed or commenced and an extension of time 
for completion granted, the authorization shall expire. Variances or special exceptions previously 
granted by the Board prior to the adoption of this section shall not be subject to this time limitation. 
Article VII  
Adoption and Amendments 
Sec. 1 ?These Rules of Procedure may be adopted by a majority vote of the membership of the Board of 
Zoning Appeals present. 
Sec. 2 ?These by-laws may be amended by a majority vote of the membership of the Board of Zoning 
Appeals present. 

Ado
pte
d ??
Feb
rua
ry 
12, 
199
1 
___
__ 

?  
Effe
ctiv
e 
Dat
e ??
Feb
rua
ry 
12, 
199
1 
___
__ 
 


ARTICLE XVI - PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 


16.1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
The provisions of this Code shall be administered by the Chief Building Official. 


16.2 - DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL 
16.2.1 ?The Chief Building Official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy 
permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary for the enforcement of this Code. 
16.2.2 ?It shall be unlawful for the Chief Building Official to approve any plans or issue a zoning 
compliance permit for any filling and leveling, excavating or construction until he has inspected such 
plans in detail and found them in conformity with this Code. To this end, the Chief Building Official 
shall require that every application for a zoning compliance permit for filling and leveling, excavation, 
construction, moving, alteration, or change in the type of use or type of occupancy, shall be 
accompanied by written statements and plans or plats drawn to scale showing the following in 
sufficient detail to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformity with this 
Code: 
16.2.2.1 ?The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot; 
16.2.2.2 ?The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or 
moved and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot; 
16.2.2.3 ?The existing and intended use of the lot and of all structures upon it; 
16.2.2.4 ?Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots or other matters as may be 
essential for determining whether the provisions of this Code are being observed; and 
16.2.2.5 ?When a sign, is to be erected or constructed, a dimensioned sketch of the proposed 
location of the sign shall be shown in relation to other structures on the property and a 
dimensioned drawing of the sign itself shall be submitted. 
16.2.3 ?If the proposed filling, leveling, excavation, construction, moving, alteration, or use of land as set 
forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this Code, the Chief Building Official 
shall issue a zoning compliance permit. If any application for such permit is not approved, the reason 
for disapproval shall be stated in writing on an appropriate denial form. 
16.2.4 ?The Chief Building Official may accept a preliminary application and a lesser number of 
submitted documents than those listed above in situations where a basic clarification is desired 
ahead of proceeding with further technical work; and the Chief Building Official may on such 
preliminary submittal take the formal action of denial and referral to the Board of Zoning Appeals, 
however, that a zoning compliance permit may not be issued until all information required in 
Subsection 16.2.2 is filed and approved. 
16.2.5 ?The Chief Building Official is under no circumstance permitted to grant exceptions to the actual 
meaning of any clause, order, or regulation contained in this Code to any person making application 
to excavate, construct, move, alter, or use buildings, structures or land; nor is the Chief Building 
Official permitted to make changes or vary the terms of this Code. 
16.2.6 ?The duties and responsibilities of the Chief Building Official for Article VIII, Floodplain 
Regulations, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
16.2.6.1 ?Review of all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of the 
Floodplain Regulations have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably 
safe from flooding. 
16.2.6.2 ?Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific 
federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided 
and maintained on file with the development permit. This shall include Section 404 of the 
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Copies of the Joint 
Army Corp. and TVA permits and Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation 
Aquatic Resources Alteration Permit (ARAP) are included in the Floodplain Development Permit 
Guide. 
16.2.6.3 ?Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of Economic and 
Community Development, Local Planning Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a 
watercourse, and submission of evidence of such notification to the FEMA and the Tennessee 
Department of Environment and Conservation. 
16.2.6.4 ?Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade, 
whichever is applicable) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially 
improved buildings, in accordance with Subsection 8.3.1.2. 
16.2.6.5 ?Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade, 
whichever is applicable) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been flood-
proofed, in accordance with Subsection 8.3.1.2. 
16.2.6.6 ?When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Chief Building Official shall obtain 
certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance 
with Subsection 8.3.1.2. 
16.2.6.7 ?Where interpretation is needed regarding the exact location of boundaries of the areas of 
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped 
boundary and actual field conditions) the Chief Building Official shall make the necessary 
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article XV. 
A. ?When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided by the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency then the Chief Building Official shall obtain, review, and 
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, 
State, or other source, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria 
for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in 
Flood Zone A on the Community FHBM or Community FIRM meet the requirements of this 
Article. 
B. ?Within unnumbered A Flood Zones or for unmapped streams, where base flood elevations 
have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the Chief Building 
Official shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or flood-proofed to a level 
of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent 
grade being defined in the definitions) or five and one-half feet above the elevation of the 
normal flow of the adjacent stream channel, whichever is greater. This is illustrated in the 
Floodplain Development Permit Guide. All applicable data including the highest adjacent 
grade elevation, elevation of the normal flow, stream channel elevation, and the elevations 
of the lowest floor of flood-proofing shall be recorded as set forth in Subsection 8.3.1. 
16.2.6.9 ?All records pertaining to the provisions of the Floodplain Regulations shall be maintained 
in the office of the Chief Building Official and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued 
under the provisions of this Article shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited 
retrieval within the combined files. 
16.2.6.10 ?Assure the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocation portion of any water 
course is maintained. 


16.3 - ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT REQUIRED 
16.3.1 ?It shall be unlawful to commence filling, leveling, excavation, or construction of any building or 
other structure, including an accessory structure, or to commence moving, alteration, or repair of any 
structure, including accessory structures which changes land use, encloses previously open 
structures, adds new structures, or adds dimensions to existing structures, costing more than 
$100.00 or exceeding 100 square feet in area, until the Chief Building Official has issued a zoning 
compliance permit including a statement of his opinion that plans, specifications, and intended use of 
such structure does in all respects conform to the provisions of this Code. 
16.3.2 ?It shall be unlawful to change the type of use or occupancy of any building, or to extend any use 
of any lot on which there is a non-conforming use, until the Chief Building Official has issued of such 
intended use a zoning compliance permit including a statement of his opinion that the proposed use 
does in all respects conform to the provisions of this Code. 
16.3.3 ?Any repair, alteration, construction, removal, filling, leveling, excavation, or change of use must 
conform to the regulations for the district in which the structure or land is located; and the fact that in 
some instances a zoning compliance permit need not be secured in no way relaxes such 
requirements. 
16.3.4 ?Application for a zoning compliance permit shall be made not less than ten days prior to the time 
when a new or enlarged use of a building or premises or part thereof is intended to begin. This 
application shall be made in writing to the Chief Building Official on forms provided for that purpose. 
A record of all such applications shall be kept on file by the Chief Building Official. Any zoning 
compliance permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be valid only for a period of six 
months following the date of issuance. 
16.3.5 ?When the Chief Building Official receives an application for a zoning compliance permit which 
requires approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals such application shall be conveyed to the Board 
for action before a zoning compliance permit is issued. 
16.3.6 ?At the time a zoning compliance permit is issued by the Chief Building Official, the applicant 
shall also obtain a placard stating that a zoning compliance permit has been issued. This placard 
shall be conspicuously posted throughout the period of construction by the applicant on the premises 
for which the zoning compliance permit is issued; and said placard shall be posted in such a manner 
to permit viewing from the street on which the property fronts. 
16.3.7 ?The issuance of a zoning compliance permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any 
provisions of this Code. 


16.4 - FEES 
A schedule of fees for permits issued under the provisions of this Code may be established by the Board 
of Commissioners. 


16.5 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
16.5.1 ?No building or structure or use for which a zoning compliance permit has been issued shall be 
used or occupied until the Chief Building Official has, after final inspection, issued a Certificate of 
Occupancy indicating his opinion that all provisions of this Code are being complied with. 
16.5.2 ?However, the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall in no case be construed as waiving 
any provisions of this Code. 
16.5.3 ?Before a Certificate of Occupancy may be obtained all site improvements shown on the final 
plan, where required, shall have been completed and approved by the Chief Building Official. 
16.5.4 ?It is provided, that a portion of a commercial site prior to the completion of site may be occupied 
prior to the completion of site improvements if a certified check or performance bond, issued and 
secured by a reliable, legally authorized and established bonding firm, acceptable to the Board of 
Commissioners, in an amount sufficient to complete the work to be done as determined by the City 
Engineer, is posted with the Board of Commissioners authorizing the Board to use the proceeds from 
said bond or check to complete the required improvements in the event the developer fails to comply 
with these regulations within 12 months from the date of the agreement. 
16.5.5 ?ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, AND PENALTY: 
All things shown on the final plan, including all construction plans for site improvements, upon final 
approval by the City Commission, become part of the zoning regulations of the district, and nothing 
in conflict therewith shall be done on the premises. 


16.6 - PENALTIES 
16.6.1 ?Any person violating any provision of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as 
other misdemeanors as provided by laws. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a 
separate offense. 


16.7 - REMEDIES 
16.7.1 ?In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted or 
maintained, or any building, structure, or land used in violation of this Code, the Chief Building 
Official or any other adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such 
violation, in addition to other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate 
action or procedure to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
16.7.2 ?The Chief Building Official is charged with the duty to prosecute these matters before the City 
Court and is authorized to instigate such proceedings before this court. 
