CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF KINGSPORT, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen 
____________ 
Adopted: October 16, 2012 
Effective: October 26, 2012 
____________ 

____________ 
Dennis R. Phillips 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tom C. Parham, Vice-Mayor 
John Clark 
Valerie Joh 
Mike McIntire 
Tom Segelhorst 
Jantry Shupe 
Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
John G. Campbell 
City Manager 
____________ 
J. Michael Billingsley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
James H. Demming 
City Recorder 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KINGSPORT, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
John Clark 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mike McIntire, Vice-Mayor 
Darrell Duncan 
Colette George 
Tommy Olterman 
Tom C. Parham 
Tom Segelhorst 
Board of Alderman 
____________ 
Jeff Fleming 
City Manager 
____________ 
J. Michael Billingsley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
James Demming 
City Recorder/Chief Financial Officer 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kingsport, Tennessee. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1998 Code, as supplemented through August 7, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Angie Marshall, Municipal Clerk, and J. Michael Billingsley, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kingsport, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kingsport, Tennessee. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kingsport, Tennessee. 2012. 
ORDINANCE NO. 6248 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KINGSPORT; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF A PREVIOUS CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF UPDATING SAID CODE; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING A DATE WHEN SUCH CODE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; AND TO FIX THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to T.C.A. §6-54-508, notice of public hearing was published on the 14th day of August, 2012 and on the 12th day of September, 2012, in the Kingsport Times, a newspaper of general circulation; and 
    WHEREAS, a public hearing was held by the Board of Mayor and Alderman on the 21st day of August, 2012 and on the 2 nd day of October, 2012. 
Now therefore, 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF KINGSPORT, as follows: 
    SECTION I. That the 2012 Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 114 inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Kingsport". 
    SECTION II. That subject to the exceptions provided herein, the entire 1998 Code of Ordinances, adopted February 23, 1998, is hereby repealed effective October 26, 2012, except as herein provided. 
    SECTION III. That all provisions of the 2012 Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 26th day of October, 2012; except Section 66-102 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 66-102. Projectile weapons or devices. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or be in possession of any firearm, including shotgun, rifle or pistol, except as otherwise provided in T.C.A. § 39-17-1311, bow and arrow, crossbow, rubber flippers, blowgun, slingshot, airgun or other weapon listed in T.C.A. § 39-17-1302 while in or upon or transversing, using or crossing any public park, greenbelt, playground, nature preserve, civic center or building or facility, area or property owned, used or operated by the city for park or recreational purposes, or nature preserve established, provided or controlled by the city, within or without the corporate limits thereof. 
(b) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1) Duly authorized law enforcement officers within the course and scope of their official duties or to employees of Bays Mountain Park when so authorized by the director of Bays Mountain Park; 
(2) Only to the extent a person strictly conforms the person's behavior to the requirements of one of the following: 
a. A person authorized to carry a handgun pursuant to T.C.A. § 39-17-1351; 
b. A person hunting during the lawful hunting season on lands owned by the city and designated as open to hunting by law or by the appropriate official; 
c. A person possessing unloaded hunting weapons while transversing the grounds of any public recreational building or property for the purpose of gaining access to public or private lands open to hunting with the intent to hunt on the public or private lands unless the public recreational building or property is posted prohibiting entry; 
d. A person possessing guns or knives when conducting or attending "gun and knife shows" when the program has been approved by the administrator of the recreational building or property; 
e. A person entering the property for the sole purpose of delivering or picking up passengers and who does not remove any weapon from the vehicle or utilize it in any manner, or 
f. A person who possesses or carries a firearm for the purpose of sport or target shooting and sport or target shooting is permitted in the park or recreational area. 
(3) At any time the person's behavior no longer strictly conforms to one of the classifications in subsection (b)(2), the person shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a). 
    SECTION IV. That all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Kingsport, enacted on or after June 5, 2012, and not included in the 2012 code, are recognized and continued in force. 
    SECTION V. That the repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not affect the following: 
a)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; 
b)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City, or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation of the City; 
c)  Any right or franchise granted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to any person, firm, or corporation; 
d)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
e)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
f)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades of any street in the City; 
g)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements; levying or imposing taxes therefore, or any fee or tax; 
h)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision plan in the City or Planning Region; 
i)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for annexation or zoning of property. 
j)  Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    SECTION VI. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a penalty of not less than ten ($10.00) dollars nor more than fifty ($50.00) dollars. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies at law or equity, including, but not limited to abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    SECTION VII. All additions or amendments to the Code which are passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that references to the Code include additions and amendments; and that the City Recorder or designee shall insert such additions or amendments in its designated place, and may extract from the Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, or make appropriate notations thereon. 
    SECTION VIII. Ordinances adopted after June 5, 2012 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to such provisions in the 2012 Code. 
    SECTION IX. That this ordinance shall take effect from and after October 26, 2012, the public welfare of the City of Kingsport, Tennessee requiring it. 
  
DENNIS R. PHILLIPS, Mayor 
  
ATTEST: 
  
ANGELA MARSHALL 
Deputy City Recorder 
  
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
  
       J. MICHAEL BILLINGSLEY, City Attorney 
  
PASSED ON 1ST READING:  October 2, 2012  
  
PASSED ON 2ND READING:  October 16, 2012  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 6231  7-24-2012 Include 1 6242  9- 4-2012 Include 1 6245  9-18-2012 Include 1 6248 10-16-2012 Include 1 6268 11-20-2012 Include 1 6305  5- 7-2013 Include 1 6306  5- 7-2013 Include 1 6322  6-18-2013 Include 1 6343  8-20-2013 Include 1 6354 10-15-2013 Include 1 6360 11-19-2013 Include 1 6367 12- 3-2013 Include 1 6373  1- 7-2014 Include 1 6374  1- 7-2014 Include 1 6383  3- 4-2014 Include 1 6385  4- 1-2014 Include 1 6386  4- 1-2014 Include 1 6387  4- 1-2014 Include 1 6388  4- 1-2014 Include 1 6405  6-17-2014 Include 1 6430  8-19-2014 Include 1 6432  9- 2-2014 Include 1 6440 10- 7-2014 Include 1 6451 12- 2-2014 Include 1 6456 12-16-2014 Include 1 6463  1- 6-2015 Include 1 6469  4- 7-2015 Include 1 6474  4- 7-2015 Include 1 6475  4-21-2015 Include 1 6526 10-20-2015 Include 1 6533  1-19-2016 Include 1 6544  2-16-2016 Include 1 6545  2-16-2016 Include 1 6547  2-16-2016 Include 1 6559  4- 5-2016 Include 1 6569  6- 7-2016 Include 1 6586  6-21-2016 Include 1 6587  6-21-2016 Include 1 6589  7- 5-2016 Include 1 6602  9-20-2016 Include 1 6604  9-20-2016 Include 1 6632 12-20-2016 Include 1 6648  2-21-2017 Include 1  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Part I, Charter and Related Laws, consists of subparts A and B. Subpart A is the basic Charter, chapter 76, Private Acts of 1917, as amended. Subpart B is various acts not specifically amendatory of chapter 76, as amended, relating to the city, of a general and permanent nature. To facilitate preparation of the state law comparative tables, all references to the Tennessee Code have been conformed to the form used in the Code of Ordinances. The section numbers of the basic Charter, as amended, have been retained; however, catchlines and italicized catchphrases have been added to facilitate indexing and references. When a section has been amended, only that section as amended is set out; likewise, repealed provisions have been deleted. In addition, directory provisions of acts subsequent to the Charter and not of a substantive or regulatory nature, including severability and repealer provisions, and effective dates have been deleted. In some instances, words in brackets have been added to correct obvious errors or to clarify the meaning where the same is ambiguous; and capitalizations, punctuations and misspellings have been corrected without notation; however, the substantive content of the sections has not been changed. 

Subpart A - CHARTER 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME, BOUNDARIES AND POWERS 

Sec. 1. - City designated, constituted body corporate and politic; corporate limits. 
    The inhabitants within the corporate limits and boundaries hereinafter described, in Sullivan County, Tennessee, shall be and continue a body politic and corporate by the name of "City of Kingsport," and as such shall have perpetual succession; may have a corporate seal and sue and be sued. 
    The said corporate limits of [the] City of Kingsport shall embrace the territory within the following boundary, to wit: [...] 
Editor's note- The corporate limits of the city are as set out in the original Charter and in subsequent private acts, ordinances, and referendums. The actual text of amendments to such limits is not set out in this publication but such amendments in ordinance form are listed in the comparative table following this Charter. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate powers. 
    Execution of powers. City of Kingsport shall have the power and authority: 
(1)  Assessment, levy and collection of taxes. To assess, levy and collect taxes for all general and special purposes on all subjects or objects of taxation taxable by law for state, county or city purposes. 
(2)  Classification of subjects taxed. To adopt such classifications of subjects and objects of taxation as may not be contrary to law. 
(3)  Special assessments. To make special assessments for local improvements. 
(4)  Contracts. To contract and be contracted with. 
(5)  Debts: evidence of indebtedness. To incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise and to give any appropriate evidence thereof in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(6)  Bonds, warrants, promissory notes or orders. To issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner dispose of negotiable or non-negotiable, interest-bearing or non-interest-bearing bonds, warrants, promissory notes or orders of the city, upon credit of the city, or solely upon credit of specific property owned by the city, or solely upon credit of income derived from any property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or solely upon credit of proceeds of special assessments for local improvements, or upon any two (2) or more such credits. 
(7)  Expending money. To expend the money of the city for all lawful purposes. 
(8)  General powers as to property. To acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of property, real or personal, and any estate or interest therein, within or without the city or state. 
(9)  Condemnation. To condemn property, real or personal, or any easement, interest or estate or use therein either within or without the city, for present or future public use; such condemnation shall be made and effected in such manner as may be provided by general law. 
(10)  Trust powers. To take and hold property within or without the city or state upon trust; and to administer trusts for the public benefit. 
(11)  Municipal public utilities. To acquire, construct, own, operate and maintain or sell, lease, mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any estate or interest therein, or any other utility of service to the city, its inhabitants, or any part thereof. 
(12)  Public utility franchises. To grant to any person, firm, association or corporation franchises for public utilities and public services to be furnished the city and those therein. Such power to grant franchises shall embrace the power hereby expressly conferred, to grant exclusive franchises; and when an exclusive franchise is granted it shall be exclusive not only as against any other person, firm, association or corporation, but also as against the city. Franchises may be granted for a period of twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer. The board of mayor and aldermen may prescribe in each grant of a franchise, the rates, fares, charges and regulations that may be made by the grantee of the franchise and may reserve the right to oversee future fares and charges. Franchises may by their terms apply to territory within the corporate limits of city at the date of franchise, and as said corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing streets, alleys and other thoroughfares, and to any other streets, alleys and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened. 
(13)  Public utility contracts. To make contracts with any person, firm, association or corporation, for public utilities and public services to be furnished to the city and those therein. Such power to make contracts shall embrace the power, hereby expressly conferred, to make exclusive contracts; and when an exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive not only as against any other person, firm, association or corporation, but also against the city itself. Such contracts may be entered into for a period of twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer. The board of mayor and aldermen may prescribe in each such contract entered into, the rates, fares, charges and regulations that may be made by the person, firm, association or corporation with whom the contract is made. Such contracts may by their terms apply to territory within the corporate limits of the city at date of the contract, and as said corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing streets, alleys and other thoroughfares and to any other streets, alleys and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened. 
(14)  Regulation and extension of public utilities. To prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the construction, maintenance, equipment, operation and services of public utilities and compel, from time to time, reasonable extensions of facilities for such services, but nothing herein shall be construed to permit the alteration or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any exclusive franchise granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under subsections (12) and (13) of this section. 
(15)  Establishment, alteration, etc., of streets, sewers, etc. To establish, open, relocate, vacate, abandon, abolish, alter, widen, extend, grade, improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light, sprinkle and clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public grounds and squares, wharves, bridges, viaducts, subways, tunnels, sewers and drains, within or without the corporate limits, and to regulate use thereof within the corporate limits. Property may be taken and appropriated for such purposes in the manner provided by law. 
(16)  Construction, improvement of streets, assessment therefor. To construct, improve, reconstruct and re-improve by opening, extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling, macadamizing, draining or otherwise improving any streets, highways, avenues, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits and to assess a portion of cost of such improvements upon the property abutting upon or adjacent to such streets, highways or alleys under, and as provided by either: 
(a)  Chapter 276, Public Acts of 1907, entitled: An Act to empower cities or towns of this State having a population of not less than 4,500 and not more than 4,800 inhabitants, under and by Federal Census of 1900 or any subsequent Federal Census to open, widen, extend, grade, pave, gravel, macadamize, gutter, construct sidewalks, or lay and construct permanent sewers in, curb and park, or otherwise improve streets, avenues, alleys and highways of said municipalities within corporate limits thereof; to levy special taxes, assessments, or local contributions on real estate abutting on said streets, avenues, alleys, and highways; to provide a method of assessing and collecting all or a portion of cost of said improvements on, from and out of property and property owners abutting on said streets, avenues, alleys, and highways, and of paying for same; and to authorize issuance of bonds or certificates of indebtedness to pay for same, and to provide for redemption of said bonds or certificates of indebtedness; 
(b)  Title 7, chapters 32 and 33, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 7-32-101 et seq., 7-33-101 et seq.] as same may be amended from time to time. 
(17)  Licensing and regulation of businesses, occupations, professions. To license and regulate all persons, firms, corporations, companies and associations engaged in any business, occupation, calling, profession or trade not prohibited by law. 
(18)  License tax on animals, things, pursuits, activities. To impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business, vocation, pursuit, privilege or calling, not prohibited by law. 
(19)  Prohibition, regulation, suppression of acts, conduct, practices; general police powers. To define and prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent and regulate all acts, practices, conduct, business, auctions, occupations, callings, trades, uses of property and all other things whatsoever detrimental or liable to be detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the city and to exercise general police powers. 
(20)  Control of occupations and practices liable to be detrimental. To prescribe limits within which business occupations and practices liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the health, morals, security or general welfare of people may lawfully be established, conducted or maintained. 
(21)  Weights and measures; inspection, weighing, testing of commodity; fee, standards. To regulate, license and impact weights and measures; to inspect, test, measure and weigh any article of consumption or use within the city, and to charge reasonable fees therefor. 
(22)  Building regulations; inspection of buildings. To regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area, lot, location, height, construction and materials of all buildings and structures, and to inspect all buildings, lands and places as to their condition for health, cleanliness and safety, and when necessary, prevent the use thereof and require any alterations or changes necessary to make them healthful, clean or safe. 
(23)  [Public institutions and services.] To provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive or penal institutions, departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences and services. 
(24)  Jail or detention facilities. To purchase or construct, maintain and establish jails or detention facilities for confinement and detention. 
(25)  Enforcement of ordinances, regulations, rules; limit of fine and imprisonment. To enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by means of fines, forfeitures, penalties, or by action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction or by any one or more of such means and to impose costs as a part thereof. 
(26)  Loaning credit of city; stock holding. To give or loan credit of the city to or in aid of any person, company, association or corporation and to become stockholder with others in any company, association or corporation in the manner provided by article II, § 29, of the Constitution of Tennessee. 
(27)  Schools. To establish schools, determine the necessary boards, officers and teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation, to purchase or otherwise acquire land for, or assess a fee for the use of or impact upon, school houses, playgrounds and other purposes connected with the schools, to purchase or erect all necessary buildings and to do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain and operate a complete education system within city. 
(28)  Animals. To regulate, tax, license or suppress the keeping or going at large of animals within the city; to impound the same and in default of redemption to sell or kill the same. 
(29)  Municipal elections. To enforce the election provisions of this Charter and to exercise all powers relating to regulation and control of municipal elections not contrary to other provisions of this Charter or to general laws respecting municipal elections. 
(30)  Municipal stores for sale of intoxicating liquors. To the extent authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 57, [T.C.A. title 57] to conduct, operate, maintain and control municipally owned stores for the retail sale of intoxicating liquors, subject to a local option election by voters pursuant to election laws under Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 57-3-106 [T.C.A. § 57-3-106], as amended; that revenues from such operation shall be first used to pay state tax obligations and the remainder shall become a part of the general fund of the City of Kingsport. 
(31)  Fair housing. To enact and establish a fair housing code and enforce fair housing ordinances, to make unlawful and to prohibit discriminatory housing practices in the sale or rental of real property, because of race, color, religion or national origin within the city. 
(32)  Taxicabs and contract carriers. To regulate the operation of taxicab and contract carriers within the city. 
(33)  Power to accept gifts or donations. To accept gifts or donations of real or personal property, and any estate or interest therein, within or without the city or state. 
(34)  Miscellaneous assessments. To assess against abutting property within the corporate limits the cost of planting shade trees, removing from sidewalks all accumulations of snow, ice and earth, cutting and removing obnoxious weeds and rubbish, street lighting, street sweeping, street sprinkling, street flushing and street oiling; the removal and disposal of garbage and refuse, the cleaning and rendering sanitary of closets and privies, as provided by this Charter or in such other manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(35)  Armory. To authorize the city for itself or to participate along with the State and/or Federal Government to acquire necessary land and buildings as a site for an armory and to erect, construct, equip and maintain an armory or use same as an armory. 
(36)  Collection and disposition of sewage, garbage, refuse. To collect and dispose of drainage, stormwater, sewage, offal, ashes, garbage and refuse by disposing of same in any lawful manner, or to license and regulate such collection and disposal, and may fund such acts by taxation, special assessment to the property owner, user fees or other charges. 
(37)  Departments, functions and services. To provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive or penal institutions, departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities, convenience and services. 
(38)  Firefighting assistance. To provide, authorize and empower the city to contract with any person, firm or corporation to furnish fire service and to engage in extinguishing fires within or without the corporate limits of the city and within or without the state, and to aid and assist any political subdivision or other governmental agency in extinguishing fires within or without the corporate limits of the city and within or without the state, by furnishing and sending its firemen and/or firefighting equipment within or without the city and within or without the state to fight or to engage in fighting and extinguishing fires, in and to any and all property, and to provide, authorize and empower the city on its own volition, to send its firemen and/or firefighting equipment within or without the corporate limits of the city and within or without the state, in order to save lives or property or for purposes of saving lives or property. 
(39)  Special code enforcement officers. To authorize the city manager to appoint, in their discretion, one (1) or more special code enforcement officers upon showing the necessity thereof, to assist in enforcement of the code of ordinances of the city. The duties of special code enforcement officers shall be limited to enforcement of those chapters, divisions, articles and sections of the code of ordinances of the city as are necessary and required for such officers to fulfill their duties and responsibilities as employees of the city assigned to the police department, fire department, department of public works, animal control division, and such other departments or divisions as may be required by ordinance from time to time to assist in enforcement of particular sections of the code of ordinances of the city. Appointment as special code enforcement officer is revocable at any time by the city manager. Special code enforcement officers shall be empowered only to issue a summons for ordinance violations. Special code enforcement officers shall not be authorized to carry a firearm. Before entering upon the performance of duties, special code enforcement officers shall execute and file with the city recorder a public officer's liability bond in such amount as may be fixed by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(40)  Powers not specifically enumerated. To have and exercise all powers which now or hereafter it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate as fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 1, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 68, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 106, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1968, ch. 486, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1974, ch. 281, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1982, ch. 198, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1984, ch. 159; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 44; Pvt. Acts 1996, ch. 177, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 1) 
Editor's note- The department of public safety has been split into two departments, the police department and the fire department. Also, with regard to subsection (25) enumerating the city's enforcement authority, the Municipal Court Reform Act of 2004, effective March 1, 2005, and codified at T.C.A. § 6-4-301 et seq., limits the city's enforcement authority to enforcing ordinances that are equivalent to Class C misdemeanors (basically $50.00 fine, enforceable by 30 days incarceration) with certain exceptions enumerated in the statutes cited. 
Sec. 3. - Effect of grant of particular powers. 
    The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words or phrases granting powers, nor shall a grant or failure to grant power in this article impair a power granted in any other part of this Charter; and whether powers, objects or purposes are expressed conjunctively or disjunctively, they shall be construed so as to permit the city to exercise freely any one or more such powers as to any one or more such objects for any one or more such purposes. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 1, § 3) 
ARTICLE IA. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 1. - Public Acts [of] 1907, chapter 276, to govern public improvements. 
    The provisions of chapter 276 of the Public Acts of Tennessee of 1907, except as modified by the provisions of this article, shall apply to and shall govern the construction, improving and reconstruction and re-improving by opening, extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling, draining, or otherwise improving any streets, highways, avenues, alleys, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city and the assessments levied upon the property abutting upon or adjacent to such streets, highways or alleys, provided the city or its officers or agents or the property owners thereof, elect to construct an improvement under the provisions of that act. The board of mayor and aldermen may by resolution choose to use any other state law it determines is advantageous for the city to use to accomplish any improvements set out in this article, including Tennessee Code Annotated Title 7, chapters 32 and 33 [T.C.A. §§ 7-32-101 et seq., 7-33-101 et seq.]. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 2) 
Sec. 2. - Costs of grading streets. 
    The city at large shall bear all expenses of grading the streets to profile grade, including all cost incidental thereto, and the subgrading or excavating or filling of the section or slab not exceeding twelve (12) inches in depth which will be occupied or displaced by the pavement slab shall be divided in the same manner as the paving costs are divided. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Costs of street pavement. 
    No change in the method of dividing the cost of street pavement from that shown in chapter 276 of the Acts of 1907 is authorized hereby, except that property zoned in a residence district under an ordinance of the City of Kingsport shall not be charged with any portion of the cost of street paving which the city estimates to exceed the cost of paving twenty-seven (27) feet between curbs, and in determining the extent to which such abutting property zoned in a residence district under an ordinance of the City of Kingsport shall be assessable for the cost of paving, credit shall be given for the width of any existing permanent pavement for which a portion of the cost has previously been assessed by the city against such abutting property. The city shall pay from its funds the portion of the cost of said street paving not assessed against abutting property. 
    The term "existing permanent pavement" as used in the preceding paragraph shall mean six (6) inch concrete pavement or its equivalent, as determined by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1957, ch. 18, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1959, ch. 217, § 1) 
Sec. 4. - Cost of sidewalks. 
    That portion of sidewalks extending into the street intersection shall be chargeable to the city at large. Sidewalks constructed in front of the property between street intersections shall be chargeable to the property in front of which it is constructed. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Cost of curbs and gutters. 
    The cost of curb and gutter shall be divided in the same manner as the cost of street paving. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Cost of sanitary sewers. 
    The cost of sanitary sewers built in street and alley intersections and that part of the trunk line or lateral of the sanitary sewer built to provide a necessary connection between the sanitary sewer in the improvement district then being improved and the nearest sewer main or branch thereof or other point of disposal or outlet for sewage, and of sewers laid in alleys, streets or other right-of-way areas outside of the improvement district where assessing a portion of their cost against the owners of property outside such improvement district is impracticable and improper in the judgment of the board of mayor and aldermen of said city, shall be chargeable to the city at large except as hereinafter provided. The cost of other sanitary sewers shall be chargeable to the owners of abutting property. The cost of manholes, flush tank siphons, etc., built in the sanitary sewers shall be deemed a part of the sanitary sewer system and their cost shall be divided as indicated by their location. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Cost of stormwater drains and sewers. 
    The entire cost of stormwater drains or stormwater sewers shall be chargeable to the city at large, including the cost of any stormwater drain or sewer which is necessary to be built outside of the limits of the improvement district in order to connect the stormwater sewer for such district with the stormwater main or other point of disposal or outlet for stormwater. 
    Stormwater drain costs shall include cost of catchbasins, manholes, and all facilities directly connected with stormwater sewers. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Cost of bridges and culverts. 
    The cost of bridges and culverts shall be chargeable to the city at large; provided, however, this shall not prevent the board of mayor and aldermen of said city from assessing property abutting upon any bridge in any improvement district with its proper share of the cost of the street paving, sidewalks, sewers and other improvements. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Extension of sanitary sewers or stormwater drains. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall have power to extend sanitary sewers or stormwater drains from any improvement district to a main sanitary sewer or to the principal stormwater drain system of the city or to some proper point of disposal or outlet for said sewers or stormwater drains, notwithstanding such extension necessitates traversing lands not included in the improvement district. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall have power in its discretion by resolution to organize the property benefited by the extension of such sanitary sewers into an improvement district in the manner provided in sections 11 and 12 of this article and to assess the property included within said district with three-fourths of so much of the cost of the extension of said sewers as would represent the cost of a sewer of the size required to serve such district, notice of its intention to levy such assessments shall be given and a hearing thereon held in the manner provided in chapter 276 of the Acts of Tennessee of 1907. The provisions of chapter 276 of the Acts of 1907 shall apply to the levy and collection of such assessments, and such assessments shall be of equal dignity with assessments levied under the provisions of this act [Private Acts of 1919, ch. 538]. In lieu of creating an improvement district and levying assessments as herein provided, the board of mayor and aldermen may in its discretion establish tapping charges for the privileges of using the sewer to be paid in full when the tapper begins to use the sewer. 
    Bonds of the city at large may be issued to defray the cost of extending sanitary sewers or stormwater drains through such outlying sections, as a part of the bond issues for the original district served by such sewers or drains. In the event an improvement district is created and assessments levied as provided in this section, bonds may be issued for the property owners' share of the cost of said improvement as well as the city's share in the manner provided in chapter 276 of the Acts of Tennessee of 1907. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Location of sanitary sewers or stormwater drains outside district served; creation of additional district. 
    Whenever geographical or engineering considerations require it, it shall be lawful to locate a sanitary sewer or stormwater drain for any district in an alley or other right-of-way strip, on another street paralleling the street comprising the improvement district and to include the cost thereof in the city improvement bonds issued for such improvement district; or the board of mayor and aldermen shall have the same authority by resolution to create in its discretion an additional improvement district and to levy assessments for any sanitary sewers located outside the limits of the district first created including the right hereby expressly conferred to levy assessments on all property receiving direct benefit from such sanitary sewers, notwithstanding the fact that said property does not abut upon the improvement district itself. Notice of the intention to levy such assessments and a hearing thereon shall be held in the manner provided in the preceding section. Said assessments shall be secured by like liens and shall be subject to all the provisions made for the improvement district. Assessments and bonds may be issued for the purpose of raising funds to pay the proportion of the cost thereof charged to the city as well as the property owners' share as provided in chapter 276 of the Acts of Tennessee, 1907. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Creation of improvement districts. 
    Full power and authority is hereby given to the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Kingsport to create an improvement district by resolution wholly on the initiative of the board of mayor and aldermen, without the necessity for obtaining a petition signed by the owners of abutting property, under the conditions named herein, and such districts shall be improved and all proceeding taken after the creation of the said districts, as provided in chapter 276 of the Acts of Tennessee of 1907, and as set forth in this act [Private Acts of 1919, ch. 538] except that the creating resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen shall entirely supplant the property owners' petition. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Resolution directing improvements; adoption, contents, notice; hearing, final resolution. 
    When the board of mayor and aldermen shall determine to create and improve any improvement districts as authorized by the preceding section, and a portion of the cost thereof is to be assessed against the property abutting or adjacent to the street, highway, avenue, alleys or other public place to be improved, it shall adopt a resolution directing that such improvement or improvements shall be made, which resolution shall describe the nature and extent of the work, the general character of alternative materials to be used, the location of the terminal points of the proposed improvements and the streets, alleys, highways or other public places, or parts thereof, on which such improvements are to be made, and shall direct that plans and specifications and estimates of the proposed improvements be prepared by the city engineer, or may adopt plans for such work already prepared. Such plans, specifications and estimates shall be placed on file in the office of the city engineer, where the property owners who may be affected by such improvements may examine the same; and the said resolution shall appoint a time when the board of mayor and aldermen shall meet, which shall be not less than two (2) weeks after the date of the first publication of notice of said resolution, to hear any objections or protests that may be made to making said improvement, the manner of making same of [or] the character of material to be used. 
    Notice of the passage of such resolution and of the hearing to be held thereunder shall be given by publishing a notice once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in any newspaper of general circulation within the city. It shall not be necessary to set out the resolution in full in such notice, but the notice shall state the general character and the location of the proposed improvements and the time and place of the hearing at which the board of mayor and aldermen of said municipality shall meet to hear protests against the making of such improvements. 
    At the time and place thus appointed the board of mayor and aldermen shall meet and at such meeting or at the time and place to which the same may be adjourned from time to time, all persons whose property may be affected by such improvement, may appear in person or by attorney or by petition and protest against the making of such improvements, the material to be used or the manner of making the improvements, and the board of mayor and aldermen shall consider such objections and protests, if any, and may confirm, amend, modify or rescind such original resolution in its discretion. The resolution adopted at such hearing shall set forth the determination of the board of mayor and aldermen as to the action to be taken for such district. Failure to object or protest at the time of the confirmation of the original resolution shall constitute a waiver of all rights of protest. 
    Upon the determination of the board of mayor and aldermen to proceed with the work, it shall be the duty of the said board to proceed with the construction of the improvements thus authorized, which may be done by contract or with the city's own forces, in the same manner as set forth in chapter 276 of the Acts of 1907. 
    Provided further, that nothing contained herein shall operate to prevent the creation of improvement districts by petition signed by the owners of fifty-one (51) percent or more of property abutting on the proposed improvement district. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 12; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 1) 
Sec. 13. - Annual installments of improvement bonds. 
    In determining the annual installments of improvement district bonds to be issued by the City of Kingsport, it shall not be obligatory to divide the amount for which improvement district bonds are issued into annual installments exactly equal, but such annual installments shall be as nearly equal as the denominations of said bonds prescribed by the board of mayor and aldermen will permit; provided, however, that unless the maturities of said bonds shall be exactly equal the denomination prescribed by said board of mayor and aldermen for said issue shall not be greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 13; Pvt. Acts 1927, ch. 104, §§ 1, 2; Pvt. Acts 1927, ch. 503, § 1) 
Sec. 14. - Improvement bonds; sinking fund and tax levy to secure payment. 
    Improvement district bonds and city improvement bonds issued under the authority conferred by this act [Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538], shall be the direct obligations of the City of Kingsport and the board of mayor and aldermen is hereby authorized and empowered to pledge the full faith, credit and revenues of the city and all real and personal property taxable therein to secure the prompt payment of the principal and the interest thereof as they may become due and payable; and the board of mayor and aldermen shall annually levy sufficient taxes for the payment of the annual interest upon and to provide a sinking fund for city improvement bonds heretofore or hereafter issued; and in the event that the funds derived from assessments are insufficient to pay the annual interest upon and to provide for the payment of the principal of improvement district bonds heretofore or hereafter issued as the same shall become due and payable, the board of mayor and aldermen shall annually levy a tax upon the real and personal property of the city or upon the property originally assessed to produce funds to redeem such bonds, sufficient to meet said deficiency. 
    The validity of bonds issued hereunder shall not be affected by any invalidity of proceedings taken in connection with the authorization of improvements financed in whole or in part by the issuance of such bonds or any invalidity in the levy of assessments against property benefitted by said improvements. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 14; Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 69, § 1) 
Sec. 15. - Validation of improvement bonds and proceedings prior to article. 
    All city improvement bonds and improvement district bonds heretofore issued by the City of Kingsport under the provisions of chapter 76 of the [Private] Acts of 1917, and chapter 276 of the [Public] Acts of 1907 are hereby validated and all proceedings pending at the time this article takes effect under the provisions of chapter 76 of the [Private] Acts of 1917, and chapter 276 of the [Public] Acts of 1907, including contracts for the construction of the improvements, the apportionment of the cost thereof and the proceedings for the levy of the assessments are likewise validated and confirmed and authority is hereby given for the issuance of bonds for the purpose of paying the city's share as well as the property owners' share of the cost of said improvement, notwithstanding any defects in said proceedings or the want of authority to issue said bonds. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 15) 
Sec. 16. - Temporary promissory notes pending bond issue. 
    The City of Kingsport shall have full authority and power to issue and sell temporary promissory notes to provide funds for carrying on the work of improving improvement districts until the receipt of proceeds of bond issues provided therefor. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Method of financing provided in chapter 276, Public Acts [of] 1907, not exclusive. 
    The method of constructing and financing improvements set forth in chapter 276 [Public Acts of 1907], as amended by the Charter of the City of Kingsport and by this article is intended as an alternative method for the exercise of the powers enumerated and shall not be considered as laying down a method to be exclusively followed as against other methods duly provided. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 17) 
Sec. 18. - Amendments to chapter 276, Public Acts [of] 1907, not applicable; construction pursuant to chapter 18, Public Acts [of] 1913, F.E.S., permissible. 
    Wherever in this act chapter 276 of the [Public] Acts of Tennessee of 1907 is referred to, it shall not be construed to include amendments to that act; but only chapter 276 of the [Public] Acts of Tennessee, 1907, exclusive of all subsequent and future amendments shall be deemed applicable to the City of Kingsport or made a part of the Charter of said city; nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the construction of local improvements in the manner set forth in chapter 18 of the Public Acts of Tennessee, First Extra Session, 1913, which is made applicable to the City of Kingsport by section 2 of article I of this Charter. 
(Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 538, § 18) 
Sec. 19. - Supplementary method and procedure for the creation of improvement districts to provide street illumination in residential areas. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen, upon petition signed by the owner or owners of fifty-one percent (51%) of the frontage of the lots or parcels of land abutting on such portions of any streets within the corporate limits as set out in the petition, shall have power to provide by ordinance for the improvement of such street by erecting and equipping lamp posts, light towers or other instrumentalities to light such street or the part thereof in front of the property abutting such street or part thereof; and it shall have power to provide for making special levies or assessments or exacting local contributions upon, on and from, the land abutting on such street to be improved in the manner hereinafter set forth, so as to provide funds to pay for such improvements. 
(1)  In order to bring the contemplated improvement of any street within the provisions of this act, the owner, or owners of not less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the frontage of the lots or parcels of land abutting on such street shall first file with the board of mayor and aldermen a petition requesting the establishment of an improvement district and the lighting thereof. Such petition shall set forth the point on such street where such system of lighting shall being [begin] and terminate; the character of posts, towers, standards or instrumentalities desired, and shall aver the willingness of each of the signers of said petition to pay for installing such lighting system, to be assessed according to the frontage of the property owner by each petitioner. Each signer shall, opposite his name, designate the location of his lot by street number or otherwise, and the frontage thereof abutting on said street. A substantial compliance with this section shall be sufficient to authorize the board of mayor and aldermen to proceed in the premises, and no formal or immaterial defect shall invalidate any petition. 
(2)  Upon the filing of such petition, the board of mayor and aldermen may, in its discretion, either grant same or reject the same. If such petition is granted, the board of mayor and aldermen shall have full power and authority to cause such street to be improved by adequate lighting thereof. 
(3)  Before any work shall be done on any improvement herein authorized, it shall be the duty of the board of mayor and aldermen to adopt an ordinance that said improvement shall be made, which shall specify that the work is being done by virtue of the petition filed, shall name the location and terminal points of the district to be improved by adequate lighting, and shall give a reference to said petition by the date of its filing. The estimated total cost of such improvement, together with the maximum rate per front foot shall be inserted in said ordinance, and after the adoption and confirmation of such ordinance, the city shall have no right to collect more per front foot than the maximum rate per front foot set forth in such ordinance, but shall pay any excess out of its general funds. Provided, however, that no lot shall be assessed in an amount in excess of the benefits to such lot, the matter of benefits to be passed upon and finally determined by the board of mayor and aldermen at or before the time for levying said assessments; and should any assessment exceed the amount of benefits to accrue to such lot by reason of said improvements, then such excess shall be borne by the city. A notice of the passage of such ordinance shall be given by publication one (1) time in a daily newspaper published within the City of Kingsport admonishing all interested property owners to appear on a day to be named therein, not earlier than ten (10) days after the date of publication, to protest against the confirmation of such ordinance if they so desire. Said notice need not set forth the entire ordinance but shall contain a description of the terminal points of the proposed district, shall set forth in general terms the proposed improvement, the total estimated cost thereof, and the maximum rate per front foot to be assessed against the abutting property. On the day prescribed in said notice, the board of mayor and aldermen shall meet to hear remonstrances or protests against the construction of said improvement, and at said meeting, or at a time and place to which the same may be adjourned, all persons whose property will be affected by said improvement may appear in person, by attorney, or by petition and protest against the construction of said improvement, and after hearing such protests, if any, the board of mayor and aldermen may confirm, modify or rescind such ordinance. If protest[s] be filed and overruled, no work shall be done or contract let for ten (10) days from the date of such overruling, within which time it shall be the duty of all persons whose protests have been overruled and who claim that said improvement, as ordered, is for any reason illegal, to cause to be reviewed the right of the board of mayor and aldermen to make said improvement in the form or shape ordered by filing the proper proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction. All persons failing to protest in the manner above set forth, or failing to file proceedings for review in a court of competent jurisdiction within the time herein prescribed, shall be conclusively held to have consented to the improvement and to pay the proportionate part of the cost thereof to be assessed against the lands abutting said improvement, and shall be conclusively held to waive any objections to the power of the municipality to make said improvement as ordered. 
(4)  From and after the date the confirmation of any such ordinance becomes final, the City of Kingsport shall have the power to contract for the construction of such improvement or any part thereof and, or, shall have power to construct the same or any part thereof with its own forces, but an accurate account of the cost thereof shall be kept. Every item of cost, together with an unitemized charge of ten percent (10%) of all sums otherwise expended, which shall cover the cost to the city of printing, advertising, clerical help, collection of funds, legal advice, stenographic fees, abstracts, plats and accounting, shall be assessable against the abutting property in the manner herein provided, subject, however, to the maximum rate per front foot set forth in such ordinance, or order of confirmation or modification. 
(5)  After the completion and acceptance of said improvement, the board of mayor and aldermen shall, subject to the limitation of the maximum rate per front foot, assess the entire cost of said improvement upon and against the several lots of land abutting the street according to their respective frontage; and all such assessments shall be and constitute a lien on the respective lots upon which they are levied, superior to all other liens except those of the state and county for taxes or the municipality for opening, widening, paving and otherwise improving the street itself. The enforcement by the state, or county, or city, of its lien for taxes or front foot assessments on any lot upon which has been levied an assessment for any improvement authorized by this act, shall not operate to discharge, or in any manner, affect the city's lien for said assessment; but the purchaser at a tax sale, or sale to enforce the lien of a front foot assessment for street purposes, shall take the same subject to the lien of an assessment and if bought by the state, county, or city, any conveyance of the title thus acquired, or any redemption, shall be subject to the lien of such assessment. 
(6)  When the amount to be assessed against each lot of land for any improvement shall have been ascertained, the city recorder shall cause a well-bound book to be prepared which shall show the names of the owners of the property assessed, if known, and opposite each name, the description of such lot or parcel of land assessed belonging to such owner and the amount assessed against each, and shall contain an appropriate column in which payments may be credited and the lien of the assessment marked "Satisfied," and if the name of the owner to be assessed be unknown, said book shall contain under the head of "Owner Unknown," a list of property to be assessed, the owners of which are unknown. After the completion of the entries in said book, the city recorder shall thereupon give notice by one (1) publication in a daily newspaper published in the city, that said book is open to inspection at his office. 
    In addition, said notice shall contain the general character of the improvement and the location thereof, and designate a time and place, not less than ten (10) days from the date of publication, at which the board of mayor and aldermen will meet to hear and determine any objection or defense presented by any owner or [of] property affected by said assessment. All persons whose property is to be assessed may, at any time, on or before the date named in said notice, and before the meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen, file in writing in the office of the city recorder their objection or defense to the proposed assessment of the amount thereof, and at the meeting on the date named, or any date to which said meeting may be adjourned, said board of mayor and aldermen shall hear and determine said objections or defenses to the assessments and after so doing, shall confirm, modify or set aside the assessment. If no objection or defense to the assessment or the amount thereof is filed within the time prescribed herein, or if the property owner fails to appear in person or by attorney and present the same with his reasons therefor to the board of mayor and aldermen at the hearing, the assessment shall be confirmed and made final. 
(7)  All assessments levied by virtue of this act shall become due and payable from and after the order of the board of mayor and aldermen fixing the same. Upon entry of the order fixing the same, the assessment roll shall be transmitted to the city treasurer who shall proceed with the collection of the amounts assessed against each lot. Said assessments shall become delinquent sixty (60) days after the entry of the order by the board of mayor and aldermen fixing them and shall thereafter bear six (6%) percent interest and a penalty of ten (10%) percent. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may provide that any assessment levied by virtue of this act, shall be payable in equal installments; and when the number of installments shall be determined, the first installment shall become delinquent in sixty (60) days after the date of such assessment, and the subsequent installments shall become delinquent periodically thereafter until all are paid in full, principal and interest. The board and [of] mayor and aldermen may further provide that any such assessment payable in equal installments shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate provided by law from the time of the assessment aforesaid until the same assessment shall be paid. Such assessments payable in equal installments shall also, as hereinbefore provided, be liens upon the land or lots so assessed. 
    The owner of any lot or parcel of land abutting on said improvement district desiring to exercise the privilege of payment by installments shall, before the expiration of the sixty (60) days aforesaid, enter into an agreement in writing with the city that, in consideration of such privilege, he will make no objection to any illegality or irregularity with regard to the assessment against his property, and will pay the same as required by law, with the specified interest. Such agreement shall be filed in the office of the city recorder. Provided, however, that the whole amount of the assessment made upon or against any lot or parcel of land abutting on said improvement district, with the interest then due, may be paid by the lot owner at his option at the time such levy is made, or at any installment period thereafter. If the lot owner makes default in the payment of any installment and interest thereon, all of the installments, with interest, shall become delinquent and immediately due and payable. 
    After the delinquent date the lien on the respective lots for such assessments shall be foreclosed and the collection of assessments enforced by the city, and the city may join in any suit all lots and delinquent owners in the improvement district, but shall not be required to do so. The property thus sold may be redeemed at any time during a period of two (2) years and after sale on payment of the assessment, interest, penalties and all court costs and other costs accruing on account of such sale. 
    At such sale no bid less than the amount of the interest, penalties and costs shall be received and in the absence of such bid, the city treasurer, on behalf of the city, shall bid in the same, and if struck off to such city, and after the redemption period, the property shall be held by the city in fee simple absolute subject to the lien of the taxes and assessments set forth in section 6 hereof. 
    Any court having jurisdiction of any suit brought for the enforcement of the lien of such assessments shall, in addition have the power to order a sale, have power and authority to appoint a receiver to collect the rents and profits of such lots and apply the proceeds thereof to the payment of costs, assessments, interest and penalties. 
    Any sale made under the provisions of this act shall be governed as to notice, terms, costs and in all other respects by the rules of chancery practiced now, or hereafter enforced, governing sales of land by the chancery courts of this state. 
(8)  If any assessment levied for any improvement authorized by this act be declared invalid by reason of any mistake or irregularity in the proceeding, the board of mayor and aldermen shall have the power at any time before the expiration of three (3) years from and after the determination of such invalidity, to reassess such property and may, when necessary, reassess all property abutting upon the street improved, the assessment on which had not been paid. 
(Pvt. Acts 1991, ch. 119, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 1. - Time of holding election. 
    A general city election shall be held on the third Tuesday of May 1963, and on the third Tuesday in May in each succeeding odd-numbered year thereafter. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 2) 
Sec. 2. - Authority of county board of election commissioners; precinct boundaries; application of state law. 
    All municipal elections, including all elections respecting bond issues, shall be conducted by the board of election commissioners for Sullivan County, who shall have the power to establish, alter or modify the voting precinct boundaries within the city for city elections subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen, and to designate the polling places therein. 
    The voting precinct boundaries within the city shall be established by the commissioners of elections and approved by the board of mayor and aldermen at least forty-five (45) days before the municipal election to be held in May 1963, and should be entered in their minutes and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least thirty (30) days before said election. Alterations or modifications of said precinct boundaries subsequent to the May 1963 election should be made in like manner, but at least ninety (90) days prior to the election affected and published at least sixty (60) days prior thereto. 
    Except as provided in the Charter of the City of Kingsport as hereby amended, the general election laws of the State of Tennessee shall be applicable to and control all elections held pursuant to the provisions of this act [Private Acts of 1963, chapter 25]. 
    The election commission for Sullivan County shall certify to the City of Kingsport for payment such expenses as shall lawfully have been incurred in holding such elections. Said expenses shall be a charge against the City of Kingsport and shall be paid by it in like manner as other expenses. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 3) 
Sec. 3. - Persons entitled to vote in city elections. 
    The persons entitled to vote in all city elections, including bond elections, and their qualifications as voters, shall be as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 6-502 [T.C.A. § 6-53-102] as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 84, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 4) 
Sec. 4. - Registrars and registration in city elections. 
    All matters pertaining to the registration of voters in all municipal elections shall be as prescribed by the permanent registration laws of the State of Tennessee, as set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 2-301 through Section 2-326 [T.C.A. §§ 2-3-101-2-3-108, 2-3-201-2-3-205, 2-5-208(j), 2-8-117, 16-3-101] inclusive, as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 5) 
Sec. 5. - Offenses under election laws. 
    Every act or deed, whether of commission or omission, denounced by law as an offense in the case of regular state elections is hereby declared to be a like offense in any municipal election held under the Charter and shall be punished in like form and manner. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 6) 
Sec. 6. - Political activity by city officers, employees. 
    To the extent permitted by federal law and except as provided by state law, neither the city manager, city attorney, recorder, city judge, chief of police, nor any person in the employ of the city under any of the said officers shall take any active part in or contribute any money toward the nomination or election of any candidates for election to any municipal office of the city, except to answer such questions as may be put to them as they may desire to answer. A violation of this section shall subject the offender to removal from office or employment and to punishment by fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 6; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 3) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that the Public Employees Political Freedom Act of 1980, T.C.A. §§ 8-50-601-8-50-604, guarantees public employees' right to communicate with elected public officials for any job-related purpose. 
Sec. 7. - Political promises. 
    No candidate for any office nor any person shall directly or indirectly give or promise any person or persons any office, employment, money, benefit, or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or obtaining political support, aid or vote for such candidate, and any person violating this provision shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 2, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 8 of article II of the Charter, outlining authority of the board of mayor and aldermen to regulate municipal elections, registration and nominations, was repealed by chapter 25, § 7, Pvt. Acts of 1963. The section was reserved to maintain format. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN 

Sec. 1. - Membership; election, term. 
    There shall be six (6) aldermen members of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
    At the general city election on the third Tuesday in May of 1979, and every four (4) years thereafter, three (3) persons shall be elected to serve as aldermen for four (4) year terms beginning at the first regular meeting of the board in July following their election. Likewise, at the general city election in May of 1981, and every four (4) years thereafter, three (3) persons shall be elected to serve as aldermen for four (4) year terms beginning at the first regular meeting of the board in July following their election. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 8; Pvt. Acts 1973, ch. 6, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 283, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Election, term of mayor; designation of members as board of mayor and aldermen. 
    At the general city election in May of 1979, and every two (2) years thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City of Kingsport, a mayor who shall serve a term of two (2) years beginning at the first regular meeting of the board in July following his election. The mayor and aldermen shall together constitute the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Kingsport. 
    No person shall be a candidate for the office of mayor and the office of alderman in the same election, nor shall any person hold both offices at the same time. 
    In the event an incumbent alderman having an unexpired term remaining to serve, shall run and be elected to the office of mayor, the vacancy thus created shall be filled by special election held within ninety (90) days after the occurrence of such vacancy (or following the certification of the prior May aldermanic election to the city recorder). 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 9; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 283, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1979, ch. 40, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Eligibility for election as mayor, aldermen. 
    Any person who is a qualified voter of the city and who has resided within the city for at least one (1) year next preceding the election shall be eligible to election to the office of mayor or alderman. 
    Residence within any area annexed in a year preceding an election shall be counted in meeting the residence [residency] requirement of this section. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 10; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 4) 
State Law reference- Discrimination on basis of residency in local government prohibited, T.C.A. § 8-50-107. 
Sec. 4. - Conviction of malfeasance, other crimes as bar to office; forfeiture of office. 
    No person shall become mayor or alderman who shall have been convicted of malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt practice, or crime, or of violating any of the provisions of section 7 of article 2 [II] of this Charter, in reference to elections, and if any mayor or alderman shall be so convicted he shall forfeit his office. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Compensation of the board of mayor and alderman. 
    The compensation of the board of mayor and aldermen shall be as follows: 
(a)  The salary of the mayor shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum. The salary of the vice-mayor and each alderman shall be two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per annum; but, the salary of any such member of the board of mayor and aldermen shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he is elected. 
(b)  The annual salaries so fixed for all members of the board of mayor and aldermen shall be payable in equal semimonthly installments. 
(c)  The mayor, vice-mayor and each alderman shall be reimbursed for their actual and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 53, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1989, ch. 45, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Powers delegated to and vested in board; powers to be exercised in session. 
    The legislative and all other powers, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, are hereby delegated to and vested in the board of mayor and aldermen, and the board of mayor and aldermen may by ordinance or resolution not inconsistent with this Charter prescribe the manner in which any powers of the city shall be exercised, provide all means necessary or proper therefor, and do all things needful within or without the city or state to protect the rights of the city. 
    The said board shall exercise its powers in session duly assembled and no member or group of members thereof shall exercise or attempt to exercise the powers conferred upon the board except through proceedings adopted at such session. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 6; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 5) 
Sec. 7. - Time, place of regular, special meetings. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall by ordinance fix the time and place at which the regular meetings of said board shall be held. Until otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution, the regular meeting of said board shall be held at 7:00 p.m. (local time) on the first and third Tuesday of each month. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor, or city manager, or of a majority of the aldermen, the welfare of the city demands it, the mayor or the recorder shall call a special meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen upon at least twelve (12) hours written notice to the mayor, each alderman, the city manager, city recorder, and city attorney, served personally or left at their usual place of residence. Each call for a special meeting shall set forth the character of the business to be discussed at such meeting and no other business shall be considered at such meetings. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 7; Pvt. Acts 1973, ch. 6, § 4; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 6) 
Sec. 8. - Mayor to preside at meetings. 
    The mayor shall normally preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen. In the absence of the mayor, the vice-mayor shall preside at meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen as provided in section 11 of this article, and provided further, that in the event that both the mayor and vice-mayor are absent, the board may choose from its membership a member to preside at the meeting, provided a quorum of the membership of the board is present. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 8; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 3) 
Sec. 9. - Attendance and voting by electronic communication. 
(a)  Members of the board of mayor and aldermen who are unable to be physically present at the designated place where a meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen is held may participate in a regular, adjourned or called meeting through the use of electronic, telephonic or radio communication by which all members participating may simultaneously hear each other and speak to each other during the meeting. Members participating in a meeting by this means are deemed to be present in person at the meeting for the purpose of voting. Members participating by electronic, telephonic, or radio communication shall not be counted for the purpose of determining the presence of a quorum. 
(b)  Any meeting held pursuant to the terms of this section shall conform to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act and shall not circumvent the spirit or requirements of that law. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 30, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 7) 
Sec. 10. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Causes of vacancies. The office of mayor, vice-mayor or alderman is vacated: 
(1)  By the death of the incumbent; 
(2)  By the resignation of the incumbent: 
(3)  By the incumbent ceasing to be a resident of the city; or 
(4)  By the incumbent's violation of the Charter. 
(b)  Declaration of vacancies to board. The mayor or vice-mayor shall declare to the board, at each session thereof, all offices to be filled by that body, which have become vacant. 
(c)  Appointment of successors. After any office becomes vacant, such vacancy in said board shall be filled by appointment within thirty (30) days by an affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members thereof; provided, however, that no member shall be appointed under this section at any time when the said board already has as many as two (2) members so appointed, but in case of any additional vacancy, the said board shall forthwith by ordinance or resolution call upon the election commissioners for Sullivan County and Hawkins County to call a special election for the purpose of filling such additional vacancy, whereupon said election commissioners shall immediately call such special election and appoint the necessary officers therefor, and said special election shall be held in the same manner as and subject to the regulations in this Charter respecting general city elections. 
(d)  Vote. All such appointments by the board shall be made viva voce, on the calling of the roll. 
(e)  Term of office of successors. The successors so appointed to hold office until the first regular meeting in July following the next general city election held after his appointment. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 10; Pvt. Acts 1973, ch. 6, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1989, ch. 44, § 1) 
Sec. 11. - Vice-mayor; appointment, function. 
    At the first meeting of the board and thereafter at the first meeting in July after a general city election, said board shall choose from its membership a member to act in the absence, inability or failure to act of the mayor. Such member shall act as mayor during any temporary absence, inability or failure to act of the mayor, and whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, such member shall become mayor and hold office as such for the unexpired term. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Quorum designated; adjournment from day to day; compelling attendance of members at meetings. 
(a)  A majority of all members of the board constitutes a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absentees in such manner and under such penalties as the board may provide. 
(b)  A board member participating by electronic, radio, or telephonic communication shall not be counted for the purpose of determining the presence of a quorum. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 12; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 30, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 8) 
Sec. 13. - Rules of procedure; authority to punish for contempt; subpoena power; oaths for witnesses; journal of proceedings. 
    Said board may determine the rules of its proceedings, subject to this Charter; and may arrest and punish by fine or imprisonment, or both, any member or other person guilty of disorderly or contemptuous behavior in its presence. It shall have power, and may delegate it to any committee, to subpoena witnesses and order the production of books and papers relating to any subject within its jurisdiction; to call upon its own officer or the chief of police to execute its process; and to arrest and punish by fine or imprisonment, or both, any person refusing to obey such subpoena or order. 
    No fine for any one offense under this section shall exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) nor shall any imprisonment for any one offense exceed thirty (30) days, but each day's continuance in any refusal as aforesaid shall be a separate offense. 
    Its presiding officer or the chairman of any committee may administer oaths to witnesses. 
    It shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and the yeas and nays in any question shall at the desire of any member present be entered thereon. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Sessions to be public; change of location. 
    All sessions of the board shall be public and subject to change of plan in case of emergency. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 14; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 9) 
Sec. 15. - Removal from office. 
    The mayor and aldermen may be removed from office by Tennessee Code Annotate, Title 8, chapter 47 [T.C.A. § 8-47-101 et seq.]. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 3, § 15; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 10) 
ARTICLE IV. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 1. - Style. 
    All ordinances shall begin: "Be it ordained by the City of Kingsport, as follows": 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Procedures for passage; emergency ordinances; amendments. 
    Before its adoption, every ordinance shall be presented on two (2) different days in open session and read in its entirety on the first of those days. Between the first and second presentation, it shall remain on file with the recorder for public inspection. Any ordinance not so read shall become null and void except that, at the discretion of the board of mayor and aldermen, the reading of the ordinance may be dispensed with provided a copy of said proposed ordinance shall have been given to each board member and three (3) copies given to the recorder at least three (3) days prior to the date of the meeting at which said ordinance shall be presented for the first time. No ordinance shall take effect until ten (10) days after its final passage, except in the case of an emergency ordinance. Each ordinance shall be signed by the mayor or by three (3) board members and entered in full upon the minutes of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
    An emergency ordinance may be enacted upon the date of its introduction; however, it shall contain the statement that an emergency exists and specify with particularity the facts and reasons constituting such emergency. The unanimous vote of all members of the board present, and not less than five (5) members, shall be required to pass an emergency ordinance. 
    Upon the first presentation of a proposed ordinance, approval or disapproval may be by voice vote. Upon second presentation, or for approval of an emergency ordinance, the roll shall be called and the vote shall be determined by yeas and nays and the names of the members voting for or against an ordinance shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings; provided, however, that upon the request of any member, the roll shall be called at the first presentation and the vote shall be determined by yeas and nays and the names of the members voting for or against an ordinance shall be entered upon the journal of the proceedings. 
    No ordinance making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or regulating the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be granted, renewed or extended as an emergency ordinance. 
    No ordinance, except for the budget ordinance, shall be amended except by a new ordinance. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 4, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1969, ch. 54; Pvt. Acts 1973, ch. 6, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1976, ch. 235; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 284, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 44, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 47, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1996, ch. 177, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 11) 
Sec. 3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Private Acts of 2001, ch. 30, § 12, adopted July 17, 2001, repealed § 3 in its entirety, which pertained to voting and the entry of yeas and nays on journal, and derived from the Private Acts of 1917, chapter 76, article 4, § 3. 
Sec. 4. - Numbering, copying, preservation of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance shall be immediately taken charge of and numbered by the recorder, copied in an ordinance book, and filed and preserved in the recorder's office. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 4, § 4; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 13) 
Sec. 5. - Publication of penal ordinances. 
    All ordinances of a penal nature, or the caption of such ordinance of a penal nature, shall be published after its final passage at least once in any newspaper of general circulation within the city and no such ordinance shall be in force until the ordinance, or its caption, is so published. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 4, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 4; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 14) 
ARTICLE V. - MAYOR 

Sec. 1. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed by it, and shall have a seat, a voice and a vote, but no veto. The mayor shall sign the journal of the board, and all ordinances upon their final passage, execute all deeds, bonds and contracts made in the name of the city unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance or resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. The mayor may introduce ordinances in the board of mayor and aldermen. 
    The mayor shall have the power of appointment and removal of members of the Kingsport Regional Planning Commission, such powers of appointment and removal to be exercised subject to the approval of the remaining members of the board of mayor and aldermen. The mayor shall not serve on any municipal or regional planning commission. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 5, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1981, ch. 28, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 15) 
Sec. 2. - Additional duties. 
    The mayor shall have the power and it is hereby made the mayor's duty to perform all acts that may be required of the mayor by any ordinance duly enacted by the board of mayor and aldermen and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 5, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 283, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 16) 
Sec. 3. - Service of process against city. 
    All legal process against the city shall be served upon the mayor or recorder, and it shall be his duty forthwith to transmit the process to the city attorney, after writing thereon the time, place and manner of service. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 5, § 3) 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 

Sec. 1. - Appointment; compensation; removal. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall appoint and fix the salary of the city manager who shall hold office at the pleasure of the board. The board shall fix the salary of and elect a city judge as provided for in this Charter. The board of mayor and aldermen shall establish and make provision in the appropriation ordinance for such other offices, officers, agents and employees as may be necessary or as required by this Charter. The recorder, chief of police, treasurer, city attorney, and all other officers, agents and employees, except the city judge, the board of education and appointees of the board of education provided for elsewhere in this Charter, shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be removable by the city manager at any time. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 6, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 106, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 17; Pvt. Acts 2003, ch. 24, § 1) 
Editor's note- Private Acts of 1937, chapter 106, § 2, repealed article VII, section 2(b), insofar as it is in conflict with this section as amended. 
Sec. 2. - Oath or affirmation of salaried personnel. 
    Every officer, agent and employee holding a position upon an annual salary shall, before entering upon his duties, take and subscribe and file with the recorder an oath or affirmation that he has all the qualifications and is not subject to any of the disqualifications named in this Charter for the office or employment he is about to assume; that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of this state and the Charter and ordinances of the city, and that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office or employment. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Bonds. 
    The city manager and every officer, agent and employee having duties embracing the receipt, disbursement, custody or handling of money shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a fidelity bond with some surety company authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, as surety (except that bonds for five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less may be given with personal surety), in such amount as shall be prescribed by ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen, except where the amount is prescribed in this Charter. All such bonds and the sureties thereto shall be subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 6, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Authority to require additional bond. 
    If at any time it appears to the mayor, city manager or recorder that the surety or sureties on any official bond are insufficient, the officer or employee shall be required to give additional bond, and, if such officer or employee fails to give such additional bond within twenty (20) days after he shall have been notified, his office shall be vacant. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 6, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Health and welfare benefits or insurance. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to establish, by ordinance, hospital, medical, surgical, disability or related benefits including, but not limited to, medical, dental, life, and income protection, whether provided by insurance, or, direct payment or reimbursement, for all officers and employees of the city and members of their families; to determine who shall be eligible to participate under said plan; to incur the expense of experts to determine the feasibility of such plan, its probable cost and administrative matters pertaining thereto; to contract with any insurance company properly licensed and qualified to do business in Tennessee in connection therewith, or any service provider; to determine to what extent, if any, the cost of such benefits shall be borne by employees, by the city, or both, and fix rates based on the beneficiaries of such plan, to determine how the share of the employee, if any, shall be collected; to appropriate and pay for the share, if any, of the city; to provide for the administration of said plan and the cost in connection therewith and to do all things necessary to establish and comply with the purposes of this act [section]. 
(b)  When in the possession of the city, applications, claims and all individual records of persons entitled to benefits from any policies or plans established pursuant to this article shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to anyone except to the extent expressly authorized in such applications, claims, policies or plans or insofar as it may be necessary for the administration of this article, the policy or plan, or other policies or plans affecting a person covered under the policy or plan, or upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 71, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1989, ch. 42, § 1) 
Editor's note- That portion of ch. 71, Pvt. Acts of 1955, which repealed ch. 74, Pvt. Acts of 1939, relating to the same subject, has been deleted. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 1. - Designation as administrative head of city government; appointment; acting city manager. 
    In addition to all other powers conferred upon the city manager, he shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the board of mayor and aldermen; he shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs and need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of his appointment. During an absence or disability of the city manager, not to exceed sixty (60) days, the city manager may designate any officer of the city established by this Charter or by ordinance, to assume the power and duties of his office; provided, however, that the board of mayor and aldermen may, at its discretion, designate an officer of the city to perform the functions of the city manager during an absence or disability of any period of time. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 7, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 44, § 5) 
Sec. 2. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the city manager shall be: 
(a)  Enforcement of laws and ordinances; institution of prosecution. To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced, and upon knowledge or information of any violation thereof, to see that prosecutions are instituted in the city court. 
(b)  Appointment or removal of officers or employees. Except as provided in this Charter, to appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees, and all appointments to be made on merit and fitness alone. No employee shall be removed except upon specific charges in writing after completion of their six (6) month-probationary period. Any employee except department heads, deputy department heads and confidential employees may request a hearing prior to their final termination. The hearing may be public if requested by the employee and the accused shall have the right to appear and defend in person or by counsel and shall have process of the board of mayor and aldermen to compel attendance of witnesses in their behalf. 
(c)  Supervision, control of officers, departments. To supervise and control the work of the recorder, the chief of police, the city attorney, treasurer, and all other officers except the city judge, and of all departments and divisions created by this Charter or which hereafter may be created by the board of mayor and aldermen, other than the department of education created by this Charter. 
(d)  Enforcement of public utility franchises. To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility or franchise are faithfully done, kept and performed and upon knowledge or information of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the city attorney who is hereby required to take such steps as are necessary to enforce the same. 
(e)  Attendance at meetings of board of mayor and aldermen. To attend all meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen with the right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. 
(f)  Recommendation of measures to board of mayor and aldermen. To recommend to the board of mayor and aldermen for adoption such measures as the city manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
(g)  Budget commissioner. To act as budget commissioner and to keep the board of mayor and aldermen fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(h)  Purchasing agent; bids required. To act as purchasing agent of the city and to purchase all material, supplies, equipment and services for the proper conduct of the city's business. The board of mayor and aldermen shall prescribe by ordinance the maximum expenditure which the city manager may make without specific authorization of the board, and shall prescribe rules for competitive bidding, but no purchase shall be made at any one time in an amount which in the aggregate will exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) unless bids shall have been requested through public advertisement and award made to the lowest responsible compliant bidder in the best interest and advantage of the city. 
(i)  Additional duties. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of the city manager by resolution or ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 7, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 106, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1969, ch. 54; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 44, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 18) 
Sec. 3. - Not to serve on planning commission. 
    The city manager shall not serve on any municipal or regional planning commission. 
(Pvt. Acts 1981, ch. 28, § 2) 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY COURT 

Sec. 1. - Establishment. 
    A city court is hereby established for the City of Kingsport. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - City judge; office authorized; salary, term, appointment; city judge pro tem. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall have power at any time to establish and create the office of city judge and fix his salary and term of service, which shall be not less than two (2) years. The mayor shall, upon the creation of the office, appoint the city judge. The mayor shall have power to appoint a city judge pro tem who shall have power to act in the absence, inability, or incompetency of the regular city judge. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1923, ch. 245, § 1) 
Sec. 2.5. - Qualifications of city judge. 
    Any person who is a resident of the City of Kingsport and has attained the age of twenty-five (25) years, who is an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Tennessee, and who is in good standing with the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of the State of Tennessee, shall be eligible for the office of city judge. 
(Pvt. Acts 2001, ch. 30, § 19) 
Sec. 3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city court shall have jurisdiction in and over all cases for the violation of laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1919, ch. 719, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 20) 
Sec. 4. - Imposition, collection, remission of fines, costs; enforcement of orders; limit upon penalties. 
    The city judge shall have power and authority to impose fines, penalties, costs and forfeitures and to punish by fine or penalty, for violations of city ordinances, to punish by fine or imprisonment for contempt, to preserve and enforce order in the court, to enforce the collection of all such fines, penalties, costs and forfeitures imposed by the city judge and in default of the payment of good and sufficient security given for the payment of any such fine, penalties, costs or forfeitures imposed by the city judge. The city judge may remit, with or without condition, fines, penalties and costs imposed for violation of any ordinance or Charter provision. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 6; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 21) 
Sec. 5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Private Acts of 2001, § 22, adopted July 17, 2001, repealed § 5 in its entirety, which pertained to the inquiry in state cases regarding city ordinance violation and derived from the Private Acts of 1917, chapter 76, article 8, § 5. 
Sec. 6. - Appeal from conviction of ordinance violation; appearance bond; pauper's oath; civil appeal bond. 
    Any person dissatisfied with the judgment of the city judge, charged with the violation of a city ordinance and the case against such person has been heard and determined by the city judge, such person, as a matter of right, may within ten (10) entire days thereafter (Sunday excluded) appeal to the next term of the law court at Kingsport in Sullivan County, upon depositing a cash bond, and/or giving an appearance bond, which shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), with good and sufficient sureties, as approved by the city judge, and/or any policeman on duty, for the appearance of such person before the law court at the next term of the law court for Kingsport in Sullivan County, to prosecute the appeal from the city court to the law court. 
    The appearance bond may be substantially in the following form: 
    STATE OF TENNESSEE-SULLIVAN COUNTY, CITY OF KINGSPORT 
    We, A.B., as principal, and the undersigned sureties, agree to pay the City of Kingsport ____________ dollars, unless the said A.B., shall appear at the next term of Law Court, at Kingsport, for Sullivan County, to answer the offense of ____________ , which is a violation of the city ordinance, and does not depart the court without leave. 
    In the case of failure to appear and prosecute the appeal in the law court, then the law court shall enter judgment against the principal and the sureties for such fine and cost as are imposed in the law court. 
    A.B. ____________ 
    C.D. ____________ 
    E.F. ____________ 
    Approved G.H. (Name of Officer) 
    In event such person charged with violation of a city ordinance and has appealed from the judgment of the city court to the next term of the law court by giving bond as herein provided, and fails to appear at the next term of the law court, and fails to prosecute the appeal, and such person is fined and/or the judgment of the lower court is affirmed in the law court, then such person and their sureties on the appearance bond shall be jointly and severally liable for the fine and costs, and the judgment shall be entered accordingly in the law court. But, if such person appears and prosecutes the appeal, and is fined and/or the judgment of the lower court is affirmed, then such person shall be in the hands of the chief of police of the City of Kingsport, to perform the judgment of the law court. 
    In event such person is unable to deposit a cash bond and/or give an appearance bond with good sureties, such person shall have the right to appeal, within the time fixed herein, to the next term of the Law Court at Kingsport, by filing with the city judge a pauper's oath. 
    In all appeals from judgment in civil matters tried and determined by the city judge, the appeal bond shall be in the manner and form, and the same as provided by the general laws of the state for appeals from general session courts in civil cases to the circuit court. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 6; Pvt. Acts 1935, Ex. Sess., ch. 96, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 23) 
Sec. 7. - Warrant for offense; arrest; affidavit to state offense. 
    Only one (1) warrant shall be issued for the same offense, said warrant to embrace all the parties charged with the same offense. No arrest shall be made except upon a warrant duly issued, unless the offense is committed in the presence of the officer making the arrest, except in a case of a felony. The affidavit upon which the warrant is issued shall specifically state the offense charged. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Disposition of fines; supervision of workhouse labor. 
    All fines or penalties imposed by the city court for violations of city ordinances shall belong to and be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 8; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 24) 
Sec. 9. - Taxation of costs; certification, collection of fines, costs; record, disposition of costs; monthly report. 
    The city judge, in all cases heard or determined by the city judge for offenses against the corporate laws and ordinances, shall tax in the bill of costs an amount to be set by the board of mayor and aldermen by ordinance. The city judge shall certify to the clerk of the city court for collection all fines, penalties, costs and forfeiture imposed for offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city. Costs shall belong to the city and be paid into its treasury. It shall be unlawful for any other person or officer to collect or receipt for said fines, penalties, costs and recoveries, but the city judge may authorize the chief of police to collect and receipt for fines, penalties and costs. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 9; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 7; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 25) 
Sec. 10. - Dockets. 
    The city judge shall keep or cause to be kept a court docket embodying complete detailed records of all cases handled by the city judge. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 10; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 26) 
Sec. 11. - Jurisdiction beyond corporate limits. 
    The jurisdiction of the city court shall extend to a distance of one (1) mile beyond the corporate limits thereof for the suppression of disorderly acts and practices forbidden by the general laws or the city ordinances, provided such jurisdiction shall not extend beyond the limits of the county in which any part of the city is situated and does not come within one (1) mile of any other incorporated city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 8, § 11) 
ARTICLE IX. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 1. - Qualifications for office. 
    The city attorney shall be an attorney at law entitled to practice in the courts of the state. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 9, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Appointment of assistants, employees; powers and duties enumerated; salary. 
    The city attorney shall appoint such assistants and employees as may be provided by ordinance and shall, except as otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance, direct the management of all litigation in which the city is a party; the city attorney shall represent the city in all legal matters and proceedings in which the city is a party or interested, or in which any of its officers are officially interested; the city attorney shall attend all meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen, advise the board of mayor and aldermen and committees or members thereof, the city manager, and the heads of all departments and divisions as to all legal questions affecting the city's interest; the city attorney shall approve as to form all contracts, deeds, bonds, ordinances, resolutions and other documents to be signed in the name of, or made by or with the city. The city attorney shall direct the functions of the prosecuting attorney in the city court if, in the city attorney's discretion, a prosecuting attorney is needed. The city attorney shall receive a salary to be fixed by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 9, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 47, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 27) 
ARTICLE X. - RECORDER; TREASURER; FINANCE 

Sec. 1. - Powers, duties enumerated; salary. 
    The recorder shall be the chief financial officer and the head of the department of finance. The recorder shall receive a salary to be fixed by the board of mayor and aldermen; and shall give such bond to the city for not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or as may be provided by ordinance. The recorder shall have a seat and a voice, but not [a] vote, in the board of mayor and aldermen. With the consent of the city manager, the recorder may appoint such deputies as may be provided by ordinance. The recorder shall, by their [his] signature and the city seal, attest all instruments signed in the name of the city and all official acts of the mayor. The recorder shall have power to administer oaths. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 28) 
Sec. 2. - Presence at board meetings; record of proceedings. 
    It shall be the duty of the recorder to be present at all meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen and to keep a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the same, to be preserved in permanent book form. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Custody of city seal; custody, registration, index of records, papers. 
    The recorder shall have custody of and preserve in his office, the city seal, the public records, original rolls of ordinances, ordinance books, minutes of the board of mayor and aldermen, contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds (except his own bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor), and all other bonds, oaths and affirmations, and all other records, papers and documents not required by this Charter or by ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates and contents, and keep an accurate and modern index thereof. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Copies of records, papers, fees therefor; copies of ordinances. 
    The recorder shall provide, and, when required by any officer or person, certify copies of records, papers and documents in his office, and charge therefor, for the use of the city, such fees as may be provided by ordinance; [and shall] cause copies of ordinances to be printed, as may be directed by the board of mayor and aldermen, and kept in his office for distribution. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Powers, duties as head of department of finance. 
    The recorder as the head of the department of finance shall exercise a general supervision over the fiscal affairs of the city, and general accounting supervision over all the city's property, assets and claims, and disposition thereof. He shall be the general accountant and auditor of the city; shall have custody of all papers, records and vouchers relating to the fiscal affairs of the city; and the records in his office shall show the financial operations and conditions, property, assets, claims and liability of the city, all expenditures authorized and all contracts in which the city is interested. He shall require proper fiscal accounts, records, settlements and reports to be kept, made and rendered to him by the several departments and officers of the city, including all deputies or employees of his department charged with the collection or expenditures of money, and shall control and continually audit the same. He shall, at least monthly, adjust the settlements of officers engaged in the collections of revenue. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Accounting system; installation, maintenance. 
    The recorder, with the approval of the city manager, shall cause an efficient system of accounting for the city to be installed and maintained. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Appointment, general duties of treasurer. 
    The city manager shall appoint a treasurer. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and all other revenues and bonds of the city, and the proceeds of its bond issues, and to disburse the same. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Payment and auditing of accounts and claims. 
    Except as by this Charter or by law or ordinance otherwise provided, the recorder shall prescribe and regulate the manner of paying creditors, officers and employees of the city. He shall audit all payrolls, accounts and claims against the city and certify thereon the balance as stated by him, but no payroll, account or claim or any part thereof, shall be audited against the city or paid unless authorized by law or ordinance and approved and certified by the city manager and the head of the department for which the indebtedness was incurred, and the amount required for payment of the same appropriated for that purpose by ordinance and in the treasury. Whenever any claim shall be presented to the city recorder he shall have power to require evidence that the amount claimed is justly due and is in conformity to law and ordinance, and for that purpose he may summon before him any officer, agent or employee of any department of the municipality, or any other person and examine him upon oath or affirmation relative thereto. The city manager, recorder and head of the department concerned, and their sureties, shall be liable to the municipality for all loss or damage sustained by the municipality by reason of the corrupt approval of any claim against the municipality. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Warrants; contents, issuance. 
    Subject to the provisions of the foregoing section, warrants shall be issued by the recorder. Each warrant shall specify the particular departmental fund against which it is drawn and shall be payable out of no other fund. Any officer or employee in the recorder's office may be designated by him to draw warrants with the same effect as if signed by the recorder, such designation to be in writing, in duplicate, filed with the city manager; provided that the city manager may make such designation if the recorder be absent or disabled and there be no one in his office designated to act. Any such designation may be revoked by the recorder while acting as such by filing the revocation in duplicate with the city manager and the treasury division. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Certificate of availability of funds or authorization of bond issue as prerequisite to expenditure of money. 
    No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution or order for the expenditure of money be passed by the board of mayor and aldermen or be authorized by any officer of the city unless the recorder shall first certify to the board of mayor and aldermen or to the proper officer, as the case may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure is in the treasury or safely assured to be forthcoming and available in time to comply with or meet such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure; and no contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money payable from the proceeds of bonds of the city shall be entered into until the issuance and sale of such bonds have been duly authorized in accordance with the provisions of this Charter in reference to city bonds. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Previous authority of law as prerequisite to contract liability; exception. 
    No contract liability shall be incurred without previous authority of law or ordinance, but the board of mayor and aldermen may, by ordinance, empower the proper officials to pay out money or incur contract liability for the city for the necessary preservation of the city's credit, or in other extreme emergency under such restrictions as may be provided in said ordinance; provided that any such liability shall mature not later than one year from the date of its incurrence. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Treasurer as custodian of sinking funds for bonds. 
    The treasurer shall be the custodian of all sinking funds established for retiring bonds of the city, to be managed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter for sinking funds. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Depositories of city funds; security regulated. 
    Depositories of the city funds shall be designated by ordinance, which ordinance shall, in every case, require the depository, before given custody of any city funds, to furnish adequate security to protect the interests of the city; either by collateral in the form of bonds of the United States government, United States government agencies, the State of Tennessee, municipalities located within [the State of] Tennessee, upon which bonds there has been no default in the payment of interest for more than thirty (30) days upon any one installment of collateral in the form of approved stock and bonds listed on the New York Stock Exchange rating "B" or above, insurance covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and any one or all of such securities so taken shall be in an amount ten (10) percent in excess of the deposits, or by a bond, in the sum of ten (10) percent in excess of the deposits, with some surety company authorized to do business in [the State of] Tennessee. All securities shall be upon the unanimous approval of the board of mayor and aldermen and shall be renewed yearly by the board, and the board shall reserve the right to call upon the depositories to give other and additional security when it is of the opinion that, for any reason, the security has become inadequate to protect the interest of the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 13; Pvt. Acts 1931, Ex. Sess., ch. 72, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1976, ch. 275, § 3) 
Sec. 14. - Stationery and forms for disbursement of money. 
    The recorder shall cause all stationery and all forms used either in connection with the receipt or disbursement of city funds to be numbered consecutively, and all spoiled and unused forms shall be accounted for. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Destruction of useless records, papers, forms. 
    The recorder may destroy any documents, books, vouchers, papers or cancelled blank forms pertaining to any department, board or office if he, the city attorney, the city manager, and the head of such department, board or office certify that they are useless and the mayor so directs; provided this shall apply only to audited records at least five (5) years old since the last entry made thereon, and only to audited cancelled bonds and interest coupons of at least ten (10) years old since the date of payment; provided further, that audited records, vouchers, etc., that have been microfilmed in reproducible form may be destroyed after one year and bonds and interest coupons after five (5) years. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 15; Pvt. Acts 1976, ch. 235, § 4) 
Sec. 16. - Judicial power pending appointment of city judge. 
    The recorder shall also preside over the city court provided for in article VIII, until such time as the board of mayor and aldermen shall establish the office of city judge, and until a city judge has been appointed and qualified. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Additional duties. 
    The recorder shall also perform any other duties imposed upon him by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 17) 
Sec. 18. - Recorder pro tempore. 
    In event of the temporary absence or disability of the recorder, the city manager may appoint a recorder pro tempore. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 10, § 18) 
ARTICLE XI. - TAXATION AND REVENUE 

Sec. 1. - Department of finance; basis of taxation; ad valorem tax on stocks, accounts, equipment; assessment book for city; certification to recorder. 
    The assessment, levy and collection of taxes and special assessments shall be in charge of the department of finance, subject to the limitations elsewhere found in this Charter. 
    All property, real, personal and mixed, subject to state, county and city taxes, and all persons liable for a poll tax and all privileges taxable by law, and all persons liable for work on the public streets, avenues, alleys or other thoroughfares of the city, or for a tax in lieu of said work when the same shall have become duly assessed for taxation, as now or may hereafter be provided by law, by the assessor or assessors elected or appointed under the general laws of the state, or by ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall be the basis upon which property shall be taxed and taxes collected by the city for municipal purposes as hereinafter provided. The ad valorem tax upon the stocks, accounts and equipment, or the gross investment of merchants shall be computed upon the average value of such stocks, accounts and equipment, or gross investment in like manner as state and county merchant's ad valorem tax is assessed upon the same property. 
    It shall be the duty of the county tax assessors for Sullivan County and Hawkins County and the Tennessee Regulatory Commission [Authority] or its successor to prepare a separate assessment book or roll showing real, personal and mixed property assessable by the county tax assessors for Sullivan County and Hawkins County or the Tennessee Regulatory Authority or its successor lying within the limits of the city. These records shall be certified to the recorder of the city upon the completion of the work of the boards of equalization, after they have been copied by the county court clerk of Sullivan County, or the comptroller of the state. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 29) 
Editor's note- The last paragraph in § 1 of art. XI, regarding the levy and collection of taxes as of January 10, 1917, was deleted as having expired. It should also be noted that references to poll taxes were deleted from article I, section 1, of the state constitution in 1953 and Amendment 24 to the U.S. Constitution prohibits poll taxes for federal elections, that the reference to persons liable for work on roads appears obsolete, and that the railroad commission no longer exists. 
Sec. 2. - City tax book; preparation, use as city assessment; assessment by city assessors. 
    As soon as practicable in each year after the assessment books for the state and county are complete (which shall be after the equalization boards provided for by general law shall have finished their work), it shall be the duty of the recorder to prepare or cause to be prepared from the said assessment books of Sullivan County and Hawkins County, and of the Tennessee Regulatory Authority or its successors, a tax book similar in form to that required by the laws of the state to be made out for the county trustee, embracing, however, only such properties and persons as are liable for taxes within the city. Such tax book, when certified to be true, correct, and complete by the recorder, shall be the assessment for taxes in said city for all municipal purposes; provided that there may be an assessment by the recorder at any time of any property subject to taxation found to have been omitted, and such assessment shall be duly noted and entered on the assessment books of the city, and further provided, that instead of the assessment made by county and state officials as herein provided the city may by ordinance insofar as not prohibited by general law, provide for and regulate an assessment to be made by its own tax assessors. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 30) 
Sec. 3. - Statement of total assessment, revenue; annual tax levy; limitation on levy. 
    It shall be the duty of the recorder, in each year as soon as the assessment roll for the city is complete, to submit to the board of mayor and aldermen a certified statement of the total amount of the valuation of assessment of the taxable property for the year within the city limits (including the assessment of all railroads, telephone and telegraph properties), together with a certified statement of the revenue derived by the city from privilege taxes, merchants ad valorem taxes, street labor taxes, fines for the preceding fiscal year, and miscellaneous revenue. Upon the presentation of such statements by the recorder, the board of mayor and aldermen shall proceed by ordinance to make the proper levy to meet the expenses of the city for the current fiscal year, not exceeding, however, in the total levy for all purposes (except interest on or sinking fund to retire the bonded debt of the city) in any one year, four (4) percentum of the total assessed valuation of property within the city for the year. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Extension of tax levy on tax book. 
    It shall be the duty of the recorder, immediately after the levy of taxes by the board of mayor and aldermen, to cause the said levy to be extended upon the said tax book prepared by the recorder, in the same manner that extensions are made upon the tax books in the hands of the county trustee. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Due date for designated taxes; duty, authority of treasurer; warrants to collect delinquent taxes. 
    All taxes due the City of Kingsport, except privilege and merchants ad valorem taxes, and street labor taxes, shall, until otherwise provided by ordinance, be due and payable on the first day of November of the year for which the taxes are assessed. The treasurer shall be custodian of the tax books, and shall be the tax collector for the city. 
    At and after the expiration of one month from the date when taxes become due, as in this section provided or as may be provided by ordinance, the tax books in the hands of the recorder shall have the force and effect of a judgment of a court or [of] record, and the recorder shall have power to issue distress warrants, alias and pluries distress warrants in the name of the City of Kingsport, to enforce the collection of said taxes against the person owning the property on January 10th, of the year for which the taxes are assessed, by a levy upon the personality [personalty] of such taxpayer; and such distress warrant shall be executed by [the] chief of police or other policeman of the City of Kingsport by a levy upon and sale of goods and chattels under the same provisions as prescribed by law for the execution of such process from a justice of the peace. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Lien for municipal taxes; errors not to affect assessment; correction of erroneous assessment. 
    All municipal taxes on real estate in the City of Kingsport, and all penalties and costs accruing thereon are hereby declared to be a lien on said realty from and after the 10th day of January of the year for which same are assessed, superior to all other liens, except to the United States, State of Tennessee, and County of Sullivan for taxes legally assessed thereon, with which it shall be a lien of equal dignity. No assessment shall be invalid because the size and dimension of any tract, lot or parcel of land shall not have been precisely named, or the amount of the valuation or tax not correctly given, nor because the property has been assessed in the name of a person who did not own the same, nor because the same was assessed to unknown owners, nor on account of any objection or informality merely technical, but all such assessments shall be good and valid. The board of mayor and aldermen shall have power to correct any errors in the tax assessments, upon a certificate filed by the assessor or assessing body. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Penalties for nonpayment of taxes. 
    On the first day of December of the year for which the taxes are assessed, or other date provided by ordinance, a penalty of two (2) percentum upon all taxes remaining unpaid shall be imposed and collected by the city and paid into the city treasury. An additional penalty of two (2) percentum shall be added for the next month thereafter and then an additional penalty of one (1) percentum for each month thereafter until paid, or the property sold as the law directs for the nonpayment of taxes. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 7; Pvt. Acts 1931, ch. 41, § 2) 
Sec. 8. - Change of due date, delinquent date for taxes; payment, discount for prompt payment. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may, by ordinance passed by unanimous vote, change the due date and delinquent date of all taxes and may provide for the semiannual payment of taxes and a discount for the prompt payment thereof. In case a semiannual installment of taxes is made due and payable before the assessment for and levy of taxes in the city for the current year is complete, the amount of the installment so collected as a tax upon any property shall be not more than fifty (50) percentum of the taxes levied on said property for the preceding year; such installments to be credited on the current year's taxes when determined and levied. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Certification of delinquent real estate to county trustee; chancery suit. 
    The recorder shall, under the provisions of the state law for the collection of delinquent taxes, certify to the trustee of Sullivan [County] or Hawkins County a list of real estate upon which municipal taxes remain due and unpaid, or which is liable for sale for other taxes, and the same shall be sold in like manner and upon the same laws and conditions as real estate is sold for delinquent state and county taxes; provided, however, that the board of mayor and aldermen may by ordinance direct the city attorney to enforce collection of delinquent taxes due it by suit in the chancery court, in the manner following, instead of certifying the aforesaid delinquent list to the county trustee as above set forth. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 9; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 8) 
Sec. 10. - Report to city attorney of delinquent real estate. 
    In the event the board of mayor and aldermen shall, under the last section above, elect to enforce the collection of delinquent city taxes in said court, the recorder shall, by said ordinance, be directed to report to the city attorney a list of all real estate on which municipal taxes are delinquent, setting forth the persons to whom said realty is assessed as owner, the assessed description of said realty, the assessed value thereof, the taxes, penalties and fees due thereon. 
    This list shall be certified to by the recorder under the seal of the city, and shall by him be turned over to the city attorney within such time as may be prescribed by the ordinance above referred to. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Notice of intent to file bill; scope of bill; designation, service of parties; payments to attorney; disposition of proceeds of decretal sale; purchasers restricted. 
    The city attorney, as soon as possible after the said list [provided for in section 10] comes into his hands, shall insert in any newspaper of general circulation within the city, a short notice that he will within thirty (30) days commence to file bills in said court to enforce the liens of taxes due the city on said realty against all parties delinquent. After the thirty (30) days have expired, he shall with all possible dispatch, file bills in said court for the purpose named above. Not less than twenty-five (25) pieces of property shall be embraced in one bill, and the bill shall not be objectionable on account of the number of parties made defendant thereto. 
    All parties having an interest in said realty, and all parties necessary to enable the court to enforce the lien and divest the title, and vest the same in the purchaser, may be made parties defendant by subpoenas to answer duly served, or by publication as in other cases in chancery. In the event that the person to whom the property is assessed, or any necessary part[y] to the suit, be a nonresident of the state, or be not found in the county of his residence in this state, or be unknown, the order for publication for such person or persons shall contain a short description of the property reported delinquent, the name in which and the year for which reported delinquent, the amount of taxes, interest, fees and penalties claimed to be due, and a short statement showing the nature of the suit. 
    Upon such publication, duly made as in other chancery causes, judgment pro confesso and final decree may be taken and entered as in other suits in the chancery court. 
    After the receipt of said delinquent list by said attorney, and before filing any bill as herein provided, he is hereby authorized to release any and all claims or liens for taxes due the state, city or county on payment of the amount of the original tax and interest, together with such fees, penalties, and costs as shall have accrued, and he will charge a fee of ten (10) percentum on the whole amount of taxes and interest collected, as compensation for his services, and a receipt and a release by said attorney will be full acquittal of all liens for taxes due said state, city or county on the property so released. After the bill is filed and at any time before sale under the suit, payment may be made to the attorney, and upon payment to him of the amount of taxes and interest, with such fees, penalties and costs if any, as have accrued when said payment is made, he will be allowed the same fees as in case of a sale. 
    When property is sold under decree, out of the proceeds shall be paid: first, all costs of the court, including a fee of one dollar ($1.00) on each piece or parcel of land so sold as a fee to the attorney, and ten (10) percent to him on the amount collected; second, all taxes due the city, or if taxes due the state and county also are collected in said suit, then the same shall be paid to the state, county and city, in whole or pro rata, through the officers respectively entitled to receipt for the same. The surplus, if any, shall be paid out under the order of the court to the parties entitled thereto; provided, that no attorney, clerk, deputy clerk or other officer, charged with the collection of any delinquent tax, or in any manner interested in the collection thereof, shall buy or be a bidder, directly or indirectly, at any sale of land for taxes under this Charter, and any sale, to any such attorney, clerk, deputy clerk, or other officer shall be deemed and held null and void; provided further, that the City of Kingsport, by its mayor if the board of mayor and aldermen shall so direct by resolution, may be a bidder at said sale and buy the property thereby sold, to be held and disposed of for the benefit of said city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 11; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 6) 
Sec. 12. - Style, substance, form of bill; exhibits; cause at issue; appeal; advertisement for sale; fixing, prorating costs; fees of sheriff, clerk. 
    Bills filed as directed in this act shall be in the name of the City of Kingsport. Said bills shall be in substance and form the same as other bills filed in the chancery court, shall describe the property delinquent and shall show by exhibits the name of the party to whom the property is assessed for the year for which the taxes are claimed, and the respective interests of the parties, the taxes due the municipality, together, with such costs, fees, penalties, and interest as have already accrued thereon. Such exhibits shall be true copies from the books or statements furnished by the recorder, and shall be signed by said attorney, which signing shall be proper and sufficient authority for the filing of same in said court. Such exhibits so signed and filed shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of the matter contained therein. No defendant shall be entitled to a copy of the bill without applying to the clerk and paying for such copy, nor shall it be necessary that all the defendants named be included in a copy of the subpoena to be left with any defendant, or in publications for nonresidents. 
    Except as hereinbefore provided, said cause shall be at issue as to any defendant whenever his or her answer is filed or pro confesso has been taken against him or her, and the cause may be proceeded with by or against any one or more of the defendants to final judgment, sale, and confirmation without in any way affecting any other party to the suit. Any party to the suit shall have the right to appeal to, or have writ of error or appeal in the nature of writ of error from, the Court of Civil Appeals or the Supreme Court, as provided by law in like cases, and such appeal, writ of error, or appeal in the nature of writ of error, shall not affect the proceedings as to other parties; provided, no appeal, writ of error or appeal in the nature of a writ of error, shall be allowed except from a final decree. 
    Advertisement for sale under this act shall embrace all property then decreed to be sold under this act. Publication made and process issued, and decrees, motions and orders entered in any such suit shall embrace all defendants as far as practicable; and in case of final decree, the costs shall be adjudged against all the defendants embraced in said decree and prorated according as the chancellor may deem equitable and so decree. 
    The sheriff's fees for serving subpoena to answer shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each name served and ten cents ($0.10) when returned not found, and the clerk shall have fifty cents ($0.50) for first name in writ and five cents ($0.05) for each additional name. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Suit when land delinquent for state and county taxes or sold by county trustee, bid in by state and unredeemed; payment when sale set aside; chancery procedure applicable. 
    If any lot or parcel of land reported delinquent for taxes due the City of Kingsport be also delinquent for state and county taxes, or if said lot or parcel of land has been previously sold by the trustee of the county and purchased by or for the state, and has not been redeemed, the state and county, as well as the record owner of said property, may be made parties defendant to said bill for the purpose of having all taxes that are a lien on the land settled in one proceeding, and said lot or parcel of land shall not be sold for less than the amount of all taxes and interest due on the same, with the pro rata part of the costs chargeable thereto. 
    If for any reason the original owner shall set aside said sale and be entitled to recover the ownership and possession of said lot or parcel of land, he shall pay the whole amount of taxes, with interest and costs found to be due in said suit, or which he may show to be justly due, and this provision shall apply not only to the owner, but to his heirs and assigns, or to any one having a vendor's lien, mortgage or other lien on the same, who may be able to recover said land or subject it to his debt or lien. 
    Said lot or parcel of land shall be sold on credit and in bar of the equity of redemption as in other chancery cases for the enforcement of mortgages of other liens on land, and title shall be vested, deeds ordered to be made, writs of possession awarded, references directed, and all other such steps taken as are taken in like cases in the chancery court. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Chancery suits for collection of assessments, levies for improvements or services. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall have the power, and is hereby given authority, to file like bills in the name of the City of Kingsport, for the collection of assessments and levies made for payment for improvements or service in said city, such as paving, sidewalks, curbing, gutters, sewers, and other improvements allowed by, or rendering services for which assessments may be made under this Charter or by any other acts of the legislature, in said city, the cost of which is made a charge on property owners abutting said improvements and a lien on abutting property, the suits commenced by said bills to be conducted as other suits in chancery for the enforcement of like liens and under the rules of law and practice provided for the same; provided that said bills shall not be objectionable because the owners of different parcels of lots of land are made parties hereto, it being the intention hereof that all persons in the same improvement district, or liable for portions of the same assessment and levy for improving a portion of the city as aforesaid, and on whose property said assessment or levy is a lien, shall be made parties defendant to one bill. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 11, § 14) 
Secs. 15, 16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Secs. 15 and 16 of art. XI of the Charter, providing for a poll tax and for road duty, respectively, have been omitted as being obsolete. The sections were reserved to maintain format. 
ARTICLE XII. - LICENSE TAXES 

Sec. 1. - Enumeration of classifications; applicability of rate fixed by state; collection, enforcement. 
    License taxes may be imposed by ordinance upon merchants, commission merchants, manufacturers, professions, auctioneers, moving pictures, hotels, restaurants, assembly buildings, halls and gardens, theaters, exhibitions, circuses, slot machines, dancehalls, billiard and poolrooms, museums, shooting galleries, bowling alleys, retailers of beer, wine gardens, beer gardens, saloons, dram shops, brewers, distillers, agents, real estate agents, mercantile agents, secondhand dealers, junk dealers, junk peddlers, photographers, contractors, insurance companies, telephone companies, telegraph companies, steam railroad companies, electric and all other kinds of railroad companies, pipe lines, public utilities, pipes, poles, wires or conduits of public utilities companies, livery stables, sales stables, public garages, aerial transportation vehicles, public vehicles, private vehicles, bicycles, street railway cars, public automobiles, private automobiles, automobile dealers, ferry and other boats, peddlers, hawkers, hucksters, billboards, publishers, newspapers, railroad ticket brokers, pawnbrokers and those engaged in loaning money, lenders on chattel mortgage, intelligence offices, agencies, rectifiers, undertakers, laundries, dye houses, dry cleaners, engravers, bankers and banking corporations, safe deposit establishments, trust companies, brokers, bond and stock brokers, express companies, transfer companies, towel supply companies, trading stamp companies, slaughterhouses, storage houses, and barbershops; and any other privileges, businesses, occupations, vocations, pursuits or callings or any class or classes thereof, now or hereafter subject to taxation under the laws of [the State of] Tennessee; and a separate license tax may be imposed for each place of business conducted or maintained by the same person, firm or corporation. 
    The foregoing enumeration shall not be taken to affect or impair the general power of the city to impose license taxes upon any business, vocation, pursuit or calling or any class or classes thereof now or hereafter not prohibited by law. 
    The city shall not be required to assess privileges at the same rate as fixed by the state statutes. 
    The treasurer shall enforce the collection of merchants' taxes and all other license taxes, and for this purpose shall have and exercise the powers by law vested in, and follow the procedure and methods prescribed for county court clerks. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 12, § 1) 
ARTICLE XIII. - CITY BONDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1, repealed art. XIII of the Charter, and enacted a new art. XIII in lieu thereof, thereby superseding ch. 269, Pvt. Acts of 1927, which had previously enacted a new art. XIII in lieu of that set out in the original Charter. Sec. 2 of ch. 507 repealed ch. 141, Pvt. Acts 1929; ch. 38, Pvt. Acts 1931; and ch. 105, Pvt. Acts 1937; all of which were amendatory of art. XIII; and repealed ch. 321, Pvt. Acts 1933, pertaining to notes in anticipation of revenue and included in the 1949 compilation as art. XIA. A supplementary authorization and procedure for issuance of municipal general obligation bonds, adopted in 1986, is found at T.C.A. § 9-21-101 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Purposes of bond issues enumerated. 
    Some of the purposes hereby specifically authorized for which the bonds of the city may issue and be given, sold, pledged or disposed of on the credit of the city, or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or upon any two (2) or more such credits are the following: 
    For the acquiring of land; for the purchase, construction, reconstruction, or extension of waterworks, public sewers, streets, alleys, buildings and equipment for the fire department, bridges, and viaducts, street railroads, terminals, ferries, docks, wharves, warehouses, gas or electric light works, power plant, telephone and telegraph systems, or any other public utility; for hospitals, jails, workhouses and other charitable, corrective and penal institutions; for courthouses, libraries, and other public buildings, public parks, parkways, boulevards, grounds, squares, rivers, and any other public improvements which the city may be authorized or permitted to make; for the purchase of lands or other property real or personal, for school purposes, the construction or purchase of buildings and equipment for school purposes, and for the purchase and equipment of playgrounds either in connection with the schools or separate therefrom, and for the purchase of the necessary equipment for the proper maintenance, operation and repair of any or all of the aforesaid public improvements, and for paying, refunding or renewing any bonded indebtedness of the city; for the acquiring and purchasing of land or buildings as a site for an armory and for erecting, constructing, equipping and maintaining an armory on the same or to participate along with the state and/or federal government for the purchase of land as a site for an armory or for erecting, constructing, maintaining and equipping an armory thereon. 
    The foregoing enumeration shall not be construed to limit any general provisions of this Charter authorizing the city to borrow money or issue and dispose of bonds, and such general provisions shall be construed according to the full force and effect of their language as if no specific purpose had been mentioned; and the authority to issue bonds for any of the purposes aforesaid is cumulative and shall not be construed to impair any authority to make any public improvements under any provisions of this Charter or of any law. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1955, ch. 70, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Instruments in anticipation of collection of taxes. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen, for the purpose of meeting the current expenses of the city, may borrow money not in excess of ninety (90) percentum of the taxes for the current fiscal year, issuing therefor negotiable notes or bonds of the city bearing interest at the lowest rate obtainable. In the event that such notes or bonds are issued prior to the annual tax levy for the year in which said indebtedness is contracted, the amount so issued shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the tax revenues of the preceding fiscal year and the proceeds shall be applied only in payment of the current and necessary expenses, and there shall be included in said annual levy a tax sufficient to pay the same at maturity. In the event that the revenues in any one year are insufficient for any cause to pay, when due, all the lawful debts of the city which have been or may hereafter be contracted, the board of mayor and aldermen is authorized and directed to levy and collect in the next succeeding year a sufficient tax to pay all of said lawfully contracted indebtedness, and may borrow money and issue notes or bonds, as provided in this section in anticipation of such tax to pay such lawfully contracted indebtedness; provided, however, that no loan or loans shall be made under the provisions of this section for a longer period than eighteen (18) months. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 9) 
Sec. 3. - Due dates, coupons, registration, conversion of bonds; sinking fund bonds. 
    Bonds issued under the provisions of this article may be so issued as to be payable on a specified date or serially or subject to call and redemption, and may be coupon bonds or registered bonds, and the board of mayor and aldermen may provide by ordinance for the conversion of coupon bonds into registered bonds and vice versa. 
    All long-term bonds may be sinking fund bonds and the amount of the annual installments to be paid into the sinking fund shall be fixed by the board of mayor and aldermen for each bond issue and such sinking fund installments shall be a prior lien on the tax levy each year. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 31) 
Sec. 4. - Bond election required; exceptions. 
    No bonds of the city except bonds for paying, refunding or renewing bonded indebtedness, bond or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, and bonds issued under the provisions of chapter 276, Public Acts of Tennessee of 1907 or chapter 18, Public Acts of Tennessee of 1913, First Extra Session, referred to in subsection (16) of section 2 of article I of this Charter, shall be issued without the assent of a majority of the qualified voters actually voting at an election held for that purpose; provided however, that nothing contained in this section or this article shall be construed as restrictive of the powers conferred by general law in [the State of] Tennessee upon municipal corporations generally relating to the issuance of bonds. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 11) 
Sec. 5. - Limit on bonded indebtedness. 
    The total bonded indebtedness of the city shall not exceed twenty (20) percentum of the assessed value of the taxable property of the city according to the last complete assessment. In computing the net debt of the city subject to this limitation, there shall be excluded from the gross debt all general obligation bonds payable out of the revenues of any public utility, all bonds issued under the provisions of chapter 276 of the Public Acts of Tennessee of 1907, or chapter 18, Public Acts of Tennessee of 1913, First Extra Session, all bonds payable solely out of the proceeds of special assessments, and bonds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 5; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Advertisement; conduct; scope; effect of bond election. 
    It shall be the duty of the board of election commissioners for Sullivan County to conduct, at the request of the board of mayor and aldermen, any election which may be held for the purpose of determining the will of the electorate respecting the issuance of bonds. The board of mayor and aldermen shall adopt an appropriate resolution addressed to the board of election commissioners requesting such election and shall cause a certified copy thereof and a copy of the bond ordinance to be delivered to the chairman or other appropriate officer of the election commission. Upon the receipt thereof, such election shall be called, and a notice thereof shall be inserted in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least sixty (60) days in advance of the date of election. 
    It shall not be necessary in the ordinance calling the election, in the notice of the election, in the question submitted, or on the ballot, or in any of the matters preceding the said election, to state the amount of bonds proposed to be issued for each purpose, but it shall be sufficient if the ordinance and notice of the election state the total amount of bonds proposed to be voted upon at the said election and in general language the purpose or purposes for which such total amount of bonds is to be issued, and if a majority of the voters of the city voting at such election assent to the issuance of the amount of bonds, then such amount may be issued and such bonds or the proceeds thereof may from time to time by ordinance adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen, be appropriated in any amount or amounts to the purpose or purposes for which such total amount was voted. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 6; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 25, § 12) 
Sec. 7. - Cancellation of evidences of indebtedness when paid. 
    Whenever any bonds, interest coupons or other written evidence of the city's debt shall be paid or discharged, they shall be cancelled by the recorder. The recorder shall immediately stamp the bonds cancelled. 
    Interest coupons and other evidences of debt shall be cancelled by stamping and punching, immediately upon their redemption. 
    The cancelled bonds, coupons and other evidences of debt shall be filed and presented for examination in annual audit. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 13, § 7; Pvt. Acts 1937, ch. 507, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 10) 
ARTICLE XIV. - SINKING FUND 

Sec. 1. - Investment; sale, exchange of sinking fund securities. 
    All sinking funds of the city may be invested by the recorder, by and with the consent of the board of mayor and aldermen, in bonds of the United States, of the State of Tennessee, of the County of Sullivan, or of the City of Kingsport, on the best terms obtainable. The recorder, by and with the consent of the board of mayor and aldermen, may sell the securities belonging to a sinking fund, or any part of them, at any time when the proceeds thereof, may be needed for the payments of bonds, on the best obtainable terms. The recorder, by and with the consent of the board of mayor and aldermen, may exchange any bonds belonging to the sinking fund for bonds of the city whenever such change may be advantageous for the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 14, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Omission of tax levy for sinking fund. 
    If the amount of any sinking fund, with the interest or revenue thereof, computed to the maturity of the city bonds, be sufficient to pay at maturity all of the bonds for which it is held, the levy of the tax for such sinking fund may then be omitted; but if by reason of decrease of interest or depreciation of investments or other cause, said fund shall not be sufficient, the levy shall be resumed. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 14, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Disposition of moneys remaining after payment of bonded debt. 
    Any moneys remaining in a sinking fund, after payment of the entire bonded debt for which it was accumulated, shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 14, § 3) 
ARTICLE XV. - BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS 

Sec. 1. - Designation of budget commissioner, fiscal year; estimate of expenditures, receipts. 
    The city manager shall be budget commissioner. The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July until otherwise provided by ordinance. The city manager shall on or before May 15th of each year, submit to the board of mayor and aldermen an estimate of the expenditures and revenues of the city for the ensuing fiscal year in a form and with documentation as required by the board of mayor and aldermen but at a minimum shall include: 
(a)  Estimates of proposed expenditures for each department, board, office or other agency of the city, showing in addition, the expenditures for corresponding items for the last fiscal year, projected expenditures for the current fiscal year and reasons for recommended departures from the current appropriation pattern as required by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Estimates of anticipated revenues of the city from all sources including current and delinquent taxes, non-tax revenues and proceeds from the sale of any bonds or long-term notes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of such sources for the last preceding fiscal year, the current fiscal year, and the coming fiscal year in such detail as may be prescribed by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  Such other information as required by the board of mayor and aldermen, or that the city manager may deem advisable to submit. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 15, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1963, ch. 24, §§ 1, 2; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 11; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 32) 
Sec. 2. - Tentative appropriation ordinance; preparation, publication, adoption. 
    Upon receipt of such estimate the board of mayor and aldermen shall prepare a tentative appropriation ordinance, which shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than one week before it is taken up for consideration by the board of mayor and aldermen, and before acting upon such tentative appropriation ordinance, the board of mayor and aldermen shall consider same at the next regular meeting and all voters and taxpayers may appear at said meeting and be heard in person or by attorney. The appropriation ordinance for each fiscal year shall be finally adopted before the first day of the fiscal year. Further appropriations and expenditures during the fiscal year after passage of the budget ordinance shall be by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen as necessity and advisability shall become apparent. 
    The budget ordinance may be amended by resolution. Further appropriations and expenditures during the fiscal year after passage of the budget ordinance shall be made by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen as the necessity and advisability shall become apparent. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 15, § 2; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 33) 
Sec. 3. - Disposition of unencumbered balances of appropriations. 
    At the end of each year all unencumbered balances of appropriations in the treasury shall revert to the general fund and be subject to further appropriations. Such balances shall be considered unencumbered only when the city manager shall certify in writing that the purpose for which they were appropriated has been completely accomplished and that no further expenditure in connection with it will be necessary. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 15, § 3) 
ARTICLE XVI. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 1. - Establishment, designation. 
    That [sic] the work and affairs of the city may be classified and arranged conveniently and conducted efficiently, there are hereby established the following departments: 
(a)  Department of finance. 
(b)  Police department. 
(c)  Fire department. 
(d)  Department of public works. 
(e)  Department of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 16, § 1; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 34) 
Editor's note- For a current list of departments see Code § 2-1. 
Sec. 2. - Salaries, duties, functions; creation, combination, abolition; temporary departments. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall fix all salary ranges in all departments except the department of education, prescribe the duties and functions of all departments except as fixed by this Charter and may, by unanimous vote of all members of the board present, and not less than five (5) members, create new departments, combine or abolish existing departments, or establish temporary departments for special work. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 16, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1976, ch. 235, § 5; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 35) 
Sec. 3. - Supervision and control. 
    The city manager shall supervise and control all departments now or hereafter created except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 16, § 3) 
ARTICLE XVII. - POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 1. - Appointment of patrolmen and members. 
    The city manager shall appoint such patrolmen and other members of the police force as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 17, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Duties enumerated. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the members of the police force to preserve order in the city, protect the inhabitants and property owners therein from violence, crime and all criminal acts, prevent the commission of crime, violations of the law and of the city ordinances and perform a general police duty; execute and return all processes, notices and orders of the city court, mayor, city manager, city attorney and recorder, and all other processes, notices and orders as in this Charter or by ordinance may be provided. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 17, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Emergency assistance for police force. 
    In time of riot or other emergency, the mayor or city manager shall have [the] power to summon any number of inhabitants to assist the police force. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 17, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 12) 
Sec. 4. - Duty to prosecute violations of ordinances. 
    Members of the police force, whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the ordinances of the city, shall procure the issuance of warrants, serve the same and appear in the city courts as prosecutors, relieving complaining citizens, insofar as practicable, of the burden of instituting cases involving the violation of the city ordinances, but this shall not be construed to relieve any person from the duty of appearing in court and testifying in any case. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 17, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Private Acts of 2001, § 36, adopted July 17, 2001, repealed § 5 in its entirety, which pertained to salaries and derived from the Private Acts of 1917, chapter 76, ale 17, § 5. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 1. - Appointment of chief and members. 
    The city manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department and such other members of the said department as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 18, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Duty of chief and members. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and the members thereof to take all proper steps for fire prevention and suppression. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 18, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Police powers at fire. 
    The chief of the fire department, or any assistant of such chief in charge at any fire, shall have the same police powers at such fire as the chief of police, under such regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 18, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Appointment of fire marshal; investigation of fires. 
    The city manager may appoint a fire marshal, whose duty it shall be, subject to the chief of the fire department, to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of fires, and the loss occasioned thereby, and assist in the prevention of arson. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 18, § 4) 
ARTICLE XIX. - BOARD OF EDUCATION 

Sec. 1. - Board created; composition; powers; qualifications; restrictions. 
    There is created a board of education consisting of five (5) members. The board of education shall have full power as trustees or directors to manage and control the public or city schools. 
    All members and candidates for membership upon the board of education shall possess the same qualifications and shall be subject to the same restrictions as are provided in [this Charter] the Charter of the City of Kingsport [this Charter] as to members and candidates for membership upon the board of mayor and aldermen. 
    No member of the board of education shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher, principal, supervisor, superintendent or any other position under the board which carries with it any salary or compensation. No member of the board shall be a member of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
    The members of the board of education shall serve without pay; provided, however, the board of mayor and aldermen shall have authority to provide for reasonable compensation to the members to be paid from the school budget for attendance at necessary meetings of the board. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1972, ch. 254, §§ 1-3; Pvt. Acts 1974, ch. 345, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Election; terms; interim appointment; nomination; president; oath; vacancies. 
    The members of the board of education shall be elected from the city at large by the qualified voters of the City of Kingsport at the general city election. The members of the board of education shall be elected for terms of office of four (4) years, and until their successors are elected and qualified. A board member shall be eligible for reelection. 
    Two (2) members shall be elected at the general city election in May, 1981, for four-year terms, and each four (4) years thereafter. Three (3) members shall be elected at the general city election in May, 1983, for four-year terms, and each four (4) years thereafter. Such elected board members shall assume office on the first day of July following their election. 
    Candidates for the office of a member of the board of education shall be nominated in the same manner as is provided for a candidate for the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Kingsport. 
    The members of the board of education, at the regular July meeting following a regular election, shall elect one (1) of their number [as] president. 
    Before entering upon their duties members of the board of education shall take the oath prescribed by the laws of Tennessee for such officers. 
    All vacancies in the board of education shall be filled by election of the board of mayor and aldermen; to serve only until the next general city election when such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by election by the qualified voters of the city. Any member elected to serve the remainder of an unexpired term shall assume office on the first day of July following their election. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1974, ch. 345, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 7) 
Sec. 3. - Rules and regulations; regulation of accounts, records by recorder. 
    The board of education shall have power to make rules and regulations for the discharge of its functions, but the recorder shall prescribe the methods to be followed by the said board keeping its accounts and records. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Appointment, salary, powers, duties of superintendent of schools, secretary of the board, teachers [and] employees. 
    The board of education shall, in its discretion, appoint for a period not to exceed three (3) years, prescribe the duties and powers of and fix the salary of the superintendent of schools of the city, and appoint, fix the salaries of and have the power to remove a secretary of the board, who shall not be a member thereof, and all other officers and teachers, agents and employees of the department of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 4; Pvt. Acts 1929, ch. 141, § 2) 
Sec. 5. - Termination of authority of former school boards; control of title to school property. 
    The jurisdiction over the schools within the City of Kingsport of any existing district school board or other supervising body subordinate to the county board of education shall be automatically terminated by and upon the organization of the board of education of the city, and all school property within the corporate limits of the city shall come under the control of the said board of education of the city, and the title thereto shall at the same time pass to and be vested in the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 5) 
Sec. 6. - Approval of plans for erection or construction of buildings. 
    All plans for the erection or improvement of school buildings or other buildings used for educational purposes, shall be subject to the approval of the board of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Purchase of school material, supplies, equipment. 
    All material, supplies and equipment for educational purposes shall be purchased by the city manager only upon the requisition of the board of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Regular and special meetings. 
    The board of education shall meet at least once in each month during the period when any schools of the city are in session, at such time as may be fixed by the board, and at any time upon request of three (3) members of the board or of the superintendent of schools and two (2) members of the board or of said superintendent and the president of the board; the secretary of the board shall call a special meeting of the board upon at least twelve (12) hours' notice to each member of the board and the superintendent of schools, served personally or left at his usual place of residence. 
    Every call for a special meeting shall set forth the character of the business to be discussed at such meeting, and no other business shall be considered at such meeting. 
    The board of education shall exercise its powers only in its regular and special meetings herein provided for. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Apportionment of state and county school funds; city treasurer as treasurer of board. 
    In apportioning the state and county school funds of Sullivan [County] or Hawkins County, the county board of education (or other apportioning and disbursing body) of Sullivan [County] or Hawkins County, shall apportion and pay over to the treasurer of the City of Kingsport such portion of the state and county school funds as by law is applicable to the schools within the limits of the City of Kingsport. 
    The treasurer of the city shall be ex officio treasurer of the board of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 9; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 13) 
Sec. 10. - Payment by treasurer on order of board of taxes apportioned to school fund. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which the federal, state, county and city taxes apportioned to the school fund shall be paid over by the city treasurer on the order of the board of education. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 19, § 10; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 14) 
ARTICLE XX. - CITY CONTRACTS 

Sec. 1. - Designated work to be by contract; advertisement for bids; bond of contractor; rejection of bids, re-advertisement; work by city forces. 
(a)  All contracts for more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be awarded to the lowest responsible compliant bidder in the best interest and advantage to the City of Kingsport after publication, advertisement and competition, as may be prescribed by ordinance; but no contract for any public work or improvement shall be awarded except on condition that the contractor give bond with some bonding company authorized to transact business in [the State of] Tennessee, as surety, in a sum equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the contract price of the particular work or improvement for the faithful performance of such contract. In lieu of the bond required in this subsection, the city may, in its sole discretion, allow the following securities or cash to be substituted: 
(1)  United States Treasury bonds, United States Treasury notes or United States Treasury bills. 
(2)  General obligation bonds of the State of Tennessee. 
(3)  Certificates of deposits irrevocably pledged from a state or national bank having its principal office in [the State of] Tennessee. 
(4)  An irrevocable letter of credit from a state or national bank having its principal office in [the State of] Tennessee. The terms and conditions of any letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city treasurer. All letters of credit shall be accompanied by an authorization of the contractor to deliver retained funds to the bank issuing the letter. 
(5)  Cash, provided that if cash is posted, the city shall pay to the contractor interest at the same rate that interest is paid on funds invested in a local government investment pool established pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 9-4-704 [T.C.A. § 9-4-704], for the contract period. 
(b)  The board of mayor and aldermen board shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again, and all advertisements shall contain a reservation of this right. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any work or improvements by city forces upon authorization by the board of mayor and aldermen. Such authorization shall be based on detailed estimates submitted by the responsible department and approved by the city manager. 
(d)  No contract for any public work or improvement for more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be awarded except on condition that the contractor give bond with some bonding company authorized to transact business in [the State of] Tennessee, as surety for mechanics' liens and materialmen's liens, in a sum equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the contract price of the particular work or improvement. In lieu of the bond required in this subsection, the city may, in its sole discretion, allow the following securities or cash to be substituted: 
(1)  United States Treasury bonds, United States Treasury notes or United States Treasury bills. 
(2)  General obligation bonds of the State of Tennessee. 
(3)  Certificates of deposit irrevocably pledged from a state or national bank having its principal office in [the State of] Tennessee. 
(4)  An irrevocable letter of credit from a state or national bank having its principal office in [the State of] Tennessee. The terms and conditions of any letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city treasurer. All letters of credit shall be accompanied by an authorization of the contractor to deliver retained funds to the bank issuing the letter. 
(5)  Cash, provided that if cash is posted, the city shall pay to the contractor interest at the same rate that interest is paid on funds invested in a local government investment pool established pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 9-4-704 [T.C.A. § 9-4-704], for the contract period. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 20, § 1; Pvt. Acts 1976, ch. 235, § 6; Pvt. Acts 1978, ch. 292, § 15; Pvt. Acts 1980, ch. 244, § 8; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 44, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 47, § 3; Pvt. Acts 2001, § 37) 
Sec. 2. - Ordinance to fix advertising procedure. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall by ordinance fix and regulate the procedure to be followed in publishing or advertising, as required by general law, all notices and other matter of every description that the City of Kingsport may publish, using such medium of advertising or publishing as in the opinion of the board will best serve the interests of the City of Kingsport and the citizens therein. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 20, § 2; Pvt. Acts 1939, ch. 447, § 17) 
Sec. 3. - Conflict of interest. 
    The conflict of interest provisions and the penalties for violations thereof, codified as T.C.A. §§ 6-54-107 and 6-54-108, and T.C.A. §§ 12-4-101 and 12-4-102, as the same may from time to time be amended, shall apply to the members of the board of mayor and aldermen and to any officer or employee of the city. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 20, § 3; Pvt. Acts 1989, ch. 43, § 1) 
ARTICLE XXI. - TEMPORARY BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN 

Sec. 1. - Appointment, powers and duties. 
    The following persons are hereby appointed to the following offices respectively, which they shall hold until the first Thursday in July, 1919, or until their successors are elected and qualified as called for by this Charter, and they shall proceed forthwith to organize themselves as the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Kingsport, and to exercise the powers conferred upon the said board as fully as they would had the persons named below been duly elected to membership in the said board as in this Charter provided: (1) James W. Dobyns; (2) F. E. Mahan; (3) J. L. Camblos; (4) Thomas C. Warrick; (5) R. Y. Grant to be aldermen; James W. Dobyns to be mayor. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 21, § 1) 
ARTICLE XXII. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 1. - Sections and parts of sections to be severable. 
    If any section or part of [a] section of this Charter proves to be invalid or unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section is wholly necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part of a section so held unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 22, § 1) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 1. - Effective on date of passage. 
    This act [shall] take effect from and after its passage, the public welfare requiring it. 
(Pvt. Acts 1917, ch. 76, art. 23, § 1) 
Editor's note- Chapter 76, Private Acts of 1917, was passed February 28, 1917, and was approved by the governor on March 2, 1917. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - DEFENSE COUNSEL FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 1. - City authorized and required to provide defense counsel for elected officials or employees; indemnification; liability insurance-Generally. 
    Whenever any elected official or employee of the City of Kingsport shall be sued for damages arising out of the performance of his official duties and while engaged in the course of his employment or discharge or attempted discharge of his official duties in his employment, the City of Kingsport shall be authorized and required to provide defense counsel for such elected official or employee in such suit and to indemnify him from any judgment rendered against him in such suit; provided, however, that such indemnity shall not extend to any judgment for punitive damages or for damages arising out of any willful wrongdoing by said elected official or employee and provided, further, that such municipal corporation or other political subdivision shall have notice of such suit. 
    The City of Kingsport is authorized to contract at governmental expense for policies of liability insurance to protect elected officials and employees in the course of their employment. 
(Pvt. Acts 1972, ch. 266, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2. - Same-Supplemental authority. 
    The City of Kingsport is authorized and required to provide defense counsel for any elected official or employee of the City of Kingsport who has been sued for damages arising out of the performance of his official duties and while engaged in the course of his employment or discharge or attempted discharge of his official duties in his employment and to indemnify him from any judgment rendered against him in such suit. Such indemnity shall not extend to any judgment for punitive damages or for damages arising out of any willful wrongdoing by said elected official or employee and such municipal corporation shall have notice of such suit. This act [section] shall apply only to such suits which are now pending litigation or final adjudication or any lawsuit which was filed in 1971 or prior to August 3, 1972. 
(Pvt. Acts 1972, ch. 415, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - NORTHEAST TENNESSEE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 1. - Title. 
    This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District Act." 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Legislative findings; public and governmental character of district declaration of public necessity. 
(a)  It is declared that a clear need exists in a specific area of Kingsport, Sullivan County, Tennessee, for improved management of the natural and manmade resources required for the attraction, expansion and continued support of industrial and commercial development and the subsequent creation and expansion of employment opportunities for Tennessee's citizens through the promotion of business development. To this end, it shall be the purpose of this act to place physical development review responsibilities and other powers specified herein in a specially designated body, and that such body shall have the authority to exercise said powers to more effectively manage the natural and manmade resources to effect the location, expansion and support of the industrial and commercial development within the specific geographic area designated by this act. 
(b)  It is further declared that the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission created pursuant to this act shall be a public and governmental body acting as an agency and instrumentality of the City of Kingsport; and that the responsibilities, management authority, and other powers designated herein are declared to be for public and governmental purpose and a matter of public necessity. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
    The following words or terms whenever used or referred to in this act shall have the following respective meanings unless different meanings clearly appear from the context: 
(a)  "Commission" shall mean the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission created pursuant to the provisions of this act. 
(b)  "Governing body" shall mean the chief legislative body of the City of Kingsport. 
(c)  "Municipality" shall mean the City of Kingsport, Tennessee, which has jurisdiction within the geographical area of the District as designated by this act. 
(d)  "State" shall mean the State of Tennessee. 
(e)  "Planning commission" shall mean the Kingsport Regional Planning Commission or any successor planning commission. 
(f)  "Corridor Overlay District" shall mean that geographical corridor described at Section 5(b) of this act. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 3) 
Sec. 4. - Commission established; purposes. 
(a)  There is established in Kingsport, Sullivan County, Tennessee, a commission to be known as the "Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission." 
(b)  The commission shall be established for the purposes of: 
(1)  Developing and adopting a comprehensive development plan for the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District delineated elsewhere in this act. 
(2)  Developing, adopting, and administering site design, architectural design and development standards for the corridor overlay district to insure a high quality living and working environment conducive to the requirements of commercial and industrial business. 
(3)  Effecting sound development of the designated area, through the construction, renovation or modification of public service facilities in cooperation with the municipality and utility districts as deemed necessary and appropriate for the location, siting, maintenance, and support of the commercial and industrial development. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 4) 
Sec. 5. - Corridor overlay zone; establishment, definition, delineation. 
(a)  In order to accomplish the purpose of this act, corridor overlay zones shall be established by the governing body within which the commission shall exercise powers described herein to effect the purposes of this act. The powers described shall be exercised in cooperation with the governing body and other police powers. The governing body's zoning resolution shall be amended to establish corridor overlay zones in accordance with the provision of its zoning resolution and the general law of the state. Where design and development standards, regulations, policies, and procedures are adopted for the corridor overlay zone by the commission pursuant to this act, said standards, regulations, policies and procedures shall apply; provided that the permitted and prohibited property uses, zoning, land management procedures and regulations otherwise applicable within the city shall also apply. 
(b)  The geographic area defined as the Northeast Tennessee Commercial and Industrial Corridor and over which the commission shall exercise its powers shall be that portion of Kingsport, Sullivan County, Tennessee: 
NORTHEAST TENNESSEE OVERLAY 
DISTRICT 
    BEGINNING at a point, said point located at the intersecting centerline of Cox Hollow Road and Snapps Ferry Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119 dated 2003; thence in a westerly direction following the centerline of Snapps Ferry Road for a distance of approximately 3,350 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of Rocks Springs Road and Snapps Ferry Road; thence in a southerly direction crossing the right-of-way of Interstate 81 for a distance of approximately 520 feet to a point, said point located on the southerly right-of-way Interstate 81, said point also being the northwesterly corner of parcel 75 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119; thence following said parcel line and interstate right-of-way for a distance of approximately 500 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 75, said point also being located on the Urban Growth Boundary as approved by the State of Tennessee for the City of Kingsport; thence in an easterly direction following the southerly extent of the Urban Growth Boundary for a distance of approximately 14,780 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of parcel 40 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northeasterly direction following the southerly property line of parcels 40, 41, and 44 for a distance of approximately 1,150 feet to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction following the easterly property line of parcel 44 for a distance of approximately 1,250 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Mitchell Road; thence following the centerline of Mitchell Road in a northeasterly direction for approximately 975 feet to a point, said point being an extension of parcel 24.40 shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northwesterly direction following said property line extended for a distance of approximately 900 feet to a point, said point being the common corner of parcels 24.40/24.10 and 27.25 and the Kingsport city limit as shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northeasterly direction following the Kingsport city limits for a distance of approximately 4,450 feet to a point located on the centerline of Fordtown Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 106, dated 2003; thence following the centerline of Fordtown Road in an easterly direction and the Kingsport city limits for a distance of 125 feet to a point, said point being an extension of the southwesterly property line of parcel 26 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 106 and the Kingsport city limits; thence following the Kingsport city limits for a distance of 4,825 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Interstate 81; thence following the centerline of Interstate 81 in a southwesterly direction for a distance of 650 feet to a point, said point being located 2,000 feet from the intersecting centerlines of Interstate 181 and Interstate 81; thence in a northerly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 17,500 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of tax parcel 2 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91 and the Kingsport city limits; thence in a northeasterly direction crossing the right-of-way of John B. Dennis Highway for a distance of 400 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of parcel 3.2-A-76J; thence following the northerly property lines of parcels 3.2-A-76J and parcel 3.25-A-76J for a distance of 1,500 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of parcel 17-A-76G; thence following the northerly property line of parcel 17-A-76G and the northerly boundary of Whispering Hills Addition for a distance of approximately 1,500 feet to a point located on the centerline of South Eastman Road; thence following the centerline of South Eastman Road in a northeasterly direction for a distance of approximately 2,850 feet to a point located in the center of the Sluice as shown on Sullivan County tax map 76; thence in a northwesterly direction following the center of the Sluice for a distance of approximately 2,850 feet to a point located on the centerline of Wilcox Drive; thence continuing along the center of the Sluice for a distance of approximately 1,550 feet to a point which is the confluence of the Sluice and Horse Creek as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61; thence in a southwesterly direction following the center of Horse Creek as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61 for a distance of approximately 2,550 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of tax parcel 14 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61; thence following the northwesterly property line of said parcel for a distance approximately 1,100 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 14; thence continuing in a southwesterly direction following the northwesterly property line of parcel 14 extended for a distance of approximately 550 feet to a point; thence continuing in a southwesterly direction for a distance of approximately 300 feet to a point being the intersection of the northerly property line of parcel 6.9 and Horse Creek Lane as shown on Sullivan County tax map 76, said point also being approximately 2,000 feet from the centerline of Interstate 181; thence in a northerly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 6,500 feet to a point, said point being located on the property line of tax parcels 60-4 and 5; thence in a westerly direction for a distance of approximately 2,000 feet to a point located on the centerline of Interstate 181; thence continuing in a westerly direction from the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 650 feet to a point, said point located on the Huntington Place subdivision boundary and the Kingsport city limits; thence in a southwesterly direction following the Kingsport city limits as shown on Sullivan County tax map 60 for a distance of approximately 1,650 feet to a point, said point located on the northerly property line of parcel 28 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 60, said point also being located 2,000 feet from the centerline of Interstate 181; thence in a southeasterly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Interstate 181 approximately 11,250 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of Reservoir Road and Jayne Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 75; thence continuing with and parallel to Interstate 181 for a distance of 1,950 feet to the intersecting centerlines of Diana Road and Hinkle Road; thence in a southerly direction following the centerline of Hinkle Road for a distance of approximately 850 feet to the centerline of Princeton Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 75; thence in a southerly direction following the westerly property line of parcel 102.02 extended for a distance of approximately 1500 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 102.02 and the Kingsport city limits as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence in a westerly direction following the southerly property line of parcel 99 and the Kingsport city limits for a distance of approximately 100 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of parcel 64 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence in a southerly direction following the westerly property boundary of Gaylemont Subdivision for a distance of approximately 1,800 feet to a point, said point located on the northerly right-of-way of Sullivan Gardens Parkway; thence in a southeasterly direction crossing Sullivan Gardens Parkway for a distance of approximately 200 feet to a point, said point being the northwesterly corner of parcel 61 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence following the westerly property line of parcel 61 for a distance of approximately 300 feet to a point located on Horse Creek; thence following the northerly shore of Horse Creek for a distance of approximately 800 feet to a point, said point also being the Kingsport city limit; thence in a southeasterly direction following the westerly property line of parcel 61 and Kingsport city limits for a distance of approximately 2,000 feet to a point, said point being the northwesterly corner of parcel 12 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91; thence in a northeasterly direction following the northerly property lines of parcels 12, 11, 10, and 9 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91 for a distance of approximately 2,500 feet to a point, said point being the northeastern corner of parcel 9 and the northwestern corner of Timberidge Subdivision; thence in a southeasterly direction following the common property line of parcel 9 and Timberidge Subdivision for a distance of approximately 1,500 feet to a point located in the centerline of McCulley Lane; thence in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of McCulley Lane to its intersection with Shadyview Road, said point also being approximately 2,000 feet from the centerline of Interstate 181; thence in a southerly direction of parallel with the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 8,450 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Rock Springs Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 105; thence continuing with and parallel to Interstate 181 for a distance of 5,225 feet to a point located on the centerline of Cox Hollow Road; thence following the centerline of Cox Hollow Road for a distance of approximately 1,250 feet to a point as shown on Sullivan County tax map 105; thence following the centerline of Cox Hollow Road for a distance of 2,700 feet as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119 to the point of BEGINNING, and being that area proposed to be designated as the "Gateway Area." 
    All property located within the City of Kingsport Planning Region with an elevation over 1,400 feet above mean sea level shall also be subject to the provision of the Gateway Overlay District. These provisions for elevations in excess of 1,400 feet will not apply to single-family detached homes or agricultural uses. 
    The board of commissioners shall regulate the portion of the overlay district found within the corporate limits of the City of Kingsport. If the corporate limits of the City of Kingsport should change in the future due to annexation, the commissioners shall, upon the effective date of the annexation, regulate the new portions pursuant to the provisions of this act. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 5; Pvt. Acts 2004, ch. 84, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission; sanctioning authority; governing board; members; appointment; terms. 
(a)  The governing body of the authority shall be a board of commissioners established in accordance with the terms of this act and charged with the promotion and support of economic based growth for the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District in the State of Tennessee. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall be composed of seven (7) members, five (5) of whom shall be appointed by the governing body of the municipality, one (1) who is in private business, one (1) from an educational or research institution and one (1) which is an architect. The sixth member shall be the director of planning of the municipality, or his or her designee. No person, whether or not a landowner or developer, with any property interest in any property within the Corridor shall be nominated for, or appointed to serve, as a commissioner. The seventh member shall be a member of the governing body of the City of Kingsport. The term of office of the member appointed from the governing body shall coincide with his or her term of office. The remaining commissioners shall serve terms of five (5) years which terms of office shall begin not more than one (1) month after ratification of this act by the governing body of the City of Kingsport. Commissioners first appointed to the board shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years respectively, but thereafter each commissioner shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years except as otherwise provided herein. All commissioners shall be residents of the City of Kingsport. Any vacancy by reason of nonresidency, incapacity, resignation or death shall be filled in a like manner for the unexpired term. Subsequent commissioners shall be appointed by the governing body of the city, and commissioners may serve more than one (1) term. A resolution of the governing body approving the nominees to the initial board of commissioners shall be adopted, and upon approval the commission shall be authorized to commence to conduct business. 
(c)  All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation, but may be allowed necessary expenses while engaged in the business of the commission; as may be provided and approved by the city recorder. 
(d)  The commissioners shall elect from its members a chairman and vice-chairman, each of whom shall continue to be voting members, and shall adopt its own bylaws and rules of procedures. A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(e)  A commissioner may be removed from office for good cause including voting in matters of personal interest in violation of T.C.A. § 12-4-101 but only after notice of the cause of such removal has been served upon the commissioner, in accordance with article 7, section 1 of the Tennessee Constitution, T.C.A. § 12-4-102, and the general law. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - General powers. 
    The authority shall have the powers necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter [article] including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  To adopt and oversee implementation of a comprehensive development plan comprised of land use, architectural standards, public facilities, and capital improvement plans for the entire corridor overlay zone for the purpose of developing a systematic land management policy and guidance for any person in the development process; 
(b)  To serve as a review board for the purpose of accepting, considering, approving or denying applications for "certificates of appropriateness" as defined herein, prior to action on requests for rezoning or variance from the provisions of the zoning regulations in effect within the corridor overlay zone, and prior to action on applications for building or grading permits within the corridor overlay zone by any person authorized to issue such permits for the City of Kingsport in order to insure [ensure] that development within the zone is consistent with the policies and plans of the commission; and to administer and enforce such developmental and architectural standards, regulations and related rules and procedures as the commissioners may adopt from time to time for the review and consideration of applications for such certificates, provided, however, that such standards, regulations and rules and procedures are first approved by the governing body for the City of Kingsport; and 
(c)  To do all acts and things necessary, or deemed necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Application for permits for construction in corridor overlay zone; certificates of appropriateness. 
    All applications for rezoning or variances from the provisions of adopted zoning ordinances, or for permits for construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, or relocation of a building, structure or other improvements to real estate situated within the corridor overlay zone, shall be reviewed by the commissioners, which shall have broad powers to request detailed plans and related data pertinent to thorough review of the proposal. No rezoning or variance to zoning provisions shall be granted, nor shall construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation or relocation to any building, structure or other improvement to real property situated within the corridor overlay zone be performed without the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the commissioners. No building permit issuing authority in the City of Kingsport shall issue any such permit for new structures or improvements within the corridor overlay zone without issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the commissioners or by the governing body of the City of Kingsport on appeal as provided in Section 11. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 8) 
Sec. 9. - Issuance or denial of certificate of appropriateness guidelines. 
(a)  The commission shall, as soon as it is reasonably possible, but in all cases within thirty (30) working days following the filing of an application with the required data, grant a certificate of appropriateness with or without attached conditions, or deny the certificate, and shall state the grounds for denial in writing. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall apply its adopted review criteria and standards, rules and regulations and give prime consideration to: 
(1)  The proposed structure's or development's consistency with the comprehensive development plan and development standards jointly adopted by the commission for the corridor overlay zone; 
(2)  The relationship of the proposed development's design or the proposed structure's exterior architectural features to the surrounding area and/or the character of the entire overlay zone; 
(3)  The general compatibility of the structure or development proposal and its projected impacts on development already in the vicinity of the proposal, as well as those projected and reflected in the adopted comprehensive plan for the zone; and 
(4)  Any other factor, including functional and/or aesthetic, which is reasonably related to the purposes of this act. 
(b)  Failure by the commission to act on an application within the time required herein shall constitute approval of the certificate, provided, however, that an extension may be granted upon concurrence of the applicant. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 9) 
Sec. 10. - Agricultural structures and residential structures excluded. 
    The structures, facilities and land uses identified herein shall not be required to apply for a certificate of appropriateness from the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission: 
(a)  Agricultural uses and structures or appurtenances located in an agricultural zone and used solely for the production of products for sale to wholesale or retail markets and not part of or functionally related to manufacturing, commercial, or industrial enterprises within the designated corridor overlay zone. 
(b)  All residential structures when such structures are located within subdivisions approved by the planning commission or otherwise permitted by the general law. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to require any change, or limit in any way any existing use of land permitted by any zoning in effect at the time of the enactment of this act. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Appeal of authority actions. 
    Any interested party who is aggrieved by any action of the commission including the approval or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal its decision to the governing body for the City of Kingsport by filing an appeal on the designated form and paying such filing fee as may be required within thirty (30) days of the action of the commissioners. The action that is appealed may be overruled by an affirmative majority vote of the governing body of the City of Kingsport. All appeals shall be heard within sixty (60) days of filing of application for appeal. Appeal from the action of the governing body for the City of Kingsport shall be by writ of certiorari as provided in the general law and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of such action. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 11) 
Sec. 12. - Enforcement of Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission decisions. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained, or used, or any land is used in violation of this act or of any regulation or provisions enacted or adopted by the commission under the powers granted by this act, the board of commissioners, the attorney general, the district attorney general for the judicial circuit in which such violation occurs, or is occurring, the governing body's supervisor, department of code administration and inspection, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action, actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin or abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or use. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Construction of act. 
(a)  The powers, authority, and rights conferred by this act shall be in addition and supplemental to any other general, special or local law conferring powers to counties, industrial development corporation or port authorities, and the limitations imposed by this act shall not affect the powers conferred to any county, industrial development corporation or port authority created by any other general, special or local law. 
(b)  This act is remedial in nature, and shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes of promoting economic development within and in proximity to the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay Zone as defined herein, facilitating the attraction, siting, and support of industries in [the City of] Kingsport, and encouraging the effective utilization of the natural, educational, and technological resources therein to the ultimate growth and development of commerce and industry in said city and throughout the State of Tennessee. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter [article] shall grant any power or control to the commission over any land or facilities now under the control of any existing authority or public utility created by general or special act. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter [article] shall be construed to prevent the extension of the corridor overlay zone into other counties by adoption of similar legislation for such counties, and upon adoption of such legislation this act should be amended to provide for participation by representatives of that county or those counties on the board of commissioners by the appointment of additional members of the board from either that county or those counties, and by providing for the governing body of such county to serve in all respects as the governing body for the development in such county. 
(e)  If any of the provisions of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not effect [affect] the other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and for that purpose the provisions of this act are separable. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Ratification. 
    This act shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-thirds vote of the governing body for the City of Kingsport. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of the governing body and certified by the presiding officer to the Secretary of State. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Effective date. 
    For the purpose of approving or rejecting the provisions of this act, it shall be effective upon becoming law, the public welfare requiring it; for all other purposes it shall be effective upon being approved as provided in Section 14. 
(Pvt. Acts 1995, ch. 77, § 15) 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
PRIVATE ACTS 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Private Acts 
Year Ch. 
No. Article Section Section 
this Charter 1917 76 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 1 3 Char. Art. IA, § 3 2 1-7 Char. Art. II, § 1- 
Char. Art. II, § 7 3 1-8 Char. Art. III, § 1- 
Char. Art. III, § 8 3 10-15 Char. Art. III, § 10- 
Char. Art. III, § 15 4 1, 2 Char. Art. IV, § 1, 
Char. Art. IV, § 2 4 4, 5 Char. Art. IV, § 4, 
Char. Art. IV, § 5 5 1-3 Char. Art. V, § 1- 
Char. Art. V, § 3 6 1-4 Char. Art. VI, § 1- 
Char. Art. VI, § 4 7 1, 2 Char. Art. VII, § 1, 
Char. Art. VII, § 2 8 1-4 Char. Art. VIII, § 1- 
Char. Art. VIII, § 4 8 6-11 Char. Art. VIII, § 6- 
Char. Art. VIII, § 11 9 1, 2 Char. Art. IX, § 1, 
Char. Art. IX, § 2 10 1-18 Char. Art. X, § 1- 
Char. Art. X, § 18 11 1-12 Char. Art. XI, § 1- 
Char. Art. XI, § 12 11 13, 14 Char. Art. XI, § 13, 
Char. Art. XI, § 14 12 1 Char. Art. XII, § 1 13 1-7 Char. Art. XIII, § 1- 
Char. Art. XIII, § 7 14 1-3 Char. Art. XIV, § 1- 
Char. Art. XIV, § 3 15 1-3 Char. Art. XV, § 1- 
Char. Art. XV, § 3 16 1-3 Char. Art. XVI, § 1- 
Char. Art. XVI, § 3 17 1-4 Char. Art. XVII, § 1- 
Char. Art. XVII, § 4 18 1-4 Char. Art. XVIII, § 1- 
Char. Art. XVIII, § 4 19 1-10 Char. Art. XIX, § 1- 
Char. Art. XIX, § 10 20 1-3 Char. Art. XX, § 1- 
Char. Art. XX, § 3 21 1 Char. Art. XXI, § 1 22 1 Char. Art. XXII, § 1 23 1 Char. Art. XXIII, § 1 1919 538 1-18 Char. Art. IA, § 1- 
Char. Art. IA, § 18 719 2 Char. Art. VIII, § 3 1923 245 1 Char. Art. VIII, § 2 1927 104 1, 2 Char. Art. IA, § 13 503 1 Char. Art. IA, § 13 1929 141 2 Char. Art. XIX, § 4 1931 
(Ex. Sess.) 72 2 Char. Art. X, § 13 1931 41 2 Char. Art. XI, § 7 1935 
(Ex. Sess.) 96 1 Char. Art. VIII, § 6 1937 106 1 Char. Art. VI, § 1 2 Char. Art. VII, § 2 507 1 Char. Art. VII, § 2 Char. Art. XIII, § 1- 
Char. Art. XIII, § 7 1939 447 17 Char. Art. XX, § 2 1955 68 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 69 1 Char. Art. IA, § 14 70 1 Char. Art. XIII, § 1 71 1 Char. Art. VI, § 5 84 1 Char. Art. II, § 3 106 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 1957 18 1 Char. Art. IA, § 3 1959 217 1 Char. Art. IA, § 3 1963 24 1, 2 Char. Art. XV, § 1 25 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 2-6 Char. Art. II, § 1- 
Char. Art. II, § 5 8-10 Char. Art. III, § 1- 
Char. Art. III, § 3 11 Char. Art. XIII, § 4 12 Char. Art. XIII, § 6 53 1 Char. Art. III, § 5 1968 486 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 1969 54 Char. Art. IV, § 2 Char. Art. VII, § 2 1972 254 1-3 Char. Art. XIX, § 1 266 1, 2 R.L. Art. I, § 1 415 1 R.L. Art. I, § 2 1973 6 2 Char. Art. III, § 10 3 Char. Art. IV, § 2 4 Char. Art. III, § 1 Char. Art. III, § 7 1974 281 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 345 1 Char. Art. XIX, § 1, 
Char. Art. XIX, § 2 1976 235 Char. Art. IV, § 2 4 Char. Art. X, § 15 5 Char. Art. XVI, § 2 6 Char. Art. XX, § 1 275 3 Char. Art. X, § 13 1978 283 1 Char. Art. III, §§ 1, 2 2 Char. Art. V, § 2 292 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 2 Char. Art. III, § 6 3 Char. Art. IV, § 2 4 Char. Art. VI, § 5 5 Char. Art. VII, § 2 6 Char. Art. VIII, § 4 7 Char. Art. VIII, § 9 8 Char. Art. XI, § 9 9 Char. Art. XIII, § 2 10 Char. Art. XIII, § 7 11 Char. Art. XV, § 1 12 Char. Art. XVII, § 3 13, 14 Char. Art. XIX, § 9, 
Char. Art. XIX, § 10 15 Char. Art. XX, § 1 1979 40 1 Char. Art. III, § 2 1980 244 Char. Art. IV, § 2 1 Char. Art. IA, § 12 2 Char. Art. II, § 6 3 Char. Art. III, § 8 4 Char. Art. IV, § 5 5 Char. Art. VII, § 2 6 Char. Art. XI, § 11 7 Char. Art. XIX, § 2 8 Char. Art. XX, § 1 284 1 Char. Art. IV, § 2 1981 28 1 Char. Art. V, § 1 2 Char. Art. VII, § 3 1982 198 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 1984 159 Char. Art. I, § 2 1989 42 1 Char. Art. VI, § 5 43 1 Char. Art. XX, § 3 44 1 Char. Art. III, § 10 45 1 Char. Art. III, § 5 1991 119 1 Char. Art. IA, § 19 1995 30 1 Char. Art. III, § 9 30 2 Char. Art. III, § 12 44 Char. Art. I, § 2 1 Char. Art. VII, § 2 2 Char. Art. XX, § 1 4 Char. Art. IV, § 2 5 Char. Art. VII, § 1 47 1 Char. Art. IV, § 2 2 Char. Art. IX, § 2 3 Char. Art. XX, § 1 1-15 R.L. Art. II, § 1- 
R.L. Art. II, § 15 1996 177 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 2 Char. Art. IV, § 2 2001 2 Char. Art. IA, § 1 3 Char. Art. II, § 6 4 Char. Art. III, § 3 5, 6 Char. Art. III, § 6, 
Char. Art. III, § 7 7 Char. Art. III, § 9 8 Char. Art. III, § 12 9 Char. Art. III, § 14 20, 21 Char. Art. VIII, § 3, 
Char. Art. VIII, § 4 23 Char. Art. VIII, § 6 24-26 Char. Art. VIII, § 8- 
Char. Art. VIII, § 10 27 Char. Art. IX, § 2 28 Char. Art. X, § 1 29, 30 Char. Art. XI, §§ 1, 2 31 Char. Art. XIII, § 3 32, 33 Char. Art. XV, § 1, 
Char. Art. XV, § 2 34, 35 Char. Art. XVI, § 1, 
Char. Art. XVI, § 2 37 Char. Art. XX, § 1 30 1 Char. Art. I, § 2 10 Char. Art. III, § 15 11 Char. Art. IV, § 2 13, 14 Char. Art. IV, § 4, 
Char. Art. IV, § 5 15, 16 Char. Art. V, § 1, 
Char. Art. V, § 2 17 Char. Art. VI, § 1 18 Char. Art. VII, § 2 19 Char. Art. VIII, § 2.5 2003 24 1 Char. Art. VI, § 1 2004 84 1 R.L. Art. II, § 5  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal government generally, T.C.A. § 6-51-101 et seq.; ordinances and codes, T.C.A. § 6-54-501 et seq.; notice requirements for adoption of code, T.C.A. § 6-54-509; action of governing body by ordinance, T.C.A. § 6-54-512. 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsport, Tennessee," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as "Kingsport City Code." 
(Code 1981, § 1-1; Code 1998, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- City need not publish code of ordinances in newspaper; public hearing and notice, however, is required, T.C.A. §§ 6-54-508, 6-54-509. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of mayor and aldermen or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Board, board of mayor and aldermen. The term "the board" or "the board of mayor and aldermen" means the board of mayor and aldermen of the city. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter, this Charter. The term "the Charter" or "this Charter" means chapter 76 of the Private Acts of Tennessee of 1917, as amended, set out in part I, subpart A, of this volume. 
    City. The term "the city" means the City of Kingsport, in the Counties of Sullivan and Hawkins and the State of Tennessee. 
    Code, this Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsport, Tennessee. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-102. 
    County. The term "the county" means the County of Sullivan or the County of Hawkins, as appropriate. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section appears that requires the head of a department or some other city official to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city recorder's office that lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104. 
    Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the city board of mayor and aldermen. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-106. 
    Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, other ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(12). 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural include the singular number. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104(c). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(19). 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. Whenever a reference to an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency appears, it shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of the City of Kingsport, Tennessee." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and" and the term "and" as "or," where the sense requires it. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city board of mayor and aldermen of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(20). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(21). 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(24). 
    Real estate, real property. The terms "real estate" and "real property" mean lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests therein, equitable, as well as legal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(20). 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city board of mayor and aldermen of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is usually, but not always, mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(25), (27). 
    State. The term "the state" means the State of Tennessee. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(32). 
    Street. The term "street" includes all public ways, alleys, lanes, courts, squares and sidewalks and those parts of public places which form traveled parts of highways. 
    T.C.A. The abbreviation "T.C.A." means Tennessee Code Annotated, as amended. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, mean any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104(a). 
    Time. Whenever reference is made as to a particular time, it refers to Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, as may then be in effect. 
    Writing, written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1981, § 1-2; Code 1998, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction, T.C.A. § 1-3-105. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several subsections and sections and the headings of chapters, articles and divisions of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the subsection, section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles or substantive portions of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the catchlines or other headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1981, § 1-4; Code 1998, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes, editor's notes, and state law references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the editor's notes and state law reference notes throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall not be considered as part of the text of the Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from the reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsport, Tennessee, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The provisions shall be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsport, Tennessee, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. In lieu of designating the section number for such new section, the city may provide that the section be appropriately numbered to conform to the numbering system used in this Code. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1981, § 1-6; Code 1998, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of mayor and aldermen. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of mayor and aldermen during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1998, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-7. - Code as evidence. 
    Any printed copy of the Kingsport City Code containing a printed certificate of the mayor and recorder of the correctness thereof shall be held to be a true and correct copy and may be read in evidence in all courts of the state without further proof of the laws contained therein. 
(Code 1998, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-8. - Ordinances not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(3)  The administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of mayor and aldermen of the city to any person, firm or corporation. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution. 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and levying or imposing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing regulations for subdivision of land or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones not inconsistent with such Code. 
(12)  Any ordinance levying any tax not otherwise provided for in the Code. 
(b)  Nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance, which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-9. - Correction of errors. 
    The city recorder, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may make or have made the correction of typographical or numbering errors in an ordinance or sections of this Code, and may make or have made changes in the numbering sequence of ordinances or Code sections when necessitated or occasioned by the amendments thereto. 
Sec. 1-10. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
    A recorder's copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city recorder, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the express duty of the recorder or his designee to insert in their designated places ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the board. 
Sec. 1-11. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the city recorder, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of mayor and aldermen, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1981, § 1-7; Code 1998, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-13. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions of this Code, including provisions adopted in this Code by reference, conflict and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by state or federal law, wherever in this Code or any ordinance of the city or rule or regulation promulgated by any officer thereof under authority vested in him by law or ordinance any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of the Charter or of this Code or any such ordinance or ordinance adopted by reference or rule or regulation shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $10.00 or more than $50.00, unless otherwise provided by ordinance and unless a greater amount is permitted by state law, in which event the maximum penalty for such violation shall be the maximum permitted by state law. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty under this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the city's Charter or Code. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-8; Code 1998, § 1-9; Ord. No. 4099, § I, 8-1-1995) 
State Law reference- Authority of city, T.C.A. § 6-54-306. 
Sec. 1-15. - Citations for violations and court appearances. 
(a)  Police officers are authorized to issue citations and summonses to court for violation of city ordinances. The summons or citation shall be signed by the recipient, and such signing shall be deemed to be a written promise on the part of the defendant to appear in court at the designated time, date and place. The signature shall not be deemed to indicate guilt or innocence of the offense charged. Service of process may also be made by a third party, by mail, or such other method in the same manner as provided for in the Tennessee Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended; provided, however, a summons or citation issued for a violation of article VIII, division 2 of chapter 98 may be served by mail to the address, as given on the motor vehicle registration, of the person named in the summons or citation by first class mail, postage prepaid. Service by mail shall be presumed complete within five calendar days of mailing. When service by first class mail is used pursuant to this section other service on such person shall not be required, if such person has notice of the summons or citation. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to violate the state or federal constitution. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear as witnessed by his signature given to an officer upon the issuance of a citation or summons, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation or summons was originally issued. 
(c)  A written promise to appear in court as evidenced by signing a citation or summons may be complied with by an appearance by counsel or by posting a cash bond with the clerk of the city court. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-14, except as otherwise provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1981, § 1-8.1; Code 1998, § 1-10; Ord. No. 5526, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 1-16. - Service of process on corporations. 
    When any corporation is charged with a violation of the city ordinances, the warrant or process shall be served upon the highest officer or agent of such corporation to be found in the city, and such service shall be deemed sufficient notice to the corporation. 
(Code 1981, § 1-9; Code 1998, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-17. - Severability. 
    If any chapter, article, division, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-5; Code 1998, § 1-6) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers generally, T.C.A. § 6-54-101 et seq.; public officers and employees generally, T.C.A. § 8-1-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
    The seal of the city shall be of the following description: Two concentric circles forming a ring within which are the words "KINGSPORT TENNESSEE" at the top and, at the bottom, the words "The Model City," with a geometric device within the inner ring filled by a triangle containing a graphic representation of the sun rising over Bays Mountain, the whole to be arranged according to the impression annexed to Ordinance No. 3497. 
(Code 1981, § 2-2; Code 1998, § 2-2) 
State Law reference- Municipal name and symbols, T.C.A. § 6-54-137. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Designees of mayor or commissioners, T.C.A. § 6-54-112. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may, by resolution, regulate the conduct of its members during its meetings and prescribe its own rules of procedure, except as provided in the Charter. In all cases where there is no established rule, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall be the guide. 
(Code 1981, § 2-45; Code 1998, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-22. - Time of regular meetings. 
    The regular meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen shall be held at 7:00 p.m. in the city hall on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. However, when such meeting falls upon a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the day following at 7:00 p.m. For the purposes of this section, a legal holiday is defined as being a holiday recognized for city employees. 
(Code 1981, § 2-46; Code 1998, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-23. - Law enforcement officer's presence at meeting. 
    A law enforcement officer shall be present at meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-47; Code 1998, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-24. - Mayor's signature attested by recorder. 
    The city recorder shall attest the signature of the mayor to the journal of the proceedings of the board of mayor and aldermen and to all ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 2-48; Code 1998, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-25. - Approval of contracts, grant applications and grants. 
    Pursuant to article I, section 2 of the Charter, permitting the city to exercise its power by ordinance, resolution or motion, all contracts of a routine nature or that occur in the normal course of business or any other contract, and approval of grants and grant applications may be approved by the board of mayor and aldermen and the mayor may be authorized to sign the same by resolution. Nothing herein shall be construed as to limit the power of the board of mayor and aldermen to exercise the corporate powers by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(Code 1998, § 2-35; Ord. No. 4945, § I, 8-7-2001) 
Secs. 2-26-2-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEGISLATION 

Sec. 2-54. - Designation of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be designated by number, in consecutive order, according to the date of passage. 
(Code 1981, § 2-17; Code 1998, § 2-61) 
State Law reference- Actions of governing body by ordinance, T.C.A. § 6-54-512. 
Sec. 2-55. - Dates of readings endorsed on ordinances. 
    The city recorder shall endorse on each ordinance the dates of its passage on first and second readings. 
(Code 1981, § 2-18; Code 1998, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-56. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1981, § 2-19; Code 1998, § 2-63) 
Secs. 2-57-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Personnel policies required, T.C.A. § 6-54-123; discrimination on basis of residency, T.C.A. § 8-50-107. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-86. - Duties. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, all city employees shall perform such functions as are designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-36; Code 1998, § 2-91) 
Sec. 2-87. - Official bonds. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall obtain a bond covering all city employees designated by the Charter or the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-31; Code 1998, § 2-92) 
Sec. 2-88. - Premiums on official bonds. 
    The premiums on all bonds of city officers required to give fidelity bonds shall be paid by the city from city funds. 
(Code 1981, § 2-32; Code 1998, § 2-93) 
Sec. 2-89. - Contracts between city and organized labor prohibited; striking, interruptions of work. 
    Except as provided by state law with respect to professional employees of the school board, the city, the board of mayor and aldermen and officers and agents of the city acting individually or otherwise are prohibited from acknowledging, executing, approving, ratifying or otherwise entering into any agreement or contract with any labor union, trade union or labor organization which seeks to represent any municipal employees as the collective bargaining agent or otherwise. Any agreement or contract between the board of mayor and aldermen or city officers or agents and any labor union, trade union or labor organization, as collective bargaining agents for any public employees of the city, is declared to be illegal, unlawful, void and without force and effect. 
(Code 1981, § 2-33; Code 1998, § 2-94) 
Sec. 2-90. - Pension and retirement benefits. 
(a)  Eligible city employees shall be members of the Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System. 
(b)  Eligible city employees shall receive the benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and provided by T.C.A. § 8-38-101. 
(Code 1981, § 2-34; Code 1998, § 2-95) 
Sec. 2-91. - Health and safety program. 
    The city shall establish and maintain an occupational safety and health program for city employees which shall be at least as stringent as federal or state guidelines. 
(Code 1981, § 2-35; Code 1998, § 2-96) 
State Law reference- Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1973, T.C.A. § 50-3-101 et seq.; applicable definitions, T.C.A. § 50-3-103. 
Sec. 2-92. - Mayor, alderman or member of board of education prohibited from employment with city. 
(a)  Neither the mayor, any alderman nor any member of the board of education shall be eligible to apply for or accept any employment, including as a consultant, with the city during the time they hold such office. 
(b)  No immediate family member or any person having been regularly living in the household of the mayor, any alderman, any member of the board of education, the city manager or the superintendent of schools shall be eligible to apply for or accept any employment, including as a consultant, with the city during the time the related official holds office. This section shall not apply to an immediate family member or any person having been regularly living in the household of the related official if such person were employed by the city prior to the time such related official was sworn into office. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to employment with the city school system, and shall not be construed to limit the right of the city school system to employ any person. 
(Code 1998, § 2-5; Ord. No. 5383, §§ I-III, 3-7-2006) 
Secs. 2-93-2-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-113. - Bond. 
    The city manager shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a fidelity bond in the sum of $5,000.00, for the faithful performance of his duty, with some surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety. 
(Code 1981, § 2-56; Code 1998, § 2-126) 
Sec. 2-114. - Printing ordinances, documents. 
    The city manager shall have the direction of printing of ordinances and other documents. 
(Code 1981, § 2-58; Code 1998, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-115. - Purchasing. 
    The city manager shall have the purchasing authority set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
Secs. 2-116-2-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECORDER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Certification of municipal clerks and recorders, T.C.A. § 6-54-120. 

Sec. 2-144. - Bond. 
    The recorder shall execute a fidelity bond with a surety company doing business in the state as surety. The form of the bond shall be approved by the city attorney. The minimum amount of the bond shall be based upon the following scale: 
Annual Receipts from 
State Department of 
Education Percentage or Amount 
to be Covered Up to $50,000.00, base bond $5,000.00 More than $50,000.00 to $500,000.00 10% Next $500,000.00 5% Next $2,000,000.00 3% More than $3,000,000.00 2%  
(Code 1981, § 2-66; Code 1998, § 2-156) 
Sec. 2-145. - Additional powers. 
    The recorder shall have all of the powers and duties of the county clerk and the county trustee which are enumerated in state law where needed to carry out municipal functions in compliance with the Charter. However, the recorder is prohibited from hiring personnel without the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-67; Code 1998, § 2-157) 
Sec. 2-146. - Deputy. 
    The position of deputy recorder is created with the authority to act as recorder in the absence of or because of incapacity of the recorder under authority of article X, section 1 of the Charter. The deputy recorder shall also be charged with carrying out specific duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the city manager and the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 2-68; Code 1998, § 2-158) 
Secs. 2-147-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-176. - Bond. 
    The city treasurer shall execute and deliver to the city recorder a bond in a sum sufficient to meet state and local requirements, as determined by the board of mayor and aldermen, to secure the faithful performance of his duty and to account for all moneys coming into his hands, with some good, solvent surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety. So long as the city recorder performs the duties of city treasurer, he shall not be required to execute the bond required in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 2-74; Code 1998, § 2-186) 
Sec. 2-177. - Receiving, collecting, disbursing public money. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the city treasurer shall, under the direction of the city manager and director of the department of finance, collect and receive all taxes, revenue and income of the city and shall disburse all funds of the city upon warrants or vouchers drawn by the city recorder and approved by the city manager and shall also receive and disburse all public funds coming into his hands as city treasurer in pursuance of such regulations as may be prescribed therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 2-75; Code 1998, § 2-187) 
Sec. 2-178. - Payments tendered by check. 
(a)  When any check, draft or order tendered in payment of taxes, fees or services rendered by the city is not paid by the drawee because the maker or drawer did not have an account or sufficient funds on deposit with the financial institution or the draft, check or order has an incorrect or insufficient signature thereon, the maker or drawer shall be assessed a handling charge not to exceed that amount as established from time to time by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The handling charge established in subsection (a) of this section shall become part of the original bill or fee and shall be subject to the same collection or enforcement procedures as the original bill or fee. 
(Code 1981, § 2-76; Code 1998, § 2-188; Ord. No. 5567, § II, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 2-179-2-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CITY ENGINEER 

Sec. 2-210. - Position established. 
    There is established the position of city engineer. 
(Code 1981, § 2-92; Code 1998, § 2-216) 
Sec. 2-211. - Preparation of maps, plans, specifications. 
    The city engineer shall perform such duties in connection with the preparation of plans, profiles, maps and specifications for public improvements, indicating for the guidance of property owners the established lines and grades of streets, as may be required of him by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-93; Code 1998, § 2-217) 
Sec. 2-212. - Preservation of maps, plans, profiles adopted by board. 
    The city engineer shall preserve all of the official maps, plans and the profiles adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-94; Code 1998, § 2-218) 
Secs. 2-213-2-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-233. - Position established. 
    There is established the position of director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 2-111; Code 1998, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-234. - Powers. 
    The director of public works shall manage and have charge of the following: 
(1)  The construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges and other public highways. 
(2)  All storm sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, streams and watercourses. 
(3)  All boulevards, squares and other public places and grounds which belong to the city or are dedicated to public use, except parks, playgrounds, public buildings and schools. 
(4)  The collection and disposal of solid waste. 
(5)  The wastewater collection and treatment system and the water treatment and distribution system of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-112; Code 1998, § 2-277) 
Secs. 2-235-2-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-262. - Appointment and removal of special code enforcement officers. 
    The city manager is authorized to appoint, with the knowledge of the board of mayor and aldermen, one or more special code enforcement officers to assist in the enforcement of those chapters, divisions, articles and sections of this Code, as such sections of the Code are necessary and required for each individual designated as a special code enforcement officer to fulfill his duties and responsibilities as a city employee and to assist the police department in the enforcement of this Code. The appointment as special code enforcement officer is revocable at any time by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-221; Code 1998, § 2-571) 
Sec. 2-263. - Departments affected. 
    The appointment of special code enforcement officers by the city manager shall be limited to the following departments and individuals designated by job description within the respective departments: 
(1)  Police department. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are parking control officers. 
(2)  Fire department. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are fire inspectors, deputy chiefs and senior captains. 
(3)  Animal control. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are animal control officers. 
(4)  Department of public works. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are those individuals directly involved with activities subject to Code provisions, recommended by the public works director and appointed by the city manager, but not to exceed four persons in the department. 
(5)  Bays Mountain Park. The person eligible by job description for appointment is the Bays Mountain Park Director. 
(6)  Department of development services. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are code enforcement officers and/or coordinators. 
(7)  Building department. The persons eligible by job description for appointment are those individuals directly involved with activities subject to Code provisions, recommended by the building official and appointed by the city manager, but not to exceed two persons in the department. 
(Code 1981, § 2-222; Code 1998, § 2-572; Ord. No. 4012, § III, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 6526, § I, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 2-264. - Limitation upon officers' authority; scope of duties and responsibilities. 
    Special code enforcement officers appointed by the city manager shall be limited in the scope of their authority to the enforcement of specific sections of this Code pertaining directly to the individuals' respective job duties and responsibilities as enumerated in this section and no other. A special code enforcement officer shall be empowered only to issue a summons for a perceived ordinance violation. A special code enforcement officer shall not be authorized to a carry a firearm. Special code enforcement officers shall be restricted by department to enforcement of specific sections of this Code as follows: 
(1)  Police department. Special code enforcement officers assigned to the police department shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of a summons for perceived violations of those sections of this Code pertaining to stopping, standing and parking. 
(2)  Fire department. Special code enforcement officers in the fire department shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of a summons for the perceived violations of the fire prevention code, as adopted in section 42-46, and to the enforcement of division 3 of article IV of chapter 98, pertaining to fire lanes. 
(3)  Animal control. Special code enforcement officers in animal control shall have the authority to issue citations for the perceived violations of chapter 14, pertaining to animals and fowl. 
(4)  Department of public works. Special code enforcement officers in the department of public works shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of summons for the perceived violations of chapter 86, regulating solid waste, and chapter 102, regulating public utilities. 
(5)  Bays Mountain Park. Special code enforcement officers at Bays Mountain Park shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of summons for the perceived violations of ordinances pertaining to trespassing, destruction of real or personal property and littering within Bays Mountain Park. 
(6)  Department of development services. Special code enforcement officers in the department of development services shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of summons for the perceived violations of ordinances pertaining to zoning, property maintenance, littering and nuisances. 
(7)  Building department. Special code enforcement officers in the department of development services shall be specifically limited in the scope of their authority to the issuance of summons for the perceived violations of chapter 22. 
(Code 1981, § 2-223; Code 1998, § 2-573; Ord. No. 4012, § IV, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 6526, § II, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 2-265. - Special code enforcement officer appointments for existing personnel; identification. 
    Appointments of special code enforcement officers by the city manager shall be bestowed upon the respective individuals in the employ of the city, and the duties shall be duties in addition to those duties held by the authorized personnel. Special code enforcement officers shall carry identification, signed by the mayor, identifying the individual as a special code enforcement officer by identity card. 
(Code 1981, § 2-224; Code 1998, § 2-574) 
Sec. 2-266. - Bond required. 
    Upon appointment as a special code enforcement officer, all such designated officers shall, prior to commencement of the performance of their respective duties as special code enforcement officers, execute and file with the city recorder a public officer's liability bond in such amount as may be fixed by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-225; Code 1998, § 2-575) 
Sec. 2-267. - Authority of police officers. 
    The appointment by the city manager of special code enforcement officers shall in no way diminish, restrict or preclude the enforcement of the Code sections enumerated in section 2-264 by police officers. 
(Code 1981, § 2-226; Code 1998, § 2-576) 
Secs. 2-268-2-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-298. - Departments of city government. 
    In order that the affairs of the city may be classified and arranged conveniently and conducted efficiently, there are established the following departments: 
(1)  Department of Bays Mountain Park. 
(2)  Building department. 
(3)  Department of communications. 
(4)  Department of community development. 
(5)  Department of education. 
(6)  Department of electronic data processing. 
(7)  Department of risk management and employee safety. 
(8)  Department of engineering. 
(9)  Department of finance. 
(10)  Fire department. 
(11)  Department of general services. 
(12)  Department of library and archives. 
(13)  Department of parks and recreation. 
(14)  Department of human services. 
(15)  Department of planning. 
(16)  Police department. 
(17)  Department of public works. 
(18)  Department of transportation. 
(19)  Department of leisure services. 
(20)  Department of developmental services. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1; Code 1998, § 2-1) 
Secs. 2-299-2-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-330. - Terms of service for most boards, commissions, committees or appointed individuals. 
    Except for appointments to the city regional planning commission, the city housing and redevelopment authority, the city economic development board, the 911 board, the gateway commission, and the historic zoning commission, term of service for any individual appointed to a board, commission or committee by the mayor or the board of mayor and aldermen shall be for no more than three years and any part of any ordinance to the contrary is hereby repealed, provided nothing herein shall be construed to lengthen the terms of any board, commission or committee with terms of service for any individual of less than three years or to any individual serving by designation of office or position. 
(Code 1998, § 2-6; Ord. No. 5400, § I, 5-2-2006) 
Secs. 2-331-2-348. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF EDUCATION 

Sec. 2-349. - Control of department. 
    The department of education shall be under the exclusive control of the board of education. 
(Code 1981, § 2-213; Code 1998, § 2-346) 
Sec. 2-350. - Rules and regulations as to schools and employees. 
    The board of education shall prescribe rules and regulations for the government of the city schools, its officers and employees. 
(Code 1981, § 2-214; Code 1998, § 2-347) 
Sec. 2-351. - Budget. 
    The board of education shall submit to the city manager, in accordance with the budget calendar, a tentative budget exhibiting the estimated income available from federal, state, county and city taxes, from tuition, etc., for the operation of the city schools, and the proposed schedule of expenditure of such funds for the current fiscal year. 
(Code 1981, § 2-215; Code 1998, § 2-348) 
Sec. 2-352. - Adherence to appropriation ordinance. 
    Upon the passage of the annual appropriation ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen, the board of education and its officers and agents shall have no power to incur a liability in excess of the items authorized in such appropriation ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-216; Code 1998, § 2-349) 
Sec. 2-353. - Payrolls. 
(a)  The superintendent of schools shall prepare and certify to the city manager for payment the payrolls covering personal services in the city schools authorized by the appropriation ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Such items as are shown on the payroll so prepared and certified shall be paid by voucher drawn by the recorder, with the approval of the city manager, or the treasurer, as for the disbursement of other city funds. 
(Code 1981, § 2-217; Code 1998, § 2-350) 
Sec. 2-354. - School safety zones. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    School means any public or private elementary, secondary or vocational-technical school. 
    School property means all property used for school purposes, including but not limited to school playgrounds. 
    School safety zone means all the territory located within 1,000 feet of school property. 
(b)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 49-2-116, the superintendent of schools, with the approval of the board of education, may develop a method of marking school safety zones, including the use of signs. Signs or other markings shall be located in a visible manner on or near each school indicating that such area is a school safety zone, that such zone extends 1,000 feet from school property and that the delivery or sale of a controlled substance to a minor in such school safety zone will subject the offender to an enhanced punishment. 
(Code 1998, § 2-351; Ord. No. 3998, § I, 2-7-1995) 
Secs. 2-355-2-381. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-382. - Created. 
    There is created and established a senior citizens advisory board, referred to in this division as the advisory board, which shall provide guidance to the department of leisure services relating to the operation of its senior citizens division. 
(Code 1981, § 2-236; Code 1998, § 2-381) 
Sec. 2-383. - Membership; terms; filling vacancy. 
(a)  The senior citizens advisory board shall be composed of 13 members. The director of leisure services and the senior citizens division manager shall be ex officio members. Six members shall be appointed from the senior citizen program participation roster, and the remaining appointments shall be members at large, regardless of age. Every member shall act and serve until his term expires or until a successor is appointed and qualifies. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board. 
(b)  The members of the advisory board shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen, for terms of two years or until their successors are appointed and qualify. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs on the advisory board because of death, resignation or inability or refusal of a member to serve, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of such member by appointment of the mayor, with the approval of the board. 
(Code 1981, § 2-237; Code 1998, § 2-382) 
Sec. 2-384. - Compensation. 
    The members of the senior citizens advisory board, by accepting appointment on the advisory board, shall serve without compensation and shall perform their duties for the benefit of and for the general welfare of the city and its surrounding community. 
(Code 1981, § 2-238; Code 1998, § 2-383) 
Sec. 2-385. - Organization. 
    After appointment, the members of the senior citizens advisory board shall meet in regular session and shall organize themselves by electing from their number a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each person so elected shall hold office for one year or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 1981, § 2-239; Code 1998, § 2-384) 
Sec. 2-386. - Meetings; records; quorum. 
    The senior citizens advisory board shall meet in regular session at least once each month, and the time and place shall be decided by vote of the members. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the advisory board and, in the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of the advisory board. Any meetings, other than a regular meeting, may be called by the chairperson or by any six members of the advisory board, and six members being present shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1981, § 2-240; Code 1998, § 2-385) 
Sec. 2-387. - Recommendation of fees and charges. 
    The senior citizens advisory board shall recommend all fees and charges connected with the operation of the senior citizens division. 
(Code 1981, § 2-241; Code 1998, § 2-386) 
Sec. 2-388. - Operating budget. 
    The senior citizens advisory board shall prepare an operating budget annually for consolidation with the annual city budget. 
(Code 1981, § 2-242; Code 1998, § 2-387) 
Sec. 2-389. - Acceptance of grants, gifts; matching funds. 
(a)  The senior citizens advisory board may, in the name of the city, accept any grant or gift or bequest of money or other personal or real property or any other grants from the United States, the state, the county and any other person, to be used and applied for the purpose provided for in this division, subject the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The board of mayor and aldermen may appropriate, as it deems wise and proper, funds to meet or match any aid or assistance made available from any entity or person to the senior citizens advisory board for the benefit and purposes of the department of leisure services, division of senior citizens. 
(Code 1981, § 2-243; Code 1998, § 2-388) 
Sec. 2-390. - Fiscal operation. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall serve as treasurer of the senior citizens advisory board. All grants, gifts, bequests of money or other personal or real property or any other grants, funds, moneys or other contributions so made for the use of the advisory board shall be deposited with the city treasurer and held by him in trust, in what shall be known as the advisory board fund, to be kept separate from all other city funds. Such funds shall be disbursed, upon the recommendation of the advisory board, as provided by the Charter and ordinances for a city department. 
(b)  All materials, supplies and equipment required or desired shall be requisitioned by the senior citizens division manager as provided by the Charter and ordinances for a city department. 
(c)  All fixtures, books, periodicals, supplies, material, equipment, etc., of the senior citizens division shall be under the control of the senior citizens division manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-244; Code 1998, § 2-389) 
Secs. 2-391-2-408. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-409. - Created. 
    There is created a public art committee to serve as the advisory committee to the board of mayor and aldermen on public art and to develop a public art policy and guidelines for approval by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1998, § 2-396; Ord. No. 5399, § I, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 2-410. - Composition. 
    The public art committee shall be composed of seven appointed and three ex offico members. 
(1)  The appointed membership of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
a.  In making the appointments, the board of mayor and aldermen may consider, but are not required to appoint, one member from each of the following organizations: 
1.  Arts Council of Greater Kingsport; 
2.  Downtown Kingsport Association; 
3.  Parks and recreation advisory committee; and 
4.  One member at large from the community. 
b.  The ex officio members shall be city employees appointed by the city manager and may come from the following departments: 
1.  Cultural arts division; 
2.  Development services; 
3.  Public works; 
4.  Finance; and 
5.  One member at large from the city staff. 
(2)  Three members first appointed to the committee shall be appointed for a term of one year. Three members first appointed to the committee shall have been appointed for a term of two years and the remaining members first appointed to the committee shall be appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, terms shall be for three years. 
(3)  Any appointive member of the committee with unauthorized absences from three consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned from the committee. A successor shall be appointed to fill the vacancy as provided in this section. 
(4)  If a vacancy occurs on the committee, the mayor shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. Such appointment shall be approved by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(5)  The members of the committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1998, § 2-397; Ord. No. 5399, § II, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 2-411. - Meetings; election of officers. 
(a)  The members of the public art committee shall meet in regular session and organize themselves by electing from their number a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each person elected shall hold office for one year or until a successor is elected and qualified. Five members shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall be authorized to govern acquisition, maintenance and deaccessioning of public art in the city as described in the public art policy. 
(b)  The public art committee shall meet in regular session but no less than quarterly, and the time and place shall be decided by a vote of the members. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the committee. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of the committee. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any four voting members of the committee. The public art committee may have such committees as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 2-398; Ord. No. 5399, §§ III, IV, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 2-412. - Administration; funding. 
(a)  The department of parks and recreation cultural arts division of the city shall be responsible for administering the program. All projects shall receive city department and management review prior to final approval by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Public art in the city may be funded from the capital improvement plan. The public art reserve fund may receive up to 0.75 percent of eligible general fund capital improvement project funds, up to a maximum of $75,000.00 per project, at the time construction of an eligible project is initiated provided there are sufficient funds. Up to 0.50 percent of eligible general fund capital improvement project funds may be used for the selection, design and development of works of public art with priority given to the particular capital improvement project generating funds and 0.25 percent of eligible general fund capital improvement project funds may go to the public art fund for maintenance of the city's public art and for marketing and public education regarding public art provided there are sufficient funds. 
(Code 1998, § 2-399; Ord. No. 5399, §§ V, VI, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 5684, § I, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-413. - Public art policy. 
    The public art committee shall develop public art policies and guidelines for consideration by the board of mayor and aldermen. It shall also establish a plan and a priority for public art projects within the city limits. The committee shall establish selection committees for each individual public art project and oversee the request for proposal process. All matters concerning public art, monuments, murals or other creative efforts of individuals or groups shall first be referred to the public art committee for consideration, coordination and recommendation to the board of mayor and aldermen. The public art committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the board of mayor and aldermen for all matters involving public art. 
(Code 1998, § 2-400; Ord. No. 5399, § VII, 5-2-2006) 
Secs. 2-414-2-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HIGHER EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-440. - Created; study and recommendations of higher educational needs of city; limitation of power and authority. 
(a)  There is created and established the higher education advisory board, referred to in this division as the advisory board, which shall generally study the higher educational needs of the community and recommend to the board of mayor and aldermen programs, facilities, special equipment and sites needed or desirable for higher education opportunities in the city with emphasis on the area known as the academic village. The advisory board shall consider the following: 
(1)  Operation and development of the academic village, including, but not limited to, overall campus issues such as parking, layout and additional buildings; 
(2)  Identification and recommendation of ways in which the academic village can benefit all the city, including the downtown area; 
(3)  Identification and recommendation of business community needs for higher education programs and educational initiatives; and 
(4)  Development of a program for scholarships for junior and senior level students attending higher education programs at the academic village. 
(b)  The advisory board shall also generally act as a clearinghouse for opportunities, concerns, and issues associated with the higher education initiatives in the academic village and facilitate communication and discussion of opportunities and concerns with the city, business, and higher education in the academic village. 
(c)  The advisory board shall have no power or authority to impair the Charter, accreditation, or contract of any institution of higher education in the academic village. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(405), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 2-441. - Membership; terms; filling vacancy. 
(a)  The higher education advisory board shall be composed of seven members as follows: 
(1)  The city manager shall be a non-voting ex officio member; 
(2)  The president of Northeast State Technical Community College shall be an ex officio member; 
(3)  One member shall be a president or presidential representative of one of the universities serving as a member of the higher education consortium for the higher education center appointed by the consortium members, and such representative will serve a term of one year and is eligible for reappointment; and 
(4)  Four members, known as appointive members, shall be appointed from the community representing business and industry by the mayor, with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen for terms of two years. Every member shall act and serve until his term expires or until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(b)  An appointive member with unauthorized absences from three consecutive meetings or from three regular meetings within a 12-month period shall be deemed to have resigned from the advisory board. A successor shall be appointed to fill the vacancy as provided in this section. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs on the advisory board because of death, resignation or inability or refusal of an appointive member to serve, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of such appointive member by appointment of the mayor, with the approval of the board. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(406), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 2-442. - Compensation. 
    The members of the advisory board, by accepting appointment on the advisory board, shall serve without compensation and shall perform their duties for the benefit of and for the general welfare of the city and its surrounding community. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(407), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 2-443. - Organization. 
    After appointment, the members of the advisory board shall meet in regular session and shall organize themselves by electing from their number a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each person so elected shall hold office for one year or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(408), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 2-444. - Meetings; records; quorum. 
    The advisory board shall meet in regular session at least once each quarter, and the time and place shall be decided by vote of the members. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the advisory board and, in the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of the advisory board. Any meetings, other than a regular meeting, may be called by the chairperson or by any four members of the advisory board upon 24-hour notice to all members of the board. Five members being present shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(409), 10-26-2010) 
Sec. 2-445. - Subcommittees. 
    The advisory board shall, as needed, develop special standing subcommittees. Structure, purpose, tenure and functions of each standing subcommittee shall be determined by the advisory board. Standing subcommittee membership appointments shall be made by the advisory board. Membership of each standing subcommittee shall include at least one advisory board member. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § I(410), 10-26-2010) 
Secs. 2-446-2-473. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-474. - Annual audit. 
    As required by state law, each year the board of mayor and aldermen shall select a qualified accountant or auditor to make a full examination and audit of the accounts and records of each city officer, agent or department. 
(Code 1981, § 2-134; Code 1998, § 2-431) 
State Law reference- Timing and conduct of required municipal audits, T.C.A. § 6-56-101. 
Sec. 2-475. - Reports. 
    Each city department shall report daily or as necessary to the recorder showing the receipt of all money and its disposition. 
(Code 1981, § 2-135; Code 1998, § 2-432) 
Sec. 2-476. - Warrants for payments by city. 
    The recorder, with the countersignature of the city manager, shall issue all warrants for payments of money by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-136; Code 1998, § 2-433) 
Sec. 2-477. - Depositories designated. 
    The Bank of Tennessee; Citizens Bank; Regions Bank; First Tennessee Bank National Association; SunTrust Bank; State of Franklin Bank Savings Bank; Bank of America; BB&T Bank; GreenBank; First Community Bank; TriSummit Bank and the State of Tennessee Local Government Investment Pool, are hereby designated as depositories of the city, subject to compliance with the requirements of article X, section 13, of the Charter. 
(Code 1981, § 2-137; Code 1998, § 2-434; Ord. No. 4021, § I, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4347, § 1, 2-18-1997; Ord. No. 4825, § I, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 5372, § I, 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 5856, § I, 7-2-2009) 
State Law reference- Deposit of public funds by local governments, T.C.A. § 9-4-111 et seq. 
Sec. 2-478. - Identity theft prevention policy. 
    For purposes of compliance with 16 CFR 681.2 and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting iden tity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the city has adopted an identity theft prevention policy, the purpose of which is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. A copy of the policy, adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section, is available in the office of the city recorder. 
Sec. 2-479. - Use of a collection agency for unpaid fines. 
    The city is authorized to solicit and use the services of a collection agency to collect unpaid fines. The contract with such agency shall be in writing and conform to all provisions set forth in T.C.A. § 40-24-105. The contract with such collection agency may also include the collection of unpaid parking fines as provided in T.C.A. § 6-54-513, after notices required by law are mailed to registered vehicle owners. 
(Ord. No. 6374, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-480-2-509. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS 

Sec. 2-510. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Project manager means the person designated by the city manager to administer and implement public works contracts and the provisions thereof on behalf of the city to which such person is assigned, including the authorization to proceed with changes in the work as set forth in this division. 
    Public works contracts means any contract involving the city pertaining to the construction of public works or improvements costing $15,000.00 or more, with the exception of contracts superintended by the board of education. 
(Code 1981, § 2-145; Code 1998, § 2-491; Ord. No. 4059, § II, 6-20-1995) 
Sec. 2-511. - Contract management rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen, to implement this division. 
(Code 1981, § 2-144; Code 1998, § 2-492) 
Sec. 2-512. - Establishment of contingency fund. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen, contemporaneously with the award of a public works contract to the successful bidder, may establish a contingency fund, the amount of which shall not exceed six percent of the contract price, to implement additional compensation or extras occasioned by changes in work in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1981, § 2-146; Code 1998, § 2-493) 
Sec. 2-513. - Supervision of public works projects. 
    All public works projects shall have a project manager designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-147; Code 1998, § 2-494) 
Sec. 2-514. - Duties of project manager. 
(a)  The project manager designated under this division is authorized and delegated the responsibility of performing all ministerial or administrative functions pertaining to the completion of a public works construction project, such as the authorization for the architect/engineer to proceed with changes in contract work within parameters established by this division. 
(b)  The project manager is authorized to approve changes in the contract work with respect to additional compensation for extras, etc., where the changes involved are merely incidental and of minor importance. The project manager shall not authorize, without prior approval of the city manager, any single change in the contract work which exceeds 20 percent of the total amount of the contingency fund established by this division. 
(c)  The project manager shall not, without prior approval of the city manager, authorize any changes in contract work, regardless of the amount involved, after such time that 50 percent of the contingency fund has been used. 
(d)  The project manager shall notify the city manager in writing by the 25th day of each month during the term of any public works project the exact status of the contingency fund as well as potential problems which may develop in the construction project that may impact upon the contingency fund in forthcoming months. 
(Code 1981, § 2-147.1; Code 1998, § 2-495) 
Sec. 2-515. - Changes in contract work requiring board approval. 
    All changes in public works contract work involving an increase in the original contract price, excepting minor changes for contingencies, as provided in this division, or an extension in time of performance of any public works contract shall be submitted for approval by the city manager to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-147.2; Code 1998, § 2-496) 
Sec. 2-516. - Authorization required for additional expenditures. 
    Under this division, all expenditures of public funds beyond the amount approved in the appropriated budget account, which includes the basic contract price, the established contingency fund and other authorized fees and expenses, must receive prior approval by the board of mayor and aldermen prior to the commencement of any work involving the expenditure of any additional funds. 
(Code 1981, § 2-147.3; Code 1998, § 2-497) 
Sec. 2-517. - Change in work, new work distinguished. 
    Changes in work, additional compensation for extras, etc., are authorized only if the changes involved are merely incidental to or of minor importance in relation to the public works project as specified and bid by the contractor. Additional compensation for new work is prohibited, except in strict compliance with established competitive bidding procedures. Changes in work for which additional compensation is required pertains to such conditions encountered by the contractor or discovered by the city during the progress of the work, subsurface or latent conditions at the work site materially differing from those shown on the drawings or indicated in the specifications for the particular project or unknown conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the character provided for in the drawings and specifications. 
(Code 1981, § 2-147.4; Code 1998, § 2-498) 
Secs. 2-518-2-542. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-543. - Appraisal required for purchase of certain real estate. 
    For property purchased by the city from a private person in excess of $20,000.00, there shall be either an appraisal or the appraised value from the most recent reappraisal used by the tax assessor to determine the assessed value for real property tax purposes for the previous tax year, a copy of which shall be provided to the city treasurer prior to the issuance of any check in payment for such real estate. 
Sec. 2-544. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Per the city's request, § 2-544, entitled, "Smoking on city-owned property" has been redesignated as § 62-211 for the purposes of maintaining Code format. 
Sec. 2-545. - Disposition of abandoned, lost, confiscated or seized personal property. 
(a)  Unclaimed property shall be disposed of in accordance with the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, T.C.A. § 66-29-101 et seq. 
(b)  For all abandoned, lost, confiscated or seized personal property not subject to the unclaimed property act cited in subsection (a) of this section, upon compliance with all requirements of the office of the state treasurer and all other applicable regulations, any personal property that is seized, confiscated, abandoned or lost deemed by the city recorder to be of nominal value may be disposed of by the city recorder without the necessity of payment to the city. For items of nominal value or those items of less than $800.00 value, the city recorder, upon recommendation of the chief of police, may dispose of such property to the convenience of the city to include donating such property to a nonprofit organization for use in the community. The inventory list of such property shall be submitted to the city recorder with written recommendation by the chief of police on a quarterly basis. The city recorder shall submit a detailed report of all such dispositions to the board of mayor and aldermen. All items of nominal value, $20.00 or less, may be destroyed if not otherwise suitable for reuse. All items destroyed shall be accounted for by certified inventory to be done by the chief of police and submitted to the city recorder. The inventory shall be kept on record in the office of the city recorder for a period of not less than five years. 
(c)  For all abandoned, lost, confiscated or seized personal property not subject to the unclaimed property act cited in subsection (a) of this section, all valuable personal property seized, confiscated, abandoned or lost and in the possession of the city may, after having been held for a period of not less than 90 days or as otherwise required by statute, be sold at public auction or by competitive sealed bids after having been advertised in a daily newspaper of general circulation in this city and after diligent inquiry an investigation has been made to ascertain the owner of the property; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to property seized or confiscated in the enforcement of any tax lien. 
(d)  Alternatively, any unclaimed, abandoned, lost, confiscated or seized real or personal property may be disposed of in accordance with applicable state or federal law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-138; Code 1998, § 2-435) 
State Law reference- Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, T.C.A. § 66-29-101 et seq. 
Secs. 2-546-2-568. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-569. - General procedure for disposition of city-owned property. 
    Excess, obsolete or unused real or personal property of the city is declared to be surplus and shall be dealt with in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Whenever the head of any department, other than the department of education, determines that real or personal property used by or under the control of that department is no longer needed or suited for its purposes, such property shall be transferred to the custody of the city recorder. 
(2)  Whenever the board of education determines that real or personal property under its control is no longer suited or needed for school purposes, the board of education shall so declare and shall transfer the property to the custody of the city recorder. 
(3)  The insurance, maintenance and repairs to any such property transferred to the custody of the city recorder shall continue to be paid out of the budget appropriation of the transferring department until the end of the fiscal year in which the transfer takes place or until the appropriation for such purposes has been transferred to the department of finance or other transferee department. 
(4)  Except for personal property determined by the city recorder to be of nominal value or which is considered refuse the city recorder shall make all such property available to all departments of the city and shall affect the transfer of such property to the department requesting its use. 
(5)  When such property is not required by any city department, the city recorder may proceed to dispose of such property in accordance with section 2-570 or 2-571, whichever is applicable, and any rules and procedures for disposition of the property not inconsistent therewith. 
(6)  The proceeds from the disposition of such property shall be credited to the general fund to be appropriated and expended in accordance with the programs and budgets submitted to and approved by the board of mayor and alderman. However, where state or federal regulations require the disposition of the proceeds to another fund or when any such property purchased or held by a bond or other special fund is disposed of, the proceeds from such disposition shall be credited to the unappropriated bond fund or other special fund. 
(7)  The purchaser or grantee of such property disposed of or conveyed by the city shall bear all expenses of the transfer, including the appraisals, costs of sale and recording fees, except when the property has only nominal value or the transfer is initiated by the city. 
(8)  Such property may also be leased under such terms and conditions as may be negotiated by the city recorder, which lease shall be subject to the final approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(9)  Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the mutual exchange of such property, except as otherwise prohibited by law, when, in the opinion of the city recorder, and if required by this article, after an appraisal to determine the value of the respective properties considered for exchange, such an exchange is deemed to be in the best interests of the city. Such exchange shall also be subject to final approval by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-141; Code 1998, § 2-461; Ord. No. 5656, § I, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 6432, § I, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 2-570. - Procedures for disposal-Real property. 
    The procedure for the disposal or sale of real property, after the determination by the city recorder that the property is not needed by any other city department, shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the city recorder finds the surplus real property is only of nominal value, he may waive the requirement for an appraisal, and may dispose of such property subject to final approval of the board of mayor and aldermen, without the necessity of payment to the city, except as otherwise required. The finding shall be in writing and filed with the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(2)  If, in the opinion of the city recorder, the value of the surplus property would be less than the cost of an appraisal and disposal is for the convenience of the city, he may waive the requirement for an appraisal, and the city recorder may dispose of such property. The finding shall be in writing and filed with the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(3)  Except when the requirement for an appraisal is waived by the board of mayor and aldermen or as otherwise provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section or, the city recorder shall have the property appraised by one or more qualified real estate appraisers. The name of the appraiser shall be kept on file in the office of the city recorder; provided, however, the board of mayor and alderman may waive this requirement and dispose of such property as it determines is in the best interest of the city. 
(4)  If, in the opinion of the city recorder, the value of the property is $5,000.00 or more, the city recorder shall: 
a.  Advertise the property for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and receive sealed bids thereon; 
b.  Offer the property for sale at public auction; or 
c.  Conduct such other manner of disposition as, in the discretion of the city recorder or the board of mayor and aldermen, may be appropriate under the circumstances, including a private sale. 
If sealed bids are taken, the bids received, together with the reports of the appraiser, if any, shall be submitted to the city recorder for consideration, or, if the property is offered for public sale at public auction, the highest bid, the number of bidders, the reports of the appraiser and such other information as may be pertinent shall be reported to the city recorder. The city recorder shall consider all bids received or such other offers as may be appropriate under the circumstances. After determining which offer is fair and adequate and in the best interest of the city, the city recorder shall make a recommendation to the board of mayor and aldermen. The board of mayor and aldermen may approve, reject or defer the sale and, if approved, shall authorize the mayor to execute a deed or other instrument of conveyance upon the successful purchaser complying with the terms of the bid or offer made. 
(5)  The city manager shall take appropriate steps to record in the appropriate county register's office any instrument of conveyance authorized in this section. 
(6)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary the board of mayor and aldermen may waive any requirement or provision herein and dispose of the property as it determines is in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-142; Code 1998, § 2-462; Ord. No. 4946, § I, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 6432, § II, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 2-571. - Same-Surplus personal property. 
    The procedure for the disposal or sale of surplus personal property when the city recorder has determined that the property is not needed by any other city department or agency shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city recorder shall determine the fair market value of any surplus personal property in a manner appropriate to the circumstances. This may include taking into consideration both the depreciated book value of the property and any other means of determining fair market value deemed appropriate by the city recorder. The N.A.D.A. or other recognized guidelines may be used to determine fair market value for vehicles. 
(2)  If the surplus personal property is only of nominal value, the city recorder may dispose of such property without the necessity of payment to the city, except as otherwise required. Except for items considered refuse, the city recorder shall submit a detailed report of all such dispositions to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(3)  If, in the opinion of the city recorder, the value of the personal property is less than $800.00 and disposal is for the convenience of the city, the city recorder shall, at his discretion, dispose of the property in the best interest of the city. The city recorder shall submit a detailed report of all such dispositions to the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(4)  If the value of the personal property is more than $800.00, it shall be sold by: 
a.  Competitive sealed bids; 
b.  Public auction; 
c.  Internet auction; 
d.  Negotiated sale to one or more designated buyers; 
e.  Transfer to another governmental entity or agency at or below reasonable market value; or 
f.  Lease, at the discretion of the city recorder. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the use of surplus personal property as trade-in for the purchase of other personal property. 
(6)  Except as otherwise required by state statute, all personal property seized, confiscated or abandoned and in the possession of the city may, after having been held for a period of not less than 90 days, be sold at public auction or by competitive sealed bids after having been advertised in a daily newspaper of general circulation in this city, or by online internet auction without any advertising requirements after diligent inquiry and an investigation having been made to ascertain the owner of the property; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to property seized or confiscated in the enforcement of any tax lien. All items with a value of $20.00 or less may be destroyed if not otherwise suitable for reuse. All items destroyed shall be accounted for by certified inventory. The inventory shall be kept on record in the office of the city recorder for a period of not less than five years. 
(7)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the board of mayor and aldermen may waive any requirements herein and dispose of the property as it determines is in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-143; Code 1998, § 2-463; Ord. No. 5656, § II, 2-19-2008) 
Secs. 2-572-2-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-591. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Established catalogue price means the price included in a catalogue, price list, schedule or other form that is regularly maintained by a manufacturer or contractor that: 
(1)  Is either published or otherwise available for inspection by customers; and 
(2)  States prices at which sales are currently or were last made to a significant number of any category of buyers or buyers constituting the general buying public for the supplies or services involved. 
    Invitation to bid means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
    Multistep sealed bidding is a two-phase process consisting of a technical first phase composed of one or more steps in which bidders submit unpriced technical offers to be evaluated by the city manager, and a second phase in which those bidders whose technical offers are determined to be acceptable during the first phase have their price bids considered. It is designed to obtain the benefits of competitive sealed bidding by award of a contract to the lowest compliant bidder meeting specifications for the particular grade or class of material, work or service desired in the best interest and advantage to the city and at the same time obtain the benefits of the competitive sealed proposals procedure through the solicitation of technical offers and the conduct of discussions to evaluate and determine the acceptability of technical offers. 
    Purchase description means the words used in a solicitation to describe the supplies, services or construction to be purchased and includes specifications attached to, or made a part of, the solicitation. 
    Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
    Responsible compliant bidder or offeror means a person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and has the integrity and reliability which will ensure good faith performance, and who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid and includes all the criteria used in evaluating the bid. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(a); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-592. - Manner of making purchases. 
(a)  The city manager or designee is authorized to purchase such supplies, materials and equipment and to contract for such services as may be provided for by the appropriation ordinances of the board of mayor and aldermen. Except as otherwise provided in this division, such purchases, contracts purchase orders, leases or lease-purchase arrangements involving the expenditures of: 
(1)  $15,000.00 or less, may be made in the open market without public advertisement or competitive bidding; 
(2)  $15,001.00 to $30,000.00, may be made in the open market without public advertisement or competitive bids but with a minimum of two informal oral quotes, whenever practical and advantageous to the city; 
(3)  $30,001.00 to $49,999.99, may be made in the open market without public advertisement or competitive bids but with a minimum of three formal written quotes, which may include the established catalogue price, whenever practical and advantageous to the city; and 
(4)  $50,000.00 and above, may be made after public advertising and formal sealed bidding or request for proposals. 
(b)  Awards shall be made to the lowest responsible compliant bidder or offeror meeting specifications for the particular grade or class of material, work or service desired in the best interest and advantage to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(b); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-593. - Invitation to bid; notice. 
    Formal sealed bidding shall include an invitation to bid which shall be issued and may include a purchase description, required contractual terms, and conditions applicable to the procurement. Adequate public notice of the invitation to bid shall be given a reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Different types of public notice on the basis of the size of the purchase or contract or the type of supplies, services or construction may be used. Such notice may include, but are not limited to, publication in a newspaper of general circulation, mailing to suppliers on a list or established suppliers, posting the notice at city hall, and publication on the city's web site on the internet. Written invitations to bid to dealers of the articles to be purchased may be sent in addition to the notice required under this section. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(c); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-594. - Submission of bid. 
    Formal sealed bids shall be submitted to the city manager or designee, as specified in the invitation to bid on or before the specified time when such bidding is to be closed, and shall be publicly opened in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as may be specified by regulation, together with the name of each bidder, shall be read aloud and recorded, and the record shall at that time be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(d); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-595. - Acceptance of bid; criteria for review. 
    Bids shall be accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this Code. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation to bid, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs and total or life cycle costs. The invitation to bid may set forth the evaluation criteria to be used, may reference the criteria listed in section 2-603, or reference such criteria as set forth in the regulations published prior to the bid by the city manager or designee. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation to bid, listed in section 2-603 or set forth in the regulations published prior to the bid by the city manager or designee. Formal sealed bids may be awarded by the city manager or designee, or by the board of mayor and aldermen, as otherwise set forth in the Charter or this Code. Only the board of mayor and aldermen can reject all bids. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(e); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-596. - Correction or withdrawal of erroneous bids. 
    Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or cancellation of awards or contracts, based on such bid mistakes shall be permitted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee. After bid opening no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. In accordance with regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee, the purchasing division may correct mathematical errors. Except as otherwise provided by regulation, all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(f); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-597. - Alternative procedure-Submission of unpriced offers. 
    When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation to bid may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation to bid limited to those bidders whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation, which process shall be known as multistep sealed bidding. The city manager or designee shall adopt regulations governing the use of multistep sealed bidding and establishing procedures. Discussions conducted for the purposes of facilitating understanding of technical offers or specifications may result in the obtaining of supplemental information, amendments of technical offers and/or amendments of the specifications. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(g); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-598. - Same-Competitive sealed proposals for contract. 
(a)  When the city manager or designee determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(b)  Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in this division. Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. 
(c)  The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. As provided in the request for proposals and under regulations promulgated by the city manager, or designee discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements. 
(d)  Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(e)  Award shall be made to the responsible compliant offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, the criteria listed in section 2-603, or reference such other criteria as set forth in the specifications published prior to, or at the time of, the request for proposals by the city manager or designee. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(i); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-599. - Award of contract without competition if only one source for items purchased. 
    A contract may be awarded for a supply, equipment, service or construction item without competition when the city manager, or designee, determines in writing that there is only one source for the required supply, equipment, service or construction item. The city manager, or designee, may, by regulation, establish specific categories of supplies, equipment, services, or construction items as sole source items, but the failure to so designate shall not prevent the city manager from declaring a sole source. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(j); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-600. - Award of contracts for professional services without competition. 
    Contracts for legal services, medical services, accounting services, fiscal agents, financial advisors or advisory services, educational consultants, architectural services, engineering services, and similar services by professional persons or groups of high ethical standards shall not be based on competitive sealed bids, but shall be awarded on the basis of recognized competence and integrity. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(k); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-601. - Notice of award. 
    The award of bid shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible compliant bidder meeting specifications for the particular grade or class of material, work or service desired in the best interest and advantage to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(h); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-602. - Purchases from other governmental units. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent the city manager or designee from purchasing from other governmental units within the limits established in this division without bids and advertisements when in the best interests of the city to do so. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(l); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-603. - Criteria for determination of lowest responsible compliant bidder. 
    In addition to price, the following criteria may be considered in determining the lowest responsible compliant bidder: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, material and equipment, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract, and the proposed warranty or guaranty; 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; 
(10)  The approach of the bidders to issues raised in the solicitation for bids; 
(11)  The peculiar capabilities of the bidders to perform the contract; 
(12)  The proprietary features of the bid; and 
(13)  The overall responsiveness of the bid to the needs of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(m); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-604. - Effect of receipt of only one bid. 
    If only one formal sealed bid or competitive sealed proposal is received, the bid may be accepted or rejected by the board of mayor and aldermen, and, if rejected, the contract or service to be performed shall be rebid. If upon rebid the contract or service only one bid is received, the bid may be accepted or rejected. This shall not apply to a purchase from a sole source or for the purchase of a unique or proprietary product. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(n); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-605. - Exception to bid requirements for emergency purchases. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the city manager, or designee, is authorized and may authorize others without bids or advertisement, to make purchases in and for apparent or actual emergency situations affecting the immediate health, safety and general welfare of the city. With respect to any such emergency purchases, the nature of the emergency must be stated on each emergency purchase order. 
(b)  In the event of an apparent emergency which requires immediate procurement of supplies, material and equipment, or contractual services, the city manager, or designee, is authorized to procure, at the lowest available price, any supplies material, equipment or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the city manager or designee, with the board of mayor and aldermen at its next regular business meeting, and shall be spread upon its minutes. In the event of actual emergency and with the approval of the city manager, or designee, the head of any department may procure directly at the lowest available price any supplies, material, equipment or contractual services, whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of a department which may vitally affect the life, health, safety or convenience of the public. 
(c)  The head of such department shall send to the city manager, or designee, a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed with the board of mayor and aldermen at its next regular business meeting and shall be spread upon its minutes. 
(Code 1981, § 2-57(o); Code 1998, § 2-127; Ord. No. 4059, § I, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 5128, § I, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 5583, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 2-606. - Execution of contracts and purchase orders. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, and the superintendent of schools for contracts paid from the school budget, is authorized to execute, in a form approved by the city attorney, and attested by the city recorder, all contracts, agreements or other documents for the following: 
(1)  Construction contracts for which there is funding in the annual appropriation ordinance not in excess of $500,000.00; 
(2)  Equipment contracts for which there is funding in the annual appropriation ordinance not in excess of $150,000.00; 
(3)  Contracts for professional services for which there is funding and not directly related to a construction project in the annual appropriation ordinance not in excess of $125,000.00; 
(4)  Contracts for purchases of supplies, equipment, material or services for which there is funding in the annual appropriation ordinance not in excess of $50,000.00; and 
(5)  Contracts, purchase orders or other documents required to be executed for emergency purchases as set out in section 2-605. 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, or superintendent of schools for purchases paid from the school budget is authorized, within the monetary limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section, to execute purchase orders (which means the city's document entitled "purchase order" used to authorize a purchase or transaction with a contractual party generally containing a description of goods and/or services ordered, the applicable terms as to payment, date of performance and such that when accepted by a party constitutes a contract) for which no other contract required, and which is made in the normal course of business and for which funding is approved in the annual appropriation ordinance. The form of the purchase order shall be approved by the city manager and the city attorney with such terms as they deem appropriate. 
(c)  No requisition, order or contract shall be subdivided to avoid public purchasing requirements or to come within the limits herein established. 
(d)  The city manager, or designee, or superintendent of schools, as appropriate, is authorized to award the bid on the contracts and agreements set out in subsection (a) of this section and on purchase orders set out in subsection (b) of this section, provided that the rejection of all bids shall be by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(e)  Should the city manager or designee, the city attorney or the city recorder decline to execute such contracts, agreements and other documents for any reason, such contracts, agreements and other documents will be brought to the board of mayor and aldermen for consideration and approval. 
(Code 1998, § 2-129; Ord. No. 5219, §§ I-IV, 8-17-2004; Ord. No. 5584, § I, 8-7-2007) 
Secs. 2-607-2-630. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC RECORDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Public records generally, T.C.A. § 10-7-101 et seq.; municipal records, T.C.A. § 10-7-701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-631. - Unauthorized removal. 
    Except as otherwise provided by state law, all records of the city are declared to be public records and shall be open to the inspection of any citizen of the city, but no official shall permit any book, paper or other document or record to be taken from his office unless on a summons, properly served, issued by some court of competent jurisdiction or some committee appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen or on an order from the board or upon request of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4; Code 1998, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Public records, T.C.A. §§ 10-7-503, 10-7-504. 
Sec. 2-632. - Copies of records, papers and documents. 
    The city recorder shall provide copies of records, papers and documents in the city recorder's office upon request and the payment of the proper fee to as established from time to time by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5; Code 1998, § 2-4; Ord. No. 5567, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 2-633-2-652. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Ethical standards for officials and employees, T.C.A. § 8-17-101 et seq.; adoption of standards required, T.C.A. § 8-17-103. 

Sec. 2-653. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Employment interest means a situation in which an official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be regulated or supervised. 
    Municipal board means any board, commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality appointed or created by the city, including those set out in T.C.A. § 8-17-102. 
    Official or employee means and includes any official, whether elected or appointed, officer, employee or servant, or any member of any board, agency, commission, authority or corporation, whether compensated or not, or any officer, employee or servant thereof, of the city. 
    Personal interest means: 
(1)  Any financial, ownership or employment interest, which is the subject of a vote by a municipal board or the board of mayor and aldermen, not otherwise regulated by state statutes or conflict of interest; 
(2)  Any financial, ownership or employment interest, in a matter to be regulated or supervised by the board of mayor and aldermen or a municipal board; or 
(3)  Any such financial, ownership or employment interest of the official's or employee's spouse, parents, step-parents, grandparents, siblings, children or step-children. 
(Code 1998, § 2-98; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
State Law reference- Definitions related to ethics for public officials, T.C.A. § 8-17-102. 
Sec. 2-654. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person violating any section of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is punishable under section 1-14, the city's general penalty clause or other applicable laws. An employee who violates any provision of this division is subject to disciplinary action, including termination from employment. 
(Code 1998, § 2-106; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-655. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article are applicable to all fulltime and parttime officials, officers, employees, servants, member of any board, agency, commission, authority or corporation, whether compensated or not, and any officer, employee, or servant thereof of the city. This includes any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the city as set out in T.C.A. § 8-17-102 including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The board of mayor and aldermen; 
(2)  City board of education, and employees; 
(3)  City industrial development board; 
(4)  City housing and redevelopment authority; 
(5)  City emergency communications district board; 
(6)  City regional planning commission; 
(7)  Board of zoning appeals; 
(8)  Beverage board; 
(9)  Bays Mountain Park Commission; 
(10)  Electrical board of examiners; 
(11)  Gateway review commission; 
(12)  Historic zoning commission; 
(13)  Mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners; 
(14)  Parks and recreation advisory committee; 
(15)  Public library commission; 
(16)  Senior citizens advisory board; 
(17)  Sidewalk board; and 
(18)  Wastewater appeals board. 
(b)  In any situation in which a personal interest under this article is also a conflict of interest under state law, the provisions of the state law shall govern. In accordance with T.C.A. § 8-17-103 to the extent an issue is covered by an ethical standard addressed by a law of general application, public law of local application, local option law or private act nothing herein shall be construed to be less restrictive than such laws. 
(Code 1998, § 2-97; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-656. - Disclosure of personal interest. 
(a)  An official on the board of mayor and aldermen or any municipal board with the responsibility to vote on a matter shall disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects, or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the matter. In addition, the official may recuse themselves from voting on the matter. 
(b)  An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, Charter, ordinance or policy, recuse themselves from the exercise of discretion in the matter. 
(Code 1998, § 2-99; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-657. - Acceptance of gifts and gratuities-Prohibition. 
(a)  An official or employee may not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, on behalf of themselves or any member of their household, any money, gift, gratuity, service, transportation, loan, loan guarantee or other consideration or favor of any kind from any person, other than the city: 
(1)  For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the regular course of his duties; 
(2)  Who has, or is seeking, to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relations with any department of the city or conducts operations or activities that are regulated by the department of the city where the employee is employed or the official has authority to act; 
(3)  Who has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the official or employee; 
(4)  Who has some mutual understanding that the gift will influence the official's or employee's decisions on behalf of the city; or 
(5)  That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence the action of the official or employee or reward such official or employee for past action in executing city business. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in subsection (a) of this section to the contrary, gifts, gratuities, services or favors, which are allowed in section 2-658 are not prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1998, § 2-100; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-658. - Same-Permitted services, offerings. 
    The following are not deemed gifts subject to the prohibitions set forth in section 2-657: 
(1)  A personal gift from a relative or friend, if such gift is unrelated to city matters; 
(2)  An item of tangible personal property with an estimated retail value of less than $50.00 from any one person or entity at any one occurrence, provided it is not solicited by the official or employee and is of limited frequency; employees who are supervisors or acting in such capacity are not permitted to accept cash gifts in any amount when such is related to or as a consequence of such employee's employment with the city or other entity covered by this chapter; 
(3)  A foodstuff gift, plant or flower arrangement which can be shared by everyone in a work area; 
(4)  A discount for meals or services that is offered to employees as a marketing strategy by business to encourage trade from a large employee base, provided the discount is not solicited by the employee and is of limited frequency; 
(5)  A business meal of a type and kind ordinarily associated with normal business activity; 
(6)  Food, refreshments, sports activity or transportation when they are part of an official's or employee's participation in a charitable, civic, political or community event that bears a relationship to the official's or employee's office and the official or employee is attending in an official capacity; 
(7)  A promotional, business logo gift item with an estimated retail value of less than $50.00 that is given for the primary purpose of advertising the business eatery or industry providing the logo gift item; or multiple promotional business logo gift items with a combined estimated retail value of less than $50.00 during a calendar year; 
(8)  A door prize that is randomly won or received and where the opportunity to win/receive the gift is random and with low statistical likelihood, and when the employee is eligible for the prize as a consequence of his employment with the city or other entity covered by this chapter; provided, however, that a door prize with an estimated retail value in excess of $50.00 that is won as a consequence of employment with the city or other entity covered by this chapter may be accepted provided a gift declaration form is completed and submitted to the city manager within five business days of receipt of the gift; and provided, further, that the final disposition of the door prize (i.e., to be retained by the employee, assigned to city use, or disposed/refused) shall be made by the city manager; 
(9)  Receipt of entertainment or athletic tickets or entry to a private or sports/athletic suite, tickets to banquets, luncheons, receptions, local area golf tournaments and such for nonbusiness related purpose; and 
(10)  A gift or thing of value provided by the city to an employee in the course of the employer-employee relationship. 
(Code 1998, § 2-101; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-659. - Procedure for return of gifts and gratuities. 
    A gift or gratuity prohibited in section 2-657 shall be declined and returned to the donor. If a gift is not easily returned, the gift shall be donated to a local charitable agency or organization in the name of the donor. Said donor shall be notified of such, as well as, notified of the city's gift prohibition regulation. In addition, the following procedures and practices are to be followed: 
(1)  A copy of all letters to donors shall be copied to the city manager; 
(2)  Questions regarding the acceptability of a certain gift should be directed to the city manager for clarification. 
(Code 1998, § 2-102; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-660. - Use of information. 
(a)  An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law. 
(b)  An official or employee may not, directly or indirectly, use or disclose information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment, that has not been made available to the general public, with the intent to result in financial gain for such official or employee or any other person or entity or to acquire or aid another to acquire, a pecuniary interest in any property, transaction or enterprise that may be affected by the information, or to speculate, or aid another to speculate, on the basis of the information. 
(Code 1998, § 2-103; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-661. - Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. 
(a)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage of such official or employee, except to the extent that such are lawfully available to the general public. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to any private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract, lease or that is determined by the board of mayor and aldermen to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 2-104; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 2-662. - Use of position or authority. 
(a)  An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the city. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or attempt to use their position to secure any privilege or exemption for themselves or others that are not authorized by the Charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 2-105; Ord. No. 5558, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, T.C.A. § 57-1-101 et seq.; beer generally, T.C.A. § 57-5-101 et seq.; authority to regulate beer sales, T.C.A. § 57-5-108; intoxicating liquors generally, T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq.; public intoxication, T.C.A. § 39-17-310. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage or beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine and capable of being consumed by a human being, other than patent medicine, or beer where the latter contains an alcoholic content of five percent by weight or less. Notwithstanding any section to the contrary in this chapter, the term "alcoholic beverage" or "beverage" also includes any liquid product containing distilled alcohol capable of being consumed by a human being, manufactured or made with distilled alcohol irrespective of alcoholic content. Notwithstanding the provisions of this definition, products or beverages containing less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, other than wine as defined in this section, shall not be considered to be alcoholic beverages. 
    Applicant means the person applying for a certificate of good moral character or a license. 
    Application means the form an applicant is required to file in order to obtain a certificate of good moral character or a license. 
    Bottle means any container, vessel or other receptacle used for holding any alcoholic beverage. 
    Certificate of good moral character means the certificate provided for in T.C.A. § 57-3-208 in connection with the prescribed procedure for obtaining a state liquor retailer's license. 
    Distiller means any person who owns, occupies, carries on, works, conducts or operates any distillery, either by himself or by his agent. 
    Distillery means any place or premises wherein any liquors are manufactured for sale. 
    Federal statutes means the statutes of the United States in effect or as they may be changed. 
    Inspection fee means the monthly fee a licensee is required by this chapter to pay, the amount of which is determined by a percentage of the gross sales of a licensee. 
    License means a license issued by the state under this chapter for the purpose of authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail in the city. 
    License fee means the annual fee a licensee is required by this chapter to pay at or prior to the time of the issuance of a license. 
    Licensee means the holder of a license. 
    Liquor district means the geographical area within the corporate limits of the city for each of the six separate areas designated as districts I through VI, inclusive, all as shown on a map, dated August 5, 1969, entitled "Liquor Store District Map of the City of Kingsport," including any future amendments to the map. 
    Liquor store means the building or the part of a building where a licensee conducts any business authorized by his license. 
    Manufacture means distilling, rectifying and operating a winery or any device for the production of alcoholic beverages. 
    Manufacturer means a distiller, vintner and rectifier of alcoholic beverages. 
    Rectifier means any person who rectifies, purifies or refines any alcoholic beverage by any process other than as provided for on distillery premises, and also any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining an alcoholic beverage, shall, by mixing an alcoholic beverage with any other material, thereby manufacture any imitation thereof, or who compounds an alcoholic beverage for sale under the name of whiskey, brandy, gin, rum, wine, spirits, cordials, bitters or any other name. 
    Retail sale or sale at retail means a sale of an alcoholic beverage to a consumer or to any person for any purpose other than for resale. 
    Sale or sell means the exchange or barter of an alcoholic beverage, and also any delivery made otherwise than gratuitously of an alcoholic beverage; the soliciting or receiving of an order for an alcoholic beverage; the keeping, offering or exposing an alcoholic beverage for sale. 
    State alcoholic beverage commission means the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, provision for which is made in the state statutes. 
    State liquor retailer's license means a license issued under the state statutes, including the provisions contained in T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq., for the purpose of authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail. 
    State rules and regulations means all applicable rules and regulations of the state applicable to alcoholic beverages in effect or as they may be changed, including without limitation the local option liquor rules and regulations of the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
    State statutes means the statutes of the state in effect or as they may be changed. 
    Unsealed bottle means a bottle with the original seal, cork, cap or other enclosing device either broken or removed or on which the federal revenue strip stamp has been broken. 
    Vintner means any person who owns, occupies, carries on, works, conducts or operates any winery, either by himself or by his agent. 
    Wholesale sale or sale at wholesale means a sale to any person for purposes of resale. 
    Wholesaler means any person who sells at wholesale any alcoholic beverage for which a license is required under T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. 
    Wine means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary additions to correct defects due to climatic, saccharine and seasonal conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content not to exceed 21 percent by volume. No other product shall be called wine unless designated by appropriate prefixes descriptive of the fruit or other product from which the product was predominantly produced or unless designated as an artificial or imitation wine. 
    Winery means any place or premises wherein wines are manufactured from any fruit or brandies are distilled as the byproduct of wine or other fruit, or where cordials are compounded; and also includes a winery for the manufacture of wine. 
(Code 1981, § 4-69; Code 1998, § 6-31) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 57-3-101. 
Sec. 6-2. - Possession of open containers in motor vehicles or on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess open or unsealed cans, bottles or containers of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage in or upon any motor vehicle while traveling or parked upon the public streets, alleys or highways of the city or while upon the premises of any public park, shopping center, trailer park or apartment complex or any other premises which is generally frequented by the public at large. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to motorized carts designed for use upon golf courses, provided that the cart is being used for the purpose of playing golf on an established golf course. 
(c)  It is not a violation of this section if any person possesses open containers of beer while upon any public street, alleys or highways of the city, public parks or any other premises which is generally frequented by the public at large, if possessed pursuant to a temporary permit issued pursuant to section 6-213(e)(2), a special occasion license issued pursuant to section 6-213(e)(3), a special permit for outdoor service areas or a permit for sidewalk cafe dining facilities, and as otherwise permitted by the rules and regulations of the beverage board or the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1; Code 1998, § 6-1; Ord. No. 4014, § II(4-1), 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 5401, § I, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 5810, § II, 2-17-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-10-416(a), (b); authority for municipal regulations, T.C.A. § 55-10-416(c). 
Sec. 6-3. - Public display or consumption of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage or to display, exhibit or show openly any open or unsealed container of beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage upon any public street or sidewalk or in any public park, playground, auditorium, theater, stadium, school or school grounds or public parking areas in any public place. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Patrons of premises licensed for on-premises consumption while the patrons are in or upon such premises; 
(2)  Patrons of premises occupied by lease or license for private purposes and not open to the general public; 
(3)  Patrons of premises licensed for on-premises consumption where attendance may be controlled by the lessee; 
(4)  Patrons of premises that have been granted special permission by the city beverage board or the state alcoholic beverage commission, whichever is applicable, for such consumption; 
(5)  When granted a permit by the beverage board for a temporary outdoor service permit; 
(6)  When granted a special permit for outdoor service areas or a permit for sidewalk cafe dining facilities; or 
(7)  When granted a special event permit and otherwise complying with the rules established by the board of mayor and aldermen and of the beverage board relating to the service of beer outdoors or pursuant to a special event or temporary permit issued pursuant to section 6-213(e). 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this section may include outdoor areas. 
(Code 1998, § 6-2; Ord. No. 4014, § II(4-2), 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 5401, § II, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 5810, § III, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 6-4. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 for each such violation. Any licensee violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to having his license suspended or revoked for such violation as provided in this chapter, state statutes or state rules and regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 4-78; Code 1998, § 6-32) 
Sec. 6-5. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person either to engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting or distributing any alcoholic beverage or to sell, store, transport, distribute, purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage, except as provided by state statutes, state rules and regulations, federal statutes and this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-70; Code 1998, § 6-33) 
Sec. 6-6. - Inspections. 
    The city manager and the recorder are authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any licensee at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether this chapter is being observed. The city manager, the city recorder, the chief of police and any other police officer is authorized to enter and inspect the premises of a liquor store at any time the liquor store is open for business. Any refusal to permit the examination of the books, papers and records of a licensee or the inspection and examination of the premises of a liquor store shall be unlawful. The city manager shall forthwith report such violation to the state alcoholic beverage commission with the request that appropriate action be taken to revoke the license of the offending licensee. 
(Code 1981, § 4-76; Code 1998, § 6-34) 
Sec. 6-7. - Article supplemental. 
    This chapter shall be supplemental to all other ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 4-80; Code 1998, § 6-35) 
Sec. 6-8. - Manufacture prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any alcoholic beverage, except as permitted by T.C.A. § 39-17-708. 
(Code 1981, § 4-71; Code 1998, § 6-36) 
Sec. 6-9. - Liability of licensee for acts of others. 
    Under this chapter, each licensee shall be responsible for all acts of such licensee's officers, stockholders, directors, employees, agents and representatives, so that any violation of this chapter by any officer, stockholder, director, employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall constitute a violation of this chapter by such licensee. 
(Code 1981, § 4-77; Code 1998, § 6-40) 
Sec. 6-10. - Contraband. 
    Police officers shall take possession of any alcoholic beverages which have been received by or are in the possession of or are being transported by any person in violation of state statutes, state rules and regulations, federal statutes or this chapter. Beverages so seized shall be contraband and shall be disposed of as provided by state law. 
(Code 1981, § 4-79; Code 1998, § 6-41) 
Secs. 6-11-6-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-39. - Sale authorized. 
    It shall be lawful for a licensee to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail in a liquor store, within the corporate limits, provided such sales are made in compliance with applicable federal statutes, state statutes, state rules and regulations and this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-73; Code 1998, § 6-38) 
State Law reference- Local sales authorized, T.C.A. § 57-3-102. 
Secs. 6-40-6-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State liquor licensing and fees, T.C.A. § 57-3-201 et seq. 

Sec. 6-67. - Application. 
(a)  A person desiring a certificate of compliance required under this chapter shall submit to the city recorder a copy of each application and each questionnaire form and other material to be filed by the applicant with the state alcoholic beverage commission in connection with his application and shall also submit five copies of a plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet, giving the following information: 
(1)  The shape, size and location of the lot upon which the liquor store is to be operated under the license; 
(2)  The shape, size, height and location of all buildings and whether they are to be erected, altered, moved or are in existence upon the lot; 
(3)  The off-street parking space and the off-street loading and unloading space to be provided, including the vehicular access to be provided from these areas to a public street; and 
(4)  The identification of every parcel of land within 200 feet of the lot upon which the liquor store is to be operated, indicating ownership thereof, and the locations of structures situated thereon and the use being made of every such parcel. 
(b)  Each applicant for a certificate of compliance shall also file with the city recorder a completed application for the certificate of compliance provided by the city recorder which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and street address of each person to have any interest, direct or indirect, in the licensee as owner, partner, stockholder, director, officer or otherwise; 
(2)  The name of the liquor store to be operated under the license; 
(3)  The address of the liquor store to be operated under the license and zoning designation applicable to such location; 
(4)  The statement that each applicant has been a bona fide resident of the state for at least two years next proceeding the date the application is filed; 
(5)  The names and addresses of at least three residents of the city who have known each applicant for at least two years; 
(6)  The agreement of each applicant to comply with state statutes, federal statutes, this chapter and state rules and regulations with reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages; and 
(7)  The agreement of each applicant that he will be actively engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages at the liquor store described in the application within 90 days after the license is granted to such applicant. 
(c)  The application form shall be signed and verified by each person who has any interest in the licensee either as owner, partner, stockholder, director, officer or otherwise. 
(d)  Every certificate of compliance to be signed by the mayor or a majority of the board shall state the following: 
(1)  The applicant who is to be in actual charge of the business has not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application and, if a corporation, that the executive officers or those in control have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, and, further, in the mayor or other official's opinion the applicant will not violate any of the provisions of T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq.; 
(2)  The applicant has secured a location for the business, which complies with all restrictions as to location within the city; and 
(3)  The applicant has complied with section 6-69 regulating the number of retail liquor stores. 
(e)  An applicant may seek review of the denial of a certificate by instituting an action in the chancery court within 60 days of the denial. 
(f)  A failure to grant or deny the certificate of compliance within 60 days of the written application shall be deemed a grant of the certificate of compliance. 
(g)  The city recorder shall review each application; shall note any apparent questions, errors and insufficiencies; and shall submit the application to the board of mayor and aldermen for consideration and action. 
(Code 1981, § 4-88; Code 1998, § 6-71) 
Sec. 6-68. - Restrictions on location of retail liquor stores. 
    No new location for a retail liquor store shall be approved when the location specified in the application for a certificate of compliance, on the date of the application for a certificate of compliance, is: 
(1)  Not classified as being in either a B-2, B-3, B-4P, M-1 or M-2 zoning district. 
(2)  Within the following distances: 
a.  200 feet of any: 
1.  Church or religious building; 
2.  Public or private school; 
3.  Park, playground, community center, public library or other public recreational facility or area; 
4.  Hospital, mortuary or cemetery; or 
5.  Other similar public building or place; 
as measured from the center of the proposed major entrance of the new location for such retail liquor store to the major entrance of any of such institutions or facilities in a direct line by the shortest distance; or 
b.  One mile of any other retail liquor store, as measured from property line to property line by way of the closest route between the stores over public streets, and not crossing any property lines. 
(3)  On either side of the same block as the major entrance of any of the institutions or facilities mentioned in subsection (2) of this section. 
(4)  Adjacent to property where any structure used as a residence is located. 
(5)  On other than an expressway or arterial street, as established by the major street and road plan adopted by the regional planning commission. 
(Code 1981, § 4-89; Code 1998, § 6-72) 
Sec. 6-69. - Limitation on number of retail licenses. 
(a)  No new location for a retail liquor store, except a transfer from one location to another in special circumstances fixed by rule or regulation of the state alcoholic beverage commission, as authorized by statute, shall be approved unless it is determined that alcoholic beverages are not generally available in the city or that the city is not being adequately served by operating retail liquor stores. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining whether alcoholic beverages are generally available in the city or whether the city is being adequately served, it will be presumed, absent proof to the contrary, that alcoholic beverages are generally available and that the area is being adequately served when the ratio between the number of operating retail liquor stores in the city and the population of the city is less than or equal to one store for each 5,500 city residents; provided, however, that there can be no less than one retail liquor store in the city in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-106. 
(c)  Any material proof to rebut the presumption established in subsection (b) of this section may be submitted as in other administrative matters before the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(d)  The determination of the board of mayor and aldermen concerning the general availability of alcoholic beverages or the adequacy of service in the city shall be binding upon the applicant. However, upon proof of materially changed conditions, the board may alter, amend or change its determination, provided that such a determination shall not affect those retail liquor licenses issued and in current and continuous use by the same holder. 
(Code 1981, § 4-90; Code 1998, § 6-73) 
Sec. 6-70. - Other restrictions on issuance. 
    To ensure that all requirements of this chapter are satisfied, no original or renewal certificate of compliance shall be issued for any location until: 
(1)  An application has been filed with the city recorder; 
(2)  The application complies with all restrictions as to location and number of retail licenses to be issued within the city; and 
(3)  The application has been considered at a regular or called meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen and approved by a majority vote. 
(Code 1981, § 4-91; Code 1998, § 6-74) 
Sec. 6-71. - Bond. 
    Each licensee, as a condition precedent to operating a liquor store in the city, shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the amount of $2,500.00. The bond shall be payable to the city and shall be executed by a surety company duly authorized and qualified to do business in the state, and the bond shall be conditioned that the licensee shall pay to the city all inspection fees due under this division. The surety bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1981, § 4-111; Code 1998, § 6-106) 
Sec. 6-72. - Inspection fees. 
    There is levied on each alcoholic beverage licensee an inspection fee in the amount of five percent of the wholesale price of all alcoholic beverages supplied during each month by wholesalers to such licensee. 
(Code 1981, § 4-107; Code 1998, § 6-101) 
State Law reference- Municipal inspection fee authorized, T.C.A. § 57-3-501. 
Sec. 6-73. - Collection. 
    Collection of the inspection fee levied in this division shall be made by the wholesaler or other source vending to the licensee at the time the sale is made to the licensee. Payment of the inspection fee by such collecting wholesaler or other source shall be made to the city recorder on or before the 20th day of each calendar month for all collections in the preceding calendar month. Nothing in this division shall relieve the licensee of the obligation of the payment of the inspection fee, and it shall be the licensee's duty to see that the payment of the inspection fee is made to the city recorder on or before the 20th day of each calendar month for the preceding month. 
(Code 1981, § 4-110; Code 1998, § 6-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-3-502. 
Sec. 6-74. - Additional taxes. 
    The inspection fee levied in this division shall be in addition to any general gross receipts, sales or other general taxes applicable to the sale of alcoholic beverages and shall not be a substitute for such taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 4-114; Code 1998, § 6-102) 
State Law reference- Exclusive fee, T.C.A. § 57-3-502. 
Sec. 6-75. - Form for reports; rules and regulations. 
    The recorder shall prepare and make available to each wholesaler or other source vending alcoholic beverages to licensees sufficient forms for the monthly report of inspection fees payable by each licensee making purchases from such wholesaler or other source. The city recorder is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to facilitate the reporting and collection of inspection fees and to specify the records of such sales and fees to be kept by each wholesaler or other vending source. 
(Code 1981, § 4-109; Code 1998, § 6-104) 
State Law reference- Reports and payments, T.C.A. § 57-3-502. 
Sec. 6-76. - Effect of failure to report and pay. 
    The failure to pay the inspection fee and to make the required reports accurately and within the time prescribed in this division shall, at the sole discretion of the city manager, be cause for taking such action as is necessary to suspend the offending licensee's license for as much as 30 days or to revoke the license. 
(Code 1981, § 4-112; Code 1998, § 6-107) 
Sec. 6-77. - Use of funds. 
    All funds derived from the inspection fees imposed in this division shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The city shall defray all expenses in connection with the enforcement of this chapter, including particularly the payment of the compensation of city officers, employees or other representatives in investigating and inspecting licensees and applicants and in seeing that all sections of this chapter are observed. The board of mayor and aldermen finds and declares that the amount of these inspection fees is reasonable and that the funds expected to be derived from these inspection fees will be reasonably required for such purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 4-113; Code 1998, § 6-108) 
Sec. 6-78. - Report of violations. 
    For any violation of T.C.A. title 57 pertaining to intoxicating liquor, rules of the alcoholic beverage commission, any federal statutes or this chapter by a licensee or by any person for whose acts the licensee is responsible, the city manager shall, upon notice, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-214, forthwith report such violation to the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Code 1981, § 4-92; Code 1998, § 6-75) 
Sec. 6-79. - Report of discontinuance of business. 
    If any licensee, for any reason, shall not be actively engaged in or shall not keep his liquor store open during normal business hours for a period of 15 workdays in any calendar year, upon notice, the city manager shall, pursuant to rules of the alcoholic beverage commission, local option liquor rules and regulations, licenses and permits (Tennessee Comp. Rules and Regs. 0100-3-.09(6)), report such fact to the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Code 1981, § 4-93; Code 1998, § 6-76) 
Secs. 6-80-6-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-102. - Local licenses not issued. 
    Unless authorized by ordinance, no wholesaler's license shall be granted to any person for the operation of any business for the sale at wholesale of any alcoholic beverage. Any wholesaler, whose business is located outside the city, holds a valid state license and who has paid to the city all privilege taxes and fees applicable to such wholesale business, may sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverage to a licensee in the city, and such licensee may purchase any alcoholic beverage from such wholesaler, but only as provided by state statutes, state rules and regulations, federal statutes and this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-72; Code 1998, § 6-37) 
Sec. 6-103. - Invoices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to supply, ship or otherwise deliver any alcoholic beverage to a licensee, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to receive any alcoholic beverage, unless there shall be issued and delivered to the licensee by the wholesaler, concurrently with each such shipment or delivery, an invoice showing the following: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name and address of the wholesaler and of the licensee; 
(3)  The brand name and quantity of alcoholic beverages covered by the invoice; and 
(4)  The unit wholesale price and the gross wholesale price for each item listed. 
(b)  The wholesaler's invoice shall be issued and delivered to the licensee as provided in subsection (a) of this section, without regard to the terms of payment of the invoice, so as to include all such transactions, whether for cash or on credit or partly for cash and partly on credit. 
(Code 1981, § 4-108; Code 1998, § 6-103) 
Secs. 6-104-6-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-135. - Compliance with zoning. 
    Compliance by each licensee with all sections of chapter 114, pertaining to zoning, including but not limited to those sections relating to the required yard area, off-street loading and unloading of vehicles and off-street parking, which are applicable to the zoning district in which a liquor store is authorized to operate under this chapter, shall be a condition precedent to the operation of any liquor store authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-122; Code 1998, § 6-136) 
Sec. 6-136. - Records kept by licensee. 
(a)  In addition to any records specified in the rules and regulations promulgated by the recorder pursuant to this chapter, each licensee shall keep on file at such licensee's liquor store the following records: 
(1)  Original invoices required in this chapter for all alcoholic beverages bought by or otherwise supplied to the licensee; 
(2)  The original receipts for any alcoholic beverage returned by such licensee to any wholesaler; and 
(3)  An accurate record of all alcoholic beverages lost, stolen, damaged, given away or disposed of other than by sale and showing for each such transaction the date thereof, the quantity and brands of alcoholic beverages involved and, where known, the name of the person receiving the alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  All such records shall be preserved for a period of at least two years unless the recorder gives the licensee written permission to dispose of such records at an earlier time. 
(Code 1981, § 4-123; Code 1998, § 6-137) 
Sec. 6-137. - Hours and days of operation. 
    No liquor store shall be open and no licensee shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage on Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, any Sunday or any day on which a public election is held within the city. On other days, no liquor store shall be open and no licensee shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. 
(Code 1981, § 4-124; Code 1998, § 6-138) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-3-406. 
Sec. 6-138. - Management. 
    Each liquor store licensed under this chapter shall be personally and actively managed by the holder of the license, if the licensee is an individual, or by a partner or corporate officer, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation. In every case where alcoholic beverages are sold by a licensee that is either a partnership or a corporation, the name and address of the managing partner or the corporate officer who will be in active control and management of the liquor store shall be designated in the application, and any future changes in such manager shall be reported forthwith in writing to the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 4-125; Code 1998, § 6-139) 
Sec. 6-139. - First floor location required; entrances and exits. 
(a)  No liquor store shall be located on any premises above the ground floor, and each liquor store shall have only one entrance for use by the public except as provided in this section. 
(b)  When a liquor store is located at the corner of two public streets, such store may have one entrance opening onto each of the streets for use by the public for the purpose of entering the store to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A liquor store fronting on a parking lot shall have one entrance for use by the public, such entrance to open onto the lot. 
(d)  A liquor store fronting on a parking lot or a public street and adjoining the lobby of a hotel or motel may have one entrance opening onto the parking lot or public street and one entrance into the hotel or motel lobby, so long as such lobby is open to the general public. 
(e)  A liquor store located in an established shopping center or shopping mall may have one public entrance onto a parking lot or one public entrance onto the concourse of the shopping center or shopping mall. 
(f)  No liquor store shall have more than two entrances for use by the public to purchase alcoholic beverages, as provided in this chapter. 
(g)  No subsection in this section is to be construed in a manner so as to relieve the operator of any liquor store covered by this chapter from compliance with the requirements of the city building and fire codes. 
(Code 1981, § 4-126; Code 1998, § 6-140) 
State Law reference- Entrances, exits, etc., T.C.A. § 57-3-404(f). 
Sec. 6-140. - Employment of felons. 
    No licensee shall employ in the sale of alcoholic beverages any person who, within ten years prior to the date of his employment, shall have been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude. If an employee is convicted, he shall immediately be discharged. However, this section shall not apply to any person who has been so convicted but whose rights of citizenship have been restored or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1981, § 4-127; Code 1998, § 6-141) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, T.C.A. § 57-3-210(i). 
Sec. 6-141. - Employment of aliens. 
    No licensee shall employ a person in the sale of alcoholic beverages who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully residing in the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 4-128; Code 1998, § 6-142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-3-210(g). 
Sec. 6-142. - Employment of minors. 
    No licensee shall employ in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages a person under the age of 18 years, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit a minor in his place of business to engage in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1981, § 4-129; Code 1998, § 6-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-3-210(h). 
Sec. 6-143. - Sale confined to premises; curb service, drive-in windows prohibited. 
    All retail sales of alcoholic beverages shall be confined to the premises of the licensee. No curb service shall be permitted, nor shall there be permitted any drive-in windows. 
(Code 1981, § 4-130; Code 1998, § 6-144) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-4-203(f). 
Sec. 6-144. - Advertisements. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise, by signs, window displays, posters or any other designs intended to advertise, any alcoholic beverage within the city, except by a sign approved by the city manager, in letters not larger than eight inches in height designating the premises as " ____________ Package Store." Only one such sign, and no other, shall be permitted, and no sign shall extend or project from the building. The lettering on the approved sign shall not be artificially illuminated, other than by exterior floodlights or spotlights. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any manufacturer or wholesaler from advertising in news media. 
(Code 1981, § 4-131; Code 1998, § 6-145) 
State Law reference- Exterior signs, T.C.A. § 57-4-203. 
Sec. 6-145. - Use of canvassers, solicitors. 
    No licensee shall employ or otherwise use the services of any canvasser, agent, solicitor or representative for the purpose of receiving an order from a consumer for any alcoholic beverage at the residence or place of business of such consumer, nor shall any licensee receive or accept any such order which shall have been solicited or received at the residence or place of business of such consumer. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the solicitation by a state-licensed wholesaler of any order from any licensee at the licensee's premises. 
(Code 1981, § 4-133; Code 1998, § 6-146) 
State Law reference- Restrictions on solicitations, T.C.A. § 57-3-405. 
Sec. 6-146. - Consumption on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or furnish any alcoholic beverage for consumption in such licensee's liquor store or on the premises used by the licensee in connection therewith. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in a liquor store. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverages in such licensee's liquor store or on the premises used by the licensee in connection therewith. 
(Code 1981, § 4-134; Code 1998, § 6-147) 
State Law reference- Consumption on premises generally, T.C.A. § 57-4-101 et seq. 
Sec. 6-147. - Amusement or entertainment devices. 
    No radio, television, record player, pinball machine or other amusement device shall be permitted in any liquor store. 
(Code 1981, § 4-135; Code 1998, § 6-148) 
Sec. 6-148. - Seating facilities. 
    No seating facilities, other than those for employees, shall be permitted in any liquor store. 
(Code 1981, § 4-136; Code 1998, § 6-149) 
Sec. 6-149. - Sale or furnishing to persons under 21 years of age or intoxicated persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to: 
(1)  Sell, furnish or give away any alcoholic beverages to any person who is: 
a.  Under 21 years of age; 
b.  Visibly intoxicated; or 
(3)  Allow any person under 21 years of age or any person who is visibly intoxicated to enter or remain in the licensee's liquor store or any part of the licensee's premises which is adjacent to the liquor store, other than as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not prohibit a person 18 years of age or older from selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages in the course of his employment. 
(Code 1981, § 4-137; Code 1998, § 6-150) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 57-3-406, 57-4-203. 
Sec. 6-150. - Restrictions on persons under 21 years of age or persons visibly intoxicated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age or any person who is visibly intoxicated to: 
(1)  Enter or remain in a liquor store. 
(2)  Loiter in the immediate vicinity of a liquor store. 
(3)  Buy or receive any alcoholic beverage from any licensee or from any other person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to misrepresent his age in an attempt to gain admission to a liquor store or in an attempt to buy any alcoholic beverage from a licensee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any licensee for the purpose of selling or giving such alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age or any person who is visibly intoxicated. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit a person 18 years of age or older from selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages in the course of his employment. 
(Code 1981, § 4-75; Code 1998, § 6-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-4-203. 
Secs. 6-151-6-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate beer, T.C.A. § 57-5-108. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-169. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Barrel means 31 gallons. 
    Beer means beer of alcoholic content and not more than five percent by weight or any other beverage of like alcoholic content. 
(Code 1981, § 4-33; Code 1998, § 6-181; Ord. No. 6463, § I, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-170. - Beverage board. 
(a)  There is created for the administration of this chapter the beverage board. The board shall consist of nine members. The chief of police, the director of planning and the city recorder and treasurer shall be ex officio members of the board for whom designees may act in their absence. The remaining six members of the board shall be citizens of the city and members of the public at large, appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of mayor and aldermen. They shall be appointed for staggered terms of not less than three years or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  One of the appointed members shall have had at least five years of business or administrative experience in the ownership or operation of a retail enterprise; one member shall be, at the time of his appointment, licensed to practice law in the state; the remaining members shall be appointed at large. Members appointed to fill vacancies shall have the same general qualifications required for their predecessors. All appointed members shall be persons of good reputation having diverse interests and who have been actively identified with the development and improvement of the city. 
(c)  The board shall enforce and administer this chapter and the rules and regulations made by it. 
(d)  The board shall have and exercise the following functions, duties and powers: 
(1)  Issue all permits in respect to or for the manufacture, storage, distribution, transportation and sale of beer. 
(2)  Revoke or suspend any permit which is authorized by this chapter or charge a civil penalty as provided by state law. Any revocation or suspension of any permit shall be made by the board only on account of the violation of or refusal to comply with any of the sections of this chapter or any rule or regulation of the board, after not less than ten days' notice to the holder of the permit proposed to be revoked, informing such permittee of the time and place of the hearing to be held in respect thereto. All further procedures with reference to the revocation of any permit shall be fixed and prescribed in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the board, which may be repealed or amended from time to time. 
(3)  Refuse to issue a permit as follows: 
a.  If, upon investigation, it finds that the applicant for a permit has concealed or misrepresented, in writing or otherwise, any material fact or circumstance concerning the operation of the business or employment or if the interest of the applicant in the operation of the business or employment is not truly stated in the application or if fraud or false swearing by the applicant touching any matter relating to the operation of the business or employment occurs. If a permit has been issued, the board shall issue a citation to the permittee to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked. All data, written statements, affidavits, evidence or other documents submitted in support of an application shall be deemed to be a part of the application. 
b.  The board may determine that such issuance would be detrimental to public health, safety or morals. 
(4)  Summon any applicant for a permit and, also, summon and examine witnesses and administer oaths to such applicants and witnesses in making any investigation in regard thereto. 
(5)  Make, promulgate, alter, amend or repeal rules and regulations for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(6)  Prescribe all forms of applications and licenses and of all reports and all other papers and documents required to be used under or in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-34; Code 1998, § 6-182; Ord. No. 5401, § III, 5-2-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority for beer board, T.C.A. § 57-5-106. 
Sec. 6-171. - Violations; revocation or suspension of permit. 
    Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and, in addition to being subject to the penalties imposed for violation of this Code in section 1-14, any permit issued may be revoked or suspended by the beverage board, or in lieu thereof, charged a civil penalty as provided by state law. 
(Code 1981, § 4-56; Code 1998, § 6-183; Ord. No. 5401, § IV, 5-2-2006) 
Sec. 6-172. - Sale, storage, manufacture, distribution as privilege. 
    The sale, storage, manufacture and distribution of beer in the city is a privilege. No person shall be deemed to have a property right in any permit issued under this article nor shall the permit itself or the enjoyment thereof be considered a property right. 
(Code 1981, § 4-35; Code 1998, § 6-184) 
Sec. 6-173. - Restrictions upon distributors, wholesalers, warehousemen, manufacturers. 
(a)  All distributors, wholesalers, warehousemen and manufacturers of beer shall be duly licensed under the law to do business in the state. 
(b)  All distributors, wholesalers, manufacturers and warehousemen of beer having a place of business within the city shall locate the business in areas appropriately zoned. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler, distributor, warehouseman or manufacturer of beer or for any of his salesmen or representatives to sell or deliver beer en route or from delivery vehicles to any person or place other than a holder of a valid retail beer permit. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of such wholesaler, distributor, warehouseman or manufacturer and his salesmen or representatives to ascertain whether or not such person or place has been issued a valid retail beer permit by the city. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this article no manufacturer, distributor or warehouseman shall sell beer to anyone except to a beer dealer holding a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-47; Code 1998, § 6-185; Ord. No. 6463, § II, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-174. - Dealing with minors. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "minor" means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years of age, except as provided by state law. 
(b)  No permit holder shall sell, furnish, dispose of, give or cause to be sold, furnished, disposed of or given beer to a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the management of any place where beer is sold to allow any minor to loiter about such place or business, and the burden of ascertaining the age shall be upon the owner or operator of such place of business. 
(d)  No person shall purchase beer for or at the request of a minor. 
(e)  No minor shall knowingly make a false statement or exhibit false identification to the effect that the minor is 21 years old or older to any person employed in the sale of beer for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining beer. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to sell, transport, dispense or have in his possession beer for any purpose; however, this shall not be construed as prohibiting any person 18 years of age or older from selling, transporting, possessing or dispensing beer in the course of his employment. 
(Code 1981, § 4-52; Code 1998, § 6-186; Ord. No. 4508, § 1, 4-21-1998) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-5-301. 
Sec. 6-175. - Other prohibited sales. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to sell or furnish any beer to any person who is known to be insane or mentally defective or to any person who is visibly intoxicated or to any person who is known to habitually drink alcoholic beverages to excess or to any person who is known to be an habitual user of narcotics or other habit-forming drugs. 
(Code 1981, § 4-54; Code 1998, § 6-187) 
Sec. 6-176. - Improper conduct on premises. 
(a)  The beverage board shall not issue a beer permit, and shall revoke the beer permit of any permittee, including, but not limited to, private clubs, who knowingly or intentionally permits or allows any person to appear in the establishment or on the premises for which the permit was issued and to: 
(1)  Publicly or openly perform acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any other sexual acts prohibited by law; 
(2)  Publicly or openly engage in the actual or simulated touching with the hand, facial area or mouth, or caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
(3)  Publicly or openly engage in the actual or simulated display to public view of any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the display of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(4)  Publicly or openly wear or use any device or covering exposed to public view which simulates the display to public view of any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the display of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(5)  Employ, use or allow any person in the sale or service of food, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages while such person is publicly or openly unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(6)  Employ, use or allow the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(7)  Publicly or openly permit any person to use artificial devices or any inanimate objects to depict any prohibited activities described in subsections (a)(1) through (6) of this section; 
(8)  For the owner of the property or the owner of any business operated thereon or any employee thereof, allow or permit any person to remain in or upon the premises who is exposing to public view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; or 
(9)  Publicly or openly show films, videotapes, laser discs, CD ROMS, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions that involve movement depicting any of the following: 
a.  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
c.  Scenes wherein the person displays the vulva, the anus or the genitals; 
d.  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described in this subsection (a)(9). 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit persons of either sex from engaging in swimming or related activities while clad in attire customarily worn in the community for such purpose. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the broadcast or display of any television program subject to regulation by the Federal Communications Commission of the United States on the permitted premises. 
(Code 1998, § 6-188; Ord. No. 4338, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Secs. 6-177-6-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 6-206. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, store or manufacture beer without first having made application to and obtained a permit from the beverage board. 
(Code 1981, § 4-37; Code 1998, § 6-216) 
Sec. 6-207. - Types designated. 
    The types of beer permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  On-premises permit. An on-premises permit shall be issued for the consumption of beer on the premises. Provided the other requirements of this article are met, an on-premises permit shall be issued only to restaurants or eating places, nonprofit clubs, manufacturers, and for certain temporary permits. 
(2)  Off-premises permit. An off-premises permit shall be issued for sale of both refrigerated and unrefrigerated beer to be consumed off the premises. 
(3)  Multiple-type permit. A multiple-type permit constitutes both an on-premises permit and an off-premises permit and shall be issued for both on-premises consumption and off-premises consumption. Anyone who has consumed beer on the premises shall be prohibited from purchasing beer for off-premises consumption when leaving the premises, except this prohibition shall not apply to permits issued to a manufacturer as part of a manufacturer's permit. Provided the other requirements of this article are met, a multiple-type permit shall be issued only to restaurants or eating places, nonprofit clubs, manufacturers, and for certain temporary permits. 
(4)  Manufacturer's permit. This permit shall be issued to manufacturers upon whose premises beer is brewed or otherwise manufactured. A manufacturer's permit may include certain on premises and/or off-premises retail sales, as hereinafter set out. A manufacturer's permit that includes on-premises and off-premises consumption, allows anyone who has lawfully consumed beer on the premises to purchase beer for off-premises consumption, when leaving the premises. 
(5)  Wholesaler's permit. This permit shall be issued to operators who have a warehouse in the city and sell or otherwise distribute beer at wholesale. 
(6)  Other permits. Permits that are otherwise authorized by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 4-38; Code 1998, § 6-217; Ord. No. 4062, §§ I, II, 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 6463, § III, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-208. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to manufacture beer in the city, distribute beer at wholesale from a warehouse located in the city limits or to sell beer at retail to patrons or customers in the city limits shall make an application to the beverage board for a permit in writing upon a form prescribed by it. Such application shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant and how long the applicant has resided there. 
(2)  The particular place for which the permit is desired, designating the place by street and number, if practicable, and, if not, by such other apt description as definitely locates it. 
(3)  The kind of permit desired. 
(4)  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the business is to be carried on. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully residing in the United States or, if a syndicate or association, that all the members thereof are citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully residing in the United States. 
(6)  A statement that no person will be employed in the storage, sale, manufacture or distribution of such beverages except those who are citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully residing in the United States. 
(7)  A statement that the applicant will not engage in the sale, storage, manufacture or distribution of beer except at the place for which the permit is issued to such applicant, and that no sale, storage, manufacturing or distribution of such beverage will be made except in accordance with the permit granted. 
(8)  A statement that no sale will be made to persons under 21 years of age, except as provided by state law, that the applicant will not permit minors or disorderly or disreputable persons or persons connected with the violation of the liquor laws to loiter around the place of business. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant has not had a license or permit for the sale, storage, manufacture or distribution of legalized beer revoked. 
(10)  A statement that neither the applicant nor any person employed or to be employed by him in the distribution, storage, manufacture or sale of beer has ever been convicted of any violation of the law against prohibition, sale, manufacture, storage, distribution or transportation of intoxicating liquor or of any crime involving moral turpitude within the ten years preceding the filing of such application. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "moral turpitude" means premeditated murder, sex-related crimes, the selling of Schedule I and II controlled substances illegally and embezzlement. 
(11)  A statement that the applicant will conduct the business in person or as agent for the person, syndicate, association or joint stock company. 
(12)  A statement that no brewer, manufacturer, distributor or warehouseman of legalized beer has any interest in the business, financial or otherwise, or in the premises upon or in which the business to be permitted to sell beer at retail is to be carried on, except as permitted by T.C.A. § 57-5-101(c). 
(13)  A statement that the applicant is willing to be fingerprinted by the police department and to be investigated by municipal, county, state and federal law enforcement agencies concerning the applicant's background and record. 
(14)  A statement by the applicant that he agrees to comply with all of the laws of the United States, the state and the city. 
(15)  An oath or affidavit by the applicant that the facts set forth in the application are true. 
(b)  Any applicant making a false statement in the application for a beverage permit shall forfeit such applicant's permit, and such applicant shall not be eligible to receive any permit for a period of ten years. 
(c)  Any applicant who submits an application three times to the beverage board and has it rejected three times cannot reapply for a period of one year from the date of the last rejection. 
(Code 1981, § 4-39; Code 1998, § 6-218; Ord. No. 4258, §§ I, II, 7-16-1996; Ord. No. 6463, § IV, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-209. - Moral character, criminal record of applicant. 
    No beer permit shall be issued except to a person of good moral character who has not been convicted of any violation of the laws against manufacturing, selling, transporting, storing, distributing or possessing intoxicating liquors or of selling or possessing beer illegally or of any crime involving moral turpitude, within ten years of the date of application, nor shall any permit be issued to any applicant that has a person, firm, corporation, syndicate, joint stock company or association having at least five percent ownership interest in the applicant or has officers or employees who have had such convictions. For the purposes of this section, the term "moral turpitude" includes, but is not limited to, premeditated murder, all sex-related crimes, selling of Schedule I and II controlled substances illegally and theft. 
(Code 1981, § 4-41; Code 1998, § 6-219; Ord. No. 4258, § IV(4-41), 7-16-1996) 
Sec. 6-210. - Private clubs. 
(a)  No off-premises beer permit will be issued to a private club. 
(b)  A private club holding an on-premises permit shall not allow a person under the age of 21 years to be a member. 
(Code 1998, § 6-220; Ord. No. 4258, § V(4-42), 7-16-1996) 
Sec. 6-211. - Compliance with zoning prerequisite. 
    No permit shall be issued to any person to manufacture, sell or distribute beer from or at any place, premises or location which constitutes a nonconforming use under the city zoning laws and ordinances in effect at the time of application for such permit, including the distance requirements contained in section 114-143 of this Code. However, this section 6-211 shall not apply to preexisting nonconforming uses. 
(Code 1981, § 4-43; Code 1998, § 6-221; Ord. No. 6463, § V, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-212. - Separate permit required for each location. 
    A separate permit shall be obtained for each location at which and from which any applicant is to manufacture, store, distribute or sell beer. 
(Code 1981, § 4-44; Code 1998, § 6-222) 
Sec. 6-213. - General restrictions on issuance of permits and business operations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization means any corporation which has been recognized as exempt from federal taxes under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Bona fide political organization means any political campaign committee as defined in T.C.A. § 2-10-101(a) or any political party as defined in T.C.A. § 2-13-101. 
    Outdoor service area means a patio, deck, courtyard, or other outdoor area, where the permitted establishment provides service where the outdoor serving area is: 
(1)  Contiguous to the exterior of the building in which the business is located; 
(2)  Operated and controlled by the business; and 
(3)  Fenced or surrounded on all sides except for designated entrances and exits. The fencing or surrounding barrier need not be permanent but must consist of a barrier not less than 40 inches high and must be constructed of a substantial material without gaps or spaces that would allow ingress and egress of the premises except through designated entrances and exits. Examples of substantial materials would include but not be limited to securely connected planters, decorative fencing or other decorative architectural or landscaping materials. An outdoor serving area may not include all or any part of an area otherwise used by the business or by the public for parking. 
(b)  Restaurants and eating places (on-premises). The issuance of beer permits for restaurants and eating places pursuant to this chapter and the operation of such establishments shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Permits for the retail sale of beer for on-premises consumption shall be issued subject to the approval of the beverage board to the owner or operator of any regularly conducted restaurant or eating place. The applicant shall fulfill all other general requirements for the retail sale of beer prescribed in this chapter. 
(2)  In addition, the restaurant or eating place shall be classified with a value of not less than passing as judged by appropriate state authorities. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued to the owner or operator of any restaurant unless such owner or operator is the holder of a current, valid business license issued by the city. 
(4)  If, after the issuance of a permit for on-premises consumption, the grade of passing is reduced by the appropriate state agency responsible for the grading of restaurants, the beverage board shall notify the permittee to appear before the beverage board to show cause why his permit should not be revoked. The beverage board shall have the authority to grant a temporary extension, not to exceed 90 days, for the permittee to make the corrections necessary and have the numerical grade increased to at least passing. 
(5)  The restaurant or eating place must be kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served or provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for the permittee's guests. If it is shown that any permittee's premises are no longer meeting these regulations, the beverage board may cancel and revoke the permit. 
(6)  No beer shall be served at tables, stools or booths or in any other manner or place outside of the building except when a beverage permit includes an approved outdoor service area or sidewalk cafe dining facility. 
(c)  Nonprofit club permits. 
(1)  Club permits may be issued to allow the sale of beer to be consumed on the premises of any nonprofit association, organized and existing under the laws of the state, which has been in existence and operating as a nonprofit association for at least two years prior to the application for a permit. The club shall: 
a.  Have at least 100 members regularly paying dues; 
b.  Be organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member; and 
c.  Own, hire or lease a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
(2)  No member or officer, agent or employee of the club shall be paid or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by club members at an annual meeting or by the club's governing body out of the general revenue of the club. 
(3)  For the purpose of this subsection (c), tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits. The beverage board shall have specific authority through rules and regulations to define with specificity the terms used in this subsection (c) and to impose additional requirements upon applicants seeking a club permit not inconsistent with the definition in this subsection. 
(d)  Manufacturers. Upon meeting the necessary federal, state and local license requirements and pursuant to T.C.A. section 57-5-101(c)(1) a manufacturer of beer may operate as a retailer at the manufacturer's location or a site contiguous thereto for sales of not more that 25,000 barrels of beer annually for consumption on or off premises, provided it meets the licensing requirements of this chapter for on and off premises permits. 
(e)  Off-premises merchant's permits. Off-premises permits shall be issued only to bona fide merchants who have been licensed to conduct a merchandising business in the city. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "bona fide merchants" means persons regularly operating and conducting business to serve the public on a regular basis, with regular business hours of operation. However, no such off-premises permit shall hereafter be issued for the sale of beer at any place of business where the sale of beer is to be made directly to an automobile and its occupants by means of drive-in window facility. It shall be unlawful to sell or give beer through a drive-in window to an automobile, its occupants or to any person outside the drive-in window. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to construct a drive-in window or to alter in any manner his place of business so as to permit the sale of beer through a drive-in window to an automobile, its occupants or to any person outside the drive-in window. 
(f)  Temporary (special event) permits. Temporary beer licenses or permits shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Newly annexed business: Temporary beer licenses or permits not to exceed 30 days' duration may be issued at the discretion of the secretary of the beverage board to newly annexed businesses which hold a valid county beer permit. The beverage board, at its next regular meeting, may make only one extension of the temporary permit for no longer than 30 days. 
(2)  One event permit for private businesses: Temporary beer licenses or permits not to exceed 24-hour duration may be issued by the beverage board at the request of the applicant upon the same conditions governing permanent permits. For the purposes of these provisions, the same conditions governing permanent permits shall apply to temporary permits and shall include the application for a temporary beer license or permit, a fee of $50.00, and a written plan detailing how the event will be conducted in order to provide for a safe and controlled environment. Such a temporary license or permit shall not allow the sale, storage or manufacture of beer on publicly owned property. 
(3)  One event permits for nonprofit organizations: A temporary license authorizing the sale of beer on public property may be issued to a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization or bona fide political organization, subject to the approval of the appropriate governmental authority charged with the management of such publicly owned property and the beverage board. Documents showing evidence of the type of organization shall be submitted with the application. Such a temporary license or permit shall be limited to two events per organization in any 12-month period. 
(4)  Multiple event permit for nonprofit organizations: Subject to the submission of a proper application and the payment of the application fee, the beverage board is authorized and empowered in its discretion to issue special event licenses to bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization for special events with the duration of said license being for a period of not more than one year. No single special event shall be longer than 72 hours in duration. The beverage board may issue a special event license under such terms, conditions, rules and regulations as the beer board may establish which are not inconsistent with state law regulating the sale of beer. 
(5)  Notice of intent to conduct a special event. Any person, organization or other entity with a special event license conducting an event during which beer is to be sold shall provide at least 30 days' advance written notice to the chairperson of the beverage board, with a copy to the city recorder, of the intent to conduct such a special event. The notice required by this part shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Date and time of the event; 
b.  The sponsor of the event; 
c.  The specific location where any beer is to be sold outside; 
d.  Any plans for proposed temporary closure of public rights-of-way; 
e.  Plans for security and policing of the event; 
f.  The anticipated number of persons attending the event; 
g.  Plans for clean up during and after the event; 
h.  Plans for sanitary facilities and for safety inspections as determined needed by the fire department; 
i.  Indemnification: A written agreement that will indemnify and hold the city, its officials and employees harmless from any claim resulting from the event; and 
j.  Liability insurance: Provide to the city from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, applicable to the serving of beer at the event and providing insurance coverage for all liabilities including death, personal injury or property damage, arising out of, or in any way related to, the event described, in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined single limits. Such insurance shall be in a form satisfactory to the city's risk manager, shall include an endorsement naming the city as additional insured under the coverage afforded, shall be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to the city, shall contain a severability of interest (cross liability) clause, and shall require the insurer to provide to the city at least 30 days' prior notice of cancellation. Proof of such insurance, also in a form satisfactory to the city's risk manager, shall be filed with the risk manager prior to the date of the event of the sponsoring organization. 
Upon receipt of the notice as required in this subsection (e)(5), the proposed special event shall be placed on the agenda of the beverage board for its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice, and the sponsor of the proposed event shall send a representative or representatives (both a representative of the nonprofit organization and a representative of the professional organization running the event, if applicable) to the beverage board meeting to address any questions or issues arising out of the proposed special event. 
(6)  The Downtown District: The beverage board is hereby authorized and empowered in its discretion to permit the sale of beer in the downtown district, being the area bounded by Main Street, Clinchfield Street, Sullivan Street and Wexler Street, and also including the area across Main Street in the 100 and 200 blocks, to a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization holding a temporary permit or a special event license at such times and events and under such terms, conditions, rules and regulations as the beverage board may establish which are not inconsistent with state law regulating the sale of beer, and including the temporary closure of public rights-of-way within the area with the express permission and cooperation of the city police department and city transportation department. 
(g)  Purchase from source other than licensee prohibited. No charitable, nonprofit or political organization possessing a temporary permit or special occasion licenses shall purchase for sale or distribution beer from any source other than a licensee as provided pursuant to state law. 
(h)  Special permits for sale in certain areas. Beer permits shall not be valid for any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public right-of-way contiguous or adjacent to the permitted establishment. Provided, however, in the downtown business area, as defined in section 90-74, the beverage board may issue a special beer permit for such areas, if the permitted establishment obtains and maintains a permit for sidewalk cafe dining facility from the department of public works as set out in chapter 90, article III, division 2, pertaining to sidewalk dining facilities. The sale, service or distribution of beer in the sidewalk cafe dining facility shall be under terms, conditions, rules and regulations as the beverage board shall establish, including but not limited to the length and periods of time during which a special permit may be valid, which are not inconsistent with state law regulating the sale of beer. Such terms, conditions, rules, and regulations may include the requirement of the submission to the beverage board of the following information: 
(1)  The identity of such person who is requesting the special permit; 
(2)  The site plan for the outdoor seating area showing where any beer is to be sold, served, or consumed, the specific location of any furniture and equipment and how the area of public right-of-way is to be separated from the remainder the public right-of-way or property; 
(3)  The safety and liability measures already taken and those that shall continue to be taken by such person with respect to the outdoor serving area. 
The person requesting the special permit shall send representatives to the beverage board meeting to address any questions or issues that may arise regarding the request. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, beer shall not be dispensed from any outdoor bar or serving station. Further, the issuance of a special permit by the beverage board pursuant to this subsection (g) does not authorize any person to utilize the public right-of-way in the downtown business area for any purpose without express permission granted by the department of public works in the form of a permit for a sidewalk cafe dining facility. 
(i)  Manufacturer's permit. Permits for the manufacture of beer shall be issued in accordance with the general requirements of this chapter and the following: 
(1)  A permit authorizing the manufacture, storage, sale and distribution of beer, not to be consumed on the premises of the manufacturer, except as otherwise provided hereinafter may be issued. In addition to the manufacture and storage of beer, a manufacturer's permit shall authorize the sale and distribution of the beer through the standard non-retail system to the extent allowed by applicable law. 
(2)  A manufacturer of beer can include in its application a request for the privilege of retail sale for on-premises and/or off premises consumption of the beer pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-101(c), at the manufacture's location or a site contiguous thereto for sales of not more than 25,000 barrels of beer annually for consumption on or off the premises. 
(3)  A manufacturer's permit that authorizes the manufacture of beer may include, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-101(c), the privilege of conducting on-premises retail sales, even though it does not maintain or have a regularly conducted restaurant or eating place. 
(4)  A manufacturer's permit that authorizes the manufacture of beer and pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-101(c) the sale of beer for off-premises consumption shall be sold for off-premises consumption in sizes and containers that are made available through the general wholesale/retail distribution system, including such containers generally known as growlers. 
(5)  A manufacturer's permit that authorizes for retail sales may take place within the same store licensed by the state alcohol beverage commission for the sale of high alcohol content beer, provided the other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(6)  Documentation by the manufacturer of the number of barrels sold each calendar year may be required by the beverage board. 
(j)  Wholesaler's permit. Permits for the wholesale sale of beer for operators who have a warehouse in the city and sell or otherwise distribute beer at wholesale, shall be issued in accordance with the general requirements of this chapter and such rules established by the beverage board not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 4-48; Code 1998, § 6-223; Ord. No. 4258, § VI, 7-16-1996; Ord. No. 4457, § 1, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 5401, § V, 5-2-2006; Ord. No. 5810, §§ IV, V, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 6367, § II, 12-3-2013; ; Ord. No. 6463, § VI, 1-6-2015) 
Sec. 6-214. - Inspection of premises. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to inspect the place of business and premises of the holder of a permit issued under this division. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to refuse to permit any such inspection during any time that such place is open for business. 
(Code 1981, § 4-55; Code 1998, § 6-224) 
Sec. 6-215. - Display. 
    Every person issued a permit under this division shall display and keep displayed his beer permit in a conspicuous place on the premises where he is licensed to conduct such business. 
(Code 1981, § 4-45; Code 1998, § 6-225) 
Sec. 6-216. - Transferability. 
(a)  Beer permits and receipts for the payment of any fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable. The holder of a beer permit may not sell, give, trade, assign, or transfer the permit to any other person, firm, corporation, or other entity. When any permittee intends to cease to engage in the beer business, he shall notify the secretary of the board, in writing, of that intent at least 15 days in advance of the cessation. 
(b)  When any permittee shall cease to engage in the beer business, changes ownership, relocates the business or changes the name of the business, including, but not limited to, a trade name, a "doing business as" name, the name used by the business to the public, or in any other manner, the permit shall automatically expire or terminate, and such permit shall be immediately surrendered to the city recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 4-46; Code 1998, § 6-226; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 6-217. - Establishment of regular hours of operation. 
(a)  Every person issued a permit under this division shall establish regular hours of operation, and such hours shall be submitted to the secretary of the beverage board in writing and shall be posted in the establishment at all times. No change of operational hours will be permitted without submitting the hours in writing to the secretary of the board, and any deviation from those hours could be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(b)  A permit will be void if an establishment does not operate the business during its normal operational hours for 30 days or more without a specific variance from the beverage board for good cause shown. 
(Code 1998, § 6-227; Ord. No. 4258, § III(4-40), 7-16-1996) 
Sec. 6-218. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to sell, furnish, dispose of or give or cause to be sold, furnished, disposed of or given beer between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. No beer shall be consumed or opened for consumption on or about any premises permitted under this division, in either bottle, glass or other container after 3:15 a.m. 
(Code 1981, § 4-50; Code 1998, § 6-228) 
State Law reference- Authority for fixing of hours by municipality, T.C.A. § 57-5-301. 
Sec. 6-219. - Loitering around place of business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under this division to allow a person to loiter around the place of business. 
(Code 1981, § 4-53; Code 1998, § 6-229) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Amusement devices, T.C.A. § 68-121-116 et seq.; taxation of coin-operated amusement devices, T.C.A. § 67-4-2201 et seq.; taxation of amusements and recreation, T.C.A. § 67-6-212; adult oriented establishments, T.C.A. § 7-51-1401 et seq.; fairs, T.C.A. § 43-21-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 10-19. - Code adopted. 
    The provisions of the Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., are adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this section. Three copies of such code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-230; Code 1998, § 10-26) 
Secs. 10-20-10-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOWLING ALLEYS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-42. - Location. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bowling alley on any floor of any building which shall be immediately over a floor used for any purpose other than that mentioned in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 11-36; Code 1998, § 10-56) 
Sec. 10-43. - Construction of buildings. 
    Any building used for the purposes specified in this article shall be constructed or insulated in such a way that the sounds therefrom shall not constitute a nuisance to adjoining businesses or residences. 
(Code 1981, § 11-37; Code 1998, § 10-57) 
Secs. 10-44-10-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS 

Sec. 10-75. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any show or aggregation of shows, carnivals, exhibitions or features ordinarily comprising one of the attractions of a carnival without a permit from the board of mayor and aldermen. The recorder shall issue no business license to any person for the purpose of conducting any such exhibition or any such business unless the applicant for the license presents to the recorder such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 11-46; Code 1998, § 10-86) 
Secs. 10-76-10-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTION PICTURE THEATERS 

Sec. 10-94. - First floor location. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate for profit any motion picture show on any floor except the first floor of a building. However, this shall not in any way prohibit the use of balconies in connection with motion picture shows or theatrical performances. 
(Code 1981, § 11-54; Code 1998, § 10-116) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fencing and confinement of animals, T.C.A. § 44-8-101 et seq.; running at large generally, T.C.A. § 44-8-401 et seq.; dogs and cats generally, T.C.A. § 44-17-101 et seq.; dogs running at large, T.C.A. § 44-8-408; confinement of female dogs in heat, T.C.A. § 44-8-410; rabies inoculations required, T.C.A. §§ 68-8-102, 68-8-104; Nonlivestock Animal Human Death Act, T.C.A. § 44-17-301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any member of the animal kingdom with a backbone (amphibians, birds, fishes, mammals and reptiles), whether domesticated or wild, but not including man. 
    At large, running at large means an animal off the premises of the owner or keeper, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
    Kennel means any commercial establishment or premises where dogs or cats are bred, boarded, kept or maintained for any purpose whatsoever, with the exception of veterinary hospitals, pet shops, grooming parlors and shelters. Any person operating a kennel must obtain a city business license, and the establishment must conform with the provisions for kennels in chapter 114. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1; Code 1998, § 14-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - City authority to establish zoological parks and wilderness areas. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall impede, hamper or prohibit the city in establishing and operating zoological parks and wilderness areas. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1; Code 1998, § 14-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area within the city is designated a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2; Code 1998, § 14-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Trapping, shooting, hunting, molesting birds. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob birds' nests or wild fowl nests. However, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of health authorities, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such a manner as is deemed advisable by the chief of police. The requirement to obtain a permit shall not apply to the actions and activities of the United States Department of Agriculture, which may, without obtaining a permit or notification to the chief of police, respond to requests for wildlife damage assistance involving birds and other such animals in the city by use of such methods and activities as it deems proper and necessary. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3; Code 1998, § 14-4; Ord. No. 5827, § I, 4-7-2009) 
Sec. 14-5. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any animal he owns or that is under his care, custody or control to run at large; provided, however, that dogs are subject to section 14-33. 
(Code 1981, § 5-5; Code 1998, § 14-6) 
Sec. 14-6. - Frightening horses. 
    No person shall, by any noise, gesture or other means, wantonly and designedly frighten any horse that is on any street or public place. 
(Code 1981, § 5-8; Code 1998, § 14-9) 
Sec. 14-7. - Disposition of dead animals. 
    The bodies of animals that have died shall be disposed of as required by the animal control officer. 
(Code 1981, § 5-9; Code 1998, § 14-10) 
Secs. 14-8-14-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-33. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring a dog to permit it to run at large at any place except on the premises of such person or in any city designated dog park. However, a dog shall not be deemed running at large if accompanied by a person actually in control of such dog by leash. 
(Code 1981, § 5-20; Code 1998, § 14-36; Ord. No. 5747, § I, 9-16-2008) 
State Law reference- Dogs running at large, T.C.A. § 44-8-408; confinement of female dogs in heat, T.C.A. § 44-8-410. 
Sec. 14-34. - Vicious dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a vicious dog, unless it is kept securely confined upon its own premises. A vicious dog shall be deemed as one that has previously bitten a person or another animal or that is subject to fits of rage during which it may attack, bite or jump on a person or other animal in such a manner as to cause physical harm. 
(Code 1981, § 5-21; Code 1998, § 14-37) 
Sec. 14-35. - Number restricted. 
    Except as permitted in chapter 114 for kennels, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep over five canines over 12 months of age on any premises. For the purpose of this section, the head of the household shall be responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 5-22; Code 1998, § 14-38) 
Secs. 14-36-14-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 14-59. - Inoculation required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat that does not have the rabies inoculation required by state law. 
(Code 1981, § 5-35; Code 1998, § 14-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. §§ 68-8-102, 68-8-104. 
Sec. 14-60. - Inoculation tag. 
    Each person who owns or has a dog or cat under his control shall, upon the inoculation of such dog or cat, procure a metal tag from the veterinarian, which tag shall show the inoculation number of the dog or cat and the year in which the inoculation is given. The owner shall keep the tag attached to a collar, that is kept on the dog or cat at all times. 
(Code 1981, § 5-36; Code 1998, § 14-67) 
Sec. 14-61. - Certificate of inoculation. 
    Each person owning or controlling an inoculated dog or cat shall keep its current certificate of inoculation and shall present such certificate when requested by properly authorized officers. 
(Code 1981, § 5-37; Code 1998, § 14-68) 
Secs. 14-62-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-81. - Authorized. 
    Animal control officers shall capture, confine or impound any animal that is in violation of any section of this chapter. Such officers may call upon members of the police department for assistance. If it is not practical to capture, confine or impound such animal, the animal may be killed. If, however, the officer can obtain the serial number from a valid rabies or license tag worn by the animal in violation, the owner of the animal may be cited to appear in city court in lieu of impounding the animal. 
(Code 1981, § 5-46; Code 1998, § 14-96) 
Sec. 14-82. - Interference with officials or pound. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal pound or with the animal control officers in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1981, § 5-50; Code 1998, § 14-97) 
Sec. 14-83. - Custody and notice of impoundment. 
    All animals impounded at the city pound shall be held for a period of 72 hours; provided, however, that an animal wearing a valid inoculation or license tag shall be held for five days. The animal control officer shall try within such period to notify the owner of such animal. 
(Code 1981, § 5-47; Code 1998, § 14-98) 
State Law reference- Three-day holding period for stray animals, T.C.A. § 44-17-304. 
Sec. 14-84. - Redemption. 
    If the owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this article shall appear and claim the animal within the period described in section 14-83, the animal shall be released to him upon the agreement to procure the required rabies inoculation and payment of the applicable fees. 
(Code 1981, § 5-48; Code 1998, § 14-99) 
Sec. 14-85. - Disposal if unredeemed. 
    Every animal impounded pursuant to this article, if not reclaimed or redeemed by the owner within the time specified in section 14-83, may be humanely put to death as soon as practical, unless redeemed or claimed by others. After the period of impoundment described in section 14-83 and before the animal is put to death, any person may redeem or claim such animal upon the agreement to procure to the required rabies inoculation and payment of the applicable fee. 
(Code 1981, § 5-49; Code 1998, § 14-100) 
State Law reference- Nonlivestock Animal Human Death Act, T.C.A. § 44-17-301 et seq. 
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Airport Authorities Act, T.C.A. § 42-3-101 et seq.; regulation of airport hazards by municipalities, T.C.A. § 42-3-119; county and municipal airports, T.C.A. § 42-5-102; heliports generally, T.C.A. § 42-8-101 et seq.; limitation on location of heliports, T.C.A. § 42-8-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HELICOPTERS AND HELIPORTS 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Helicopter means any rotorcraft which depends principally for its support and motion in the air upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis. 
    Heliport means an area of land, water or structural surface which is designed, used or intended to be used for landing and takeoff of helicopters and any appurtenant areas, including buildings and other facilities such as refueling, parking, maintenance and repair facilities. The term "heliport" applies to all such facilities, whether the facility is public or private. 
    Helistop means a minimum facility without the logistical support provided at a heliport at which helicopters land and take off, including the touchdown area. Helistops may be at ground level or elevated on a structure. The term "helistop" applies to all such minimum facilities, whether the facility is public or private. 
(Code 1981, § 3-21; Code 1998, § 18-26) 
Sec. 18-20. - Precedence of zoning. 
    No section of this article shall be construed to alter or amend any section of chapter 114, and no use prohibited by the terms of chapter 114 shall be deemed permitted by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 3-24; Code 1998, § 18-28) 
Sec. 18-21. - Design in compliance with rules, regulations and minimum standards. 
    All heliports or helistops shall comply with Advisory Circular No. 150/5390-2B regarding heliport design published by the Federal Aviation Administration, as well as any rules and regulations promulgated by the bureau of aeronautics, state department of transportation, with respect to minimum standards for heliports or helistops, as amended from time to time. If a heliport or helistop shall be located on a building or other structure, it shall further comply with the city building code. 
(Code 1981, § 3-23; Code 1998, § 18-29) 
Sec. 18-22. - Landing in unauthorized places; exceptions. 
    No person shall land a helicopter at any place within the city other than at a landing facility duly licensed or approved as required by appropriate statute or regulation by the state and federal aviation agencies, except for the following: 
(1)  In any emergency or for persons involved in the conduct of official business of any law enforcement agency or military unit of any branch of the armed forces of the United States or state national guard or any medical evacuation unit, search and rescue unit or civil defense unit; or 
(2)  Educational activities or special events that would be limited in scope and time. Such activities or special events may be approved by the city manager after receiving approval of a written safety plan submitted by the requesting party. The plan requires review and approval of the chief of police and fire chief. 
(Code 1981, § 3-22; Code 1998, § 18-30) 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Contractor Licensing Act of 1994, T.C.A. § 62-6-101 et seq.; power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, T.C.A. § 6-54-502; authority of municipality to adopt standardized codes by reference, T.C.A. § 6-54-119; power of municipality to regulate electricians and electrical work, T.C.A. § 6-54-104; structures unfit for occupation and use, T.C.A. § 13-21-101 et seq., building regulations generally, T.C.A. § 68-120-101 et seq.; minimum statewide construction safety standards, T.C.A. § 68-120-101; certification of local fire and building officials, T.C.A. § 68-120-113; municipal authority to license residential, commercial and accessory buildings and maintenance and alteration contractors, T.C.A. § 7-62-103; limitation on local licensing authority, T.C.A. § 7-62-104. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Fire districts. 
(a)  The first fire district of the city shall include the area within the following boundaries: 
    Beginning at the intersection of the northerly right-of-way of Carolina, Clinchfield and Ohio Railway with the centerline of Clay Street; thence along the centerline of Clay Street north 38 degrees 20 minutes east 2,180.97 feet more or less, to the centerline of Sullivan Street; thence along the centerline of Sullivan Street south 37 degrees 13 minutes east 311.08 feet, more or less; thence at right angles and along the divisional line and the continuations thereof, between lots one and two of block 50, 232 feet more or less, to the centerline of Holston Street; thence along such centerline north 9 degrees 54 minutes west 45 feet more or less, to the intersection of such centerline with the centerline of a 15-foot alley; thence following the centerline of such alley in a general southeasterly direction 843 feet, more or less, crossing Broad Street to the centerline of Watauga Street; thence south 85 degrees 30 minutes east 30 feet, more or less, to its intersection with the centerline of another 15-foot alley; thence leaving Watauga Street and following the centerline of such alley south 18 degrees 59 minutes west 186 feet to an angle; thence still along the alley south 37 degrees 13 minutes east 238 feet, more or less, to the line of Charlemont Avenue; thence along the centerline of Charlemont Avenue south 18 degrees 59 minutes west 75 feet, more or less, to the intersection of such centerline with the centerline of Boone Street; thence south 77 degrees 23 minutes east 100 feet, more or less, to its intersection with the centerline of a 15-foot alley; thence along the centerline of such alley south 26 degrees 13 minutes east 1,480 feet to the intersection of such centerline with the centerline of Center Street; thence south 71 degrees 33 minutes west; thence following along the line of right-of-way north along the centerline of Center Street 535 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Wexler Street; thence along the centerline of Wexler Street south 38 degrees 2 minutes west 1,160 feet, more or less, to the northerly right-of-way of Carolina, Clinchfield and Ohio Railway; thence north 51 degrees 58 minutes west 2,177.35 feet, more or less, to an angle; thence along such line south 38 degrees 2 minutes west 30 feet, more or less, to an angle; thence still along such line north 51 degrees 58 minutes west 405 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning, containing 96 acres, more or less. 
(b)  The second fire district shall include all the territory within the corporate limits except the territory within the first district, described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 6-17; Code 1998, § 22-112) 
Sec. 22-2. - Duties of officials regarding standard technical codes. 
    In each of the standard technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, the designated city official who has duties corresponding to that named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official, insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1; Code 1998, § 22-1) 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-23-22-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 22-48. - Position established. 
    There is established the position of building official. 
(Code 1981, § 2-83; Code 1998, § 22-51) 
Sec. 22-49. - Duties. 
    The building official shall be in charge of the building department and shall be charged with the enforcement of the various building codes and ordinances of the city. In addition, the building official shall be in charge of all public buildings, except as otherwise noted in the Charter or this Code, and shall have such other duties as are provided by ordinance or by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-84; Code 1998, § 22-52) 
Sec. 22-50. - Air pollution. 
    The building official shall be the person in charge of all air pollution and air pollution related matters which require coordination with state and federal agencies. 
(Code 1981, § 2-85; Code 1998, § 22-53) 
Secs. 22-51-22-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MECHANICAL, PLUMBING AND GAS BOARD OF EXAMINERS 

Sec. 22-74. - Created. 
    There is created a mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners. 
(Code 1981, § 6-98; Code 1998, § 22-81) 
Sec. 22-75. - Members' qualifications, terms of office, oath, compensation. 
(a)  The mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners shall consist of five members, three of whom are persons who, from special training or experience, would qualify as experts either in the field of natural gas, plumbing or heating. At least one of the three members shall be a person who, from special training and experience, shall qualify in the field of natural gas installation, and at least one of the three members shall be a person who, from special training and experience, shall be qualified in the field of plumbing. The third member shall be qualified by special training either in the field of natural gas, heating or plumbing. The other two members shall be the plumbing inspector and the building official. 
(b)  The term of office for the members, other than the plumbing inspector and the building official, shall be for a period of two years or until their successors are appointed. The city manager shall appoint the other members of the board and their successors. Three members shall constitute a quorum of the board and shall have the power to act. 
(c)  All members, before assuming their duties, shall subscribe to an oath before the city recorder to discharge their duties impartially to the best of their ability, without fear or favor. 
(d)  The appointive members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 6-99; Code 1998, § 22-82) 
Sec. 22-76. - Officers; meetings. 
(a)  As soon as possible after its appointment, the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners shall meet and organize by selecting a chairperson. The city building official shall be the secretary and shall designate the time and place for the examination of every applicant desiring to obtain a license to operate a natural gas, plumbing or heating business. 
(b)  Meetings of the board shall be held not more often than once a month, unless a special meeting is requested by at least three members of the board, one of whom must be the secretary thereof, upon reasonable attempted notice to all members of the board. 
(Code 1981, § 6-100; Code 1998, § 22-83) 
Secs. 22-77-22-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 22-96. - Codes adopted by reference. 
(a)  Building code. The provisions of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and the one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(b)  Existing buildings code. The provisions of the International Existing Buildings Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. One copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and the one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(c)  Property maintenance code. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. One copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and the one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(d)  Energy conservation code. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(e)  Residential Code. The provisions of the International Residential Code, 2012 edition excluding Chapter 11 (Energy Conservation) and inserting instead Chapter 11 (Energy Conservation) of the 2009 International Residential Code, excluding section R313 & R2904 in accordance with TCA § 68-120-101(a)(8)(A), removing section 3902.12 and using section 3902.13 for all construction and including appendix F, for one and two-family dwellings, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, as set forth in TCA § 68-120-101(a)(C)(i)(a), a townhouse shall be considered a separate building with independent exterior walls and shall be separated by a two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly. A townhouse shall be built according to local and statewide adopted building codes; provided, however, a fire sprinkler system shall not be required for a townhouse. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary and as provided for in T.C.A. § 68-120-101(a)(8)(A), a fire sprinkler system shall not be required for a single family residence. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(f)  Accessibility code. The provisions of the Chapter 11 of the International Building Code, 2012 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim in this subsection. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection, and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-16; Code 1998, § 22-111; Ord. No. 4295, § II, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 4441, § 1, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 4736, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 5435, § I, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § I, 8-19-2014; Ord. No. 6559, § I, 4-5-2016) 
Secs. 22-97-22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to regulate electricians and electrical work, T.C.A. § 6-54-104. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-121. - Electrical code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, excluding section 110.24 and replacing section 210.12 (A) with section 210.12 (B) for all construction, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination 
(Code 1981, § 6-29; Code 1998, § 22-141; Ord. No. 4441, § 2, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 4736, § II, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 5435, § II, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § II, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 22-122. - Applicability to homeowners. 
    Nothing in this article or the electrical code adopted in section 22-121 shall prevent any homeowner from installing or maintaining electrical work within his own property boundaries, providing such electrical work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of the electrical code or this article, nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-30; Code 1998, § 22-142) 
Sec. 22-123. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The building official is authorized to adopt rules and regulations to enforce this article. No such rule or regulation shall become effective until four weeks after notice of intention to adopt it shall have been given in the newspaper of general circulation in the city and until a public hearing on the rule or regulation shall have been held. However, the public hearing shall not be necessary unless a request shall have been made for such hearing during the period of publication. Such rule must be drawn in its proposed form and shall be open to public inspection at the time the notice to adopt is published. Any rule may be amended or repealed by the same procedure prescribed for adoption of new rules. 
(b)  Rules adopted and promulgated as provided in this section shall have the same force and effect as the sections of this article. 
(c)  In adopting rules for electrical control, the building official shall embody in them the most approved methods and practices for safety of life and property. 
(Code 1981, § 6-31; Code 1998, § 22-143) 
Secs. 22-124-22-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-145. - Permit required. 
    No person shall do any work which is within the scope of the electrical code adopted by section 22-121 without a permit issued by the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 6-39; Code 1998, § 22-171) 
Sec. 22-146. - Permit fees. 
    A person desiring an electrical permit shall pay such fees as are established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 6-44; Code 1998, § 22-172) 
Sec. 22-147. - Imposition of additional permit charges by building official. 
    The building official is authorized to make additional charges in accordance with the established fee schedule on any job for which an electrical permit has been issued, to cover any addition to that particular job or for work knowingly or unknowingly left out of the permit application. 
(Code 1981, § 6-45; Code 1998, § 22-173) 
Sec. 22-148. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Permits for electrical work shall be issued only by the recorder, upon receipt of an application issued by the building official. No application for a permit shall be issued until the applicant therefor, if requested by the building official, submits detailed plans or drawings showing the work to be covered by the permit. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any work which does not or will not comply with this article or the provisions of any other applicable law or ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 6-40; Code 1998, § 22-174) 
Sec. 22-149. - Inspections and approvals required. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of or to supply current for electric wiring for light, heat or power in a building or structure, unless the required inspection has been made and approval has been granted. 
(Code 1981, § 6-41; Code 1998, § 22-175) 
Sec. 22-150. - Right of entry to make inspection. 
    The electrical inspector shall have authority to enter any building or premises for the purpose of inspecting electrical work or appliances at any time during reasonable working hours. 
(Code 1981, § 6-42; Code 1998, § 22-176) 
Sec. 22-151. - Conduct of inspections. 
(a)  At least two inspections shall be made on each electrical job, the first when the work is roughed in (all connections made and soldered, not taped), and the second when the job is finished. On jobs where, due to the size or type of construction, it would not be practical to get all the wiring ready for inspection at one time, inspections shall be made as often as is necessary. 
(b)  No work shall be covered until the proper inspections have been made and approval given. The contractor or the person responsible for any work covered before it is inspected and approved shall uncover such work at his own expense in order that proper inspection can be made. 
(c)  No service equipment or wiring shall be installed in attics, lofts or upper floors unless there is a ladder or stairway furnished so that work will be accessible at the time a request for an inspection is made. 
(Code 1981, § 6-43; Code 1998, § 22-177) 
Sec. 22-152. - Correction of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  If after inspection the electrical inspector finds that electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment which are within the scope of this article are in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating such shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs and changes required to place them in a safe condition within ten days or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply with such notice, the electrical inspector is authorized to have electrical service discontinued until such repairs or changes are made. 
(c)  No fee shall be charged for an inspection made pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 6-46; Code 1998, § 22-178) 
Sec. 22-153. - Temporary use of current before final approval of work. 
    The building official in his discretion may grant temporary permission, for a reasonable time, to supply and use current in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and final approval granted. 
(Code 1981, § 6-47; Code 1998, § 22-179) 
Sec. 22-154. - Appeals. 
    When the building official condemns all or a part of any electrical installation or denies an electrical permit, the person aggrieved may, within five days after receiving written notice from the building official, file a petition in writing for review of such action with the city manager. Upon receipt of the petition, the city manager shall at once proceed to determine if the installation or proposed installation complies with this article and within three days shall make a decision in accordance with his findings. 
(Code 1981, § 6-48; Code 1998, § 22-180) 
Secs. 22-155-22-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICIANS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-177. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice means a person working under the direction and supervision of a licensed electrician for the purpose of learning the electrical trade. 
    Electrical trade. 
(1)  The term "electrical trade" means the practical installation, maintenance and repair of electrical wiring or wiring systems as set out in the definition of electrician as provided in this section. 
(2)  The term "electrical trade" does not include: 
a.  Work by persons excluded from the definition of electrician; 
b.  The performance of minor repairs, such as the replacement of fuses, sockets, lamps, switches, outlet receptacles in installed electrical wiring systems; 
c.  The connection of electrical portable appliances to existing receptacles which have been permanently installed; or 
d.  Work involving the manufacture, test or repair of any electrical materials, devices, appliances or apparatus. 
    Electrician. 
(1)  The term "electrician" applies to all persons engaged in the electrical trade on a fulltime or parttime basis to install, maintain, repair or replace electrical wiring or wiring systems. The term "electrician" shall apply to a person on the maintenance staff of any hospital or similar institution, commercial building, theater, office building, hotel, motel, tourist facility or court, apartment complex and shall also apply to a person in the employ of or a person who operates or maintains any single-family or multifamily residential structure which is used, in whole or in part, by subdivision into separate apartments or rooms of any nature whatsoever, for the purpose of being leased, rented or otherwise made available to the public for occupancy which requires such person to do more than maintain or repair existing electrical wire, wiring systems or maintain or replace electric appliances or electrical equipment within such buildings on an in-house basis. 
(2)  The term "electrician" does not apply to a person who: 
a.  Sells, installs or maintains elevators, escalators or similar equipment or to employees of a municipal plant or other public utility organized for the purpose of constructing, maintaining and operating public works for the generation, supply, transmission and distribution of electricity; and 
b.  Is under the control of a federal regulatory body or authority granted by the state or to any person in the employ of a manufacturing or industrial plant for the purpose of performing repair, manufacturing and maintenance work on the premises occupied by such manufacturing or industrial plant, and installation work on premises occupied only by the manufacturing or industrial plant; 
however, this exception does not apply if electrical work is done outside the main plant area by an independent contractor; such work shall be performed only by a duly licensed electrician after having obtained the necessary license and payment of the requisite license and permit fees to the city for such work. 
    Helper means a person employed by an electrician to perform tasks that do not constitute actual electrical work or the practice of the electrical trade as defined in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 6-56; Code 1998, § 22-206) 
Sec. 22-178. - Responsibility for electrical work. 
    Every electrician shall be responsible for all work performed by his employees while acting within the course and scope of their employment for all electrical work covered in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 6-69; Code 1998, § 22-207) 
Sec. 22-179. - Use of only licensed electricians; responsibility for compliance with standards. 
    Electricians shall use only licensed electricians in the performing of actual electrical work in the practice of the electrical trade, except as otherwise provided in this article, and shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed in a safe and workmanlike manner and up to the standard of this type of work and shall see that the work is performed in accordance with the provisions of applicable codes as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6-70; Code 1998, § 22-208) 
Secs. 22-180-22-196. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Electrical Board of Examiners 

Sec. 22-197. - Created. 
    There is created an electrical board of examiners. 
(Code 1981, § 6-57; Code 1998, § 22-236) 
Sec. 22-198. - Members' qualifications, terms, oath and compensation. 
(a)  The electrical board of examiners shall consist of five members, three of whom are persons who, from special training or experience, would qualify as experts in the electric field and the other members being the electrical inspector and the building official. 
(b)  The term of office for the board members, other than the electrical inspector and the city building official, shall be two years or until their successors are appointed. The city manager shall appoint the members of the board, other than the electrical inspector and the building official, and their successors. Three members of the board shall have the power to act. 
(c)  All members of the board, before assuming their duties, shall subscribe to an oath before the city recorder to discharge their duties impartially to the best of their ability, without fear or favor. 
(d)  The appointive members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 6-58; Code 1998, § 22-237) 
Sec. 22-199. - Officers; meetings. 
(a)  As soon as possible after appointment, the electrical board of examiners shall meet and organize by selecting a chairperson. The building official shall be the secretary and shall designate the time and place for the examination of every applicant desiring to obtain a license to operate as an electrician within the city. 
(b)  Meetings of the board shall be held once a month, unless a special meeting is requested by at least three members of the board, one of whom must be the secretary thereof, upon attempted reasonable notice to all members of the board. 
(Code 1981, § 6-59; Code 1998, § 22-238) 
Secs. 22-200-22-221. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Licenses 

Sec. 22-222. - Required; applicability to apprentices and helpers. 
(a)  No person shall practice the electrical trade without a license issued by the recorder, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  An electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the practice of the electrical trade on a fulltime or parttime basis and to perform actual electrical work as set out in the definition of electrical trade and electrician in section 22-177. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of an electrician's license issued pursuant to this subdivision to allow any person who is not licensed as an electrician to do any actual electrical work, except that nothing in this article shall preclude any person from working as an apprentice or a helper under the direct supervision and direction of a licensed electrician. 
(d)  An electrician who is employed by an itinerant company, operating stage show, circus or similar form of entertainment need not obtain such a license, but shall purchase the required electrical permit and shall be subject to the instructions and approvals of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 6-60; Code 1998, § 22-266) 
Sec. 22-223. - Examination. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, every person who desires to practice the electrical trade in the city shall appear before the electrical board of examiners and be examined as to his qualifications and ability to perform such endeavors and be approved for a license. The electrician's examination may be oral, written or any combination thereof for applicants to demonstrate to the electrical board of examiners basic skills of the electrical trade. The fee for the examination shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time, as circumstances require, in addition to the regular fee for the issuance of a license. However, nothing in this section shall require the reexamination of any person holding a valid electrical contractor's license issued by the electrical board of examiners prior to September 20, 1983. Every person desiring to practice the electrical trade shall be examined and required to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-61; Code 1998, § 22-267) 
Sec. 22-224. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for an electrician's license shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as the circumstances require. 
(Code 1981, § 6-62; Code 1998, § 22-268) 
Sec. 22-225. - Bond. 
(a)  No person shall practice an electrical trade within the city until such person shall secure and present to the building official a licensing bond executed and issued by a surety company duly qualified and authorized to do business in the state, in a penal sum to be determined and set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as circumstances require. 
(b)  The bond shall be payable to the city, for the use of the city and any citizen who may be damaged by the failure of such electrical contractor to comply with this article or who may be damaged by any negligence committed or imperfect or defective work done by such electrician or any person in the employ of such electrician, while acting in the scope and course of his employment. 
(c)  The bond shall be so conditioned as to require electricians to comply with all sections of this article. In such bond, the electrician shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all persons therein from loss, cost or damage caused by negligence or by inadequate, imperfect or defective work done by him or his employees while acting in the scope and course of their employment. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any electrician from giving bond as required by this section or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 6-68; Code 1998, § 22-269) 
Sec. 22-226. - Issuance. 
    No electrician's license shall be issued by the recorder without a certificate of approval from the electrical board of examiners. Such approvals for licenses shall be signed by the chairperson and the secretary of the electrical board of examiners. 
(Code 1981, § 6-63; Code 1998, § 22-270) 
Sec. 22-227. - Expiration term. 
    An electrician's license authorizing the holder to practice the electrical trade shall expire on December 31, unless sooner revoked or renewed. 
(Code 1981, § 6-64; Code 1998, § 22-271) 
Sec. 22-228. - Display. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed electrician to display his license at his place of business or to have evidence of such license on his person at all times on the job. 
(Code 1981, § 6-65; Code 1998, § 22-272) 
Sec. 22-229. - Revocation. 
    Any license to practice the electrical trade within the city may be revoked by the electrical board of examiners, after a hearing affording due process, for the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any section of this article or any city ordinance governing the installation of electric wiring, electric appliances and electric equipment. 
(2)  Permitting such work to be carried on in an unworkmanlike manner by those employed by him. 
(3)  Using unqualified labor in performance of such work. 
(4)  Permitting the work to be done in a hazardous or dangerous manner. 
(5)  Incompetent work. 
(6)  Obtaining a permit for an unlicensed person not in his employ. 
(Code 1981, § 6-66; Code 1998, § 22-273) 
Secs. 22-230-22-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANTENNAS 

Sec. 22-252. - Compliance with article and electrical code required. 
    All television and radio antennas or masts and their appurtenances erected in the city shall comply with the requirements of this division and the rules and regulations of article 810 of the electrical code adopted in section 22-121. 
(Code 1981, § 6-78; Code 1998, § 22-301) 
Sec. 22-253. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall erect any television or radio antenna or mast or appurtenance thereto without a permit issued by the building official. A person desiring such a permit shall make application to the building official, setting forth detailed information regarding the location, type of antenna and material to be used, all of which shall conform to this article. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  When the application shows that the proposed work and equipment conform with this article, the building official shall issue a permit. Where the application fails to show conformity to this article, a permit shall be denied. 
(Code 1981, § 6-79; Code 1998, § 22-302) 
Sec. 22-254. - Noncomplying installations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, use or have on his premises a television or radio antenna, mast or appurtenance thereto unless the antenna, mast or appurtenance shall conform to this article. When any television or radio antenna, mast or appurtenance thereto shall be found to be in violation of this article, the owner of such equipment shall be served with notice and shall be given 30 days to correct the conditions in order to conform to this article or to remove the equipment from the premises. 
(Code 1981, § 6-80; Code 1998, § 22-303) 
Sec. 22-255. - Anchoring to chimney or flue. 
    No television or radio antenna or mast shall be fastened to a chimney unless the antenna or mast has sufficient guy wires. Any fastening to a chimney or flue will be accepted only as a stabilizer for the base of the antenna or mast and not as a brace. Any anchorage to a chimney or flue shall be made by a steel band of No. 16-gauge metal one-inch-wide or by approved chimney clamp. The ends of such band shall be fastened by means of clamps or rivets. There shall be at least 150 pounds of masonry above the clamp, computed on a basis of six pounds per brick in place. 
(Code 1981, § 6-81; Code 1998, § 22-304) 
Sec. 22-256. - Safety wire. 
    No television or radio antenna or mast shall be located where it will be in danger of falling on electrical distribution lines, unless a separate safety wire is attached to the crossarm of the antenna and is sufficiently anchored according to subsection 22-257(b). 
(Code 1981, § 6-82; Code 1998, § 22-305) 
Sec. 22-257. - Guy wires. 
(a)  Television or radio antennas or masts shall have at least three guy wires of No. 12-gauge or larger galvanized wire or six stranded clothesline wire. 
(b)  All guy wires shall be anchored securely. If the anchors are fastened to the wood structure of the building, screw-type eyebolts at least 5/16-inch in diameter shall be embedded into solid wood at least three inches deep. All guy wires extended to the ground shall be fastened to 11/4-inch iron pipe driven at least three feet six inches into firm soil or clay or a four-inch by four-inch post of pressure treated wood driven three feet six inches into firm soil or clay. A plate of iron three-eighths-inch thick and with an area of at least one square foot having a one-half-inch diameter rod fastened to masonry shall be by means of two three-eighths-inch expansion bolts imbedded at least four inches into the masonry. Nails for fasteners or anchorage are prohibited. Guy wires shall be secured to anchors by served connections, served wrapped ends or wire clamps. 
(Code 1981, § 6-83; Code 1998, § 22-306) 
Sec. 22-258. - Restrictions for anchoring guy wires. 
(a)  Under this division, no anchorage for guy wires shall be made to a cornice or projection of any building, but the anchorage shall be made to substantial framing of the building. 
(b)  No guy wires shall be fastened to any adjoining building without the written consent of the owner of the building or his agent and the occupant of the building. 
(c)  No guy wires shall be placed in the path of regular travel of persons or placed in such manner as to form a trap for anyone. 
(Code 1981, § 6-84; Code 1998, § 22-307) 
Sec. 22-259. - Grounding. 
    All television or radio antennas or masts shall be grounded by means of No. 6-gauge wire or larger clamped to a ground rod driven four feet into the earth or to cold water piping of the building within eight feet of the vertical line of the antennas or masts. If the conditions of the earth are such that no moisture is obtained at a four-foot depth, a hole shall be drilled or dug at least four feet deep and, after placing the grounding rod therein, the hole shall be filled with wet charcoal. All grounding conductors shall be run in as straight a line as practicable from the grounding electrode or rod. Lightning arrestors or lead-ins are not to be considered the grounding of the antennas or masts. 
(Code 1981, § 6-85; Code 1998, § 22-308) 
Sec. 22-260. - Lightning arrestors. 
    Whenever polyethylene ribbon-type lead-in conductors are used, lightning arrestors shall be installed on each lead-in conductor. Lightning arrestors shall be grounded in the same manner as television antennas or masts. 
(Code 1981, § 6-86; Code 1998, § 22-309) 
Secs. 22-261-22-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GAS CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-284. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-112; Code 1998, § 22-336; Ord. No. 4441, § 3, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 4736, § III, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 5435, § III, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § III, 8-19-2014) 
Secs. 22-285-22-301. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-302. - Permit required. 
    No person shall do any work which is within the scope of the gas code adopted in section 22-284 without a permit issued by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 6-120; Code 1998, § 22-366) 
Sec. 22-303. - Action upon application for permit. 
    The building official shall act upon an application for a gas permit with plans as filed or as amended without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(Code 1981, § 6-121; Code 1998, § 22-367) 
Sec. 22-304. - Effect of issuance of permit. 
    A gas permit shall be construed as a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside the requirements of this article, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in plans or in construction or of violations of the gas code. 
(Code 1981, § 6-122; Code 1998, § 22-368) 
Sec. 22-305. - Service connection permit. 
    Before the gas company shall make any opening or service connection in any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place to connect the applicant consumer to any gas main, a permit shall be obtained for such opening from the city recorder, upon receipt of an application therefor, issued by the public works director, to make such installation. 
(Code 1981, § 6-131; Code 1998, § 22-369) 
Sec. 22-306. - Permit fees. 
    A person desiring a gas permit shall pay such fees as are established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 6-123; Code 1998, § 22-370) 
Sec. 22-307. - Permit revocation. 
    The building official may revoke a permit issued under this division if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit is based. In all such cases no fees shall be refunded. 
(Code 1981, § 6-124; Code 1998, § 22-371) 
Sec. 22-308. - Inspections required. 
    All new gas installation work and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or changes shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with approved plans. 
(Code 1981, § 6-125; Code 1998, § 22-372) 
Sec. 22-309. - Installing agency to furnish equipment, materials, labor for tests. 
    The installing agency shall be required under any permit issued in compliance with this article to furnish all necessary test equipment, materials, power and labor needed in making the inspection and in testing the safety of such installation, in accordance with good engineering practices in such field of work. 
(Code 1981, § 6-126; Code 1998, § 22-373) 
Sec. 22-310. - Notice for inspection. 
    The installing agency shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when gas installation work is ready for test or inspection. The installing agency shall make sure that the work will stand the test prescribed before giving such notice. 
(Code 1981, § 6-127; Code 1998, § 22-374) 
Sec. 22-311. - Final testing. 
    The final test for each permit issued under this division shall be made after the gas has been turned into the system in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Before turning the gas into any piping system, all openings from which gas can escape shall be closed. 
(2)  Immediately after turning the gas into any piping system, the gas company shall check and ascertain that no gas is escaping. 
(3)  If the gas company finds that gas is escaping, it shall immediately shut off the gas and notify the building official, which notice, if requested, shall be in writing and shall direct the installing agency to prepare the system for further tightness tests. Thereafter, the procedure of final test shall be as provided in this section and in section 22-312. 
(4)  If the gas company ascertains that the system is apparently gastight, it shall notify the building official in writing of such fact. 
(Code 1981, § 6-128; Code 1998, § 22-375) 
Sec. 22-312. - Correction, retesting of disapproved work. 
    If the building official finds that gas installation work will not pass the test required by section 22-311, the installing agency shall make the necessary corrections and the work shall then be resubmitted for reinspection. 
(Code 1981, § 6-129; Code 1998, § 22-376) 
Sec. 22-313. - Stop work orders. 
    Upon notice from the building official that work on any gas installation is being done contrary to this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of such property or to his agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, oral notice given by the building official shall be sufficient, but he shall confirm the notice in writing within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(Code 1981, § 6-130; Code 1998, § 22-377) 
Sec. 22-314. - Unauthorized connection to mains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person authorized by the gas company, to make any opening or service connection in any street, alley or public place to connect consumers to a gas main of the company. 
(Code 1981, § 6-132; Code 1998, § 22-378) 
Sec. 22-315. - Turning on gas prior to inspection, approval of system. 
    It shall be unlawful for the gas company to turn on the gas for the applicant consumer to the gas main or other source of supply and render gas service to such consumer by or through such connection, except for testing purposes made by the gas company, until such connection to the gas meter or source of supply, together with the consumer's entire system for the use and consumption of gas, has been first inspected, tested and approved and notice of approval has been given to the gas company by the building department. 
(Code 1981, § 6-133; Code 1998, § 22-379) 
Secs. 22-316-22-333. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GASFITTERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-334. - Responsibility for gas installation. 
    A gasfitter engaged in the business of a gas installing agency shall be responsible for all work performed by licensed gasfitters in his employ pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1981, § 6-150; Code 1998, § 22-406) 
Sec. 22-335. - Responsibility of installing agency. 
    A gasfitter engaged in business as a gas installing agency shall use only licensed gasfitters to perform the work of gasfitting in the installation, replacement or repair of consumer gas piping or in the connection, installation, repair or serving of gas appliances and gas burning equipment and shall be responsible for seeing that such work is performed in a safe and workmanlike manner, up to the standards of this type of work, and shall see that the work is performed in accordance with the applicable codes adopted by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6-151; Code 1998, § 22-407) 
Secs. 22-336-22-358. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 22-359. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in work as a gasfitter without a license issued by the recorder. The sections of this division are applicable to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories as set forth by the gas code adopted in this article and all acts supplemental and amendatory thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 6-141; Code 1998, § 22-436) 
Sec. 22-360. - Examination of applicant. 
    Every person desiring to engage in work as a gasfitter who does not possess a valid gasfitting license shall appear before the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners and be examined as to his qualifications and ability to engage in work as a gasfitter and shall be approved for a license. Such examination may be oral or written or any combination thereof for an applicant to demonstrate to the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners basic skills as a gasfitter. The fee for the examination shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as the circumstances require; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall require the reexamination of any person holding a valid gas installing agency license heretofore issued by the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners prior to September 20, 1983. All other persons desiring to engage in work as a gasfitter shall be examined and required to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-142; Code 1998, § 22-437) 
Sec. 22-361. - Fee. 
    A person desiring a license to work at or engage in gasfitting shall pay such fee as set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen as may be established from time to time as circumstances require. 
(Code 1981, § 6-143; Code 1998, § 22-438) 
Sec. 22-362. - Bond. 
(a)  A person shall not engage in or work at the installation, extension or alteration of a consumer's gas piping or gas appliances until such person shall secure and present to the building official a licensing bond executed and issued by a surety company qualified and authorized to do business in the state, in a penal sum determined and set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as circumstances require. If a person duly licensed as a gasfitter is also a duly licensed and bonded plumber who is licensed by the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners, one bond licensing gas work, as well as plumbing work shall be sufficient to fulfill this requirement. 
(b)  The bond shall be payable to the city, for the use of the city and any citizen who may be damaged by the failure of such gasfitter to comply with this article or who may be damaged by any negligence committed or imperfect or defective work done by such gasfitter while acting in the scope and course of his employment. 
(c)  The bond shall be so conditioned as to require gasfitters to comply with all sections of this article. In such bond the gasfitter shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all persons therein from loss, cost or damage caused by negligence or by inadequate, imperfect or defective work done by him or his employees while acting in the course and scope of his employment. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to relieve any gasfitter from giving bond as required by this section or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 6-149; Code 1998, § 22-439) 
Sec. 22-363. - Issuance. 
    No gasfitter's license shall be issued by the city recorder without a certificate of approval from the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners. Such certificates shall be signed by the chairperson and the secretary of the board of examiners. 
(Code 1981, § 6-144; Code 1998, § 22-440) 
Sec. 22-364. - Expiration. 
    A license to work as a gasfitter shall expire December 31 following the date of issuance unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1981, § 6-145; Code 1998, § 22-441) 
Sec. 22-365. - Display. 
    A person holding a license to do work as a gasfitter shall display his license at his place of business or shall have evidence of such license on his person at all times on the job. 
(Code 1981, § 6-146; Code 1998, § 22-442) 
Sec. 22-366. - Revocation. 
    Any license to work as a gasfitter may be revoked by the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners, after a hearing affording due process, for the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with this article and all city ordinances governing the installation of gas-burning facilities and equipment in doing such work. 
(2)  Permitting the work to be carried on in an unworkmanlike manner by those employed by him. 
(3)  Allowing and using unqualified labor in the performance of such work. 
(4)  Permitting the work to be done in a hazardous or dangerous manner. 
(5)  Incompetent work. 
(6)  Obtaining a permit for an unlicensed person to perform gasfitting work. 
(Code 1981, § 6-147; Code 1998, § 22-443) 
Secs. 22-367-22-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 22-391. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that one copy of said code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-163; Code 1998, § 22-471; Ord. No. 4441, § 4, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 5435, § V, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § IV, 8-19-2014) 
Secs. 22-392-22-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-411. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that copy of said code and revisions there to shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-175; Code 1998, § 22-501; Ord. No. 4441, § 5, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 5435, § VI, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § V, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 22-412. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The building official is authorized to adopt rules and regulations to enforce this article. 
(b)  No rule or regulation of the building official shall become effective until four weeks after notice of intention to adopt it shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation and until a public hearing on the rule or regulation shall have been held. The public hearing shall not be necessary unless a request shall have been made for such hearing during the period of publication. Such rule must be drawn in its proposed form and shall be open to public inspection at the time the notice to adopt is published. Any rules may be amended or repealed by the same procedure prescribed for the adoption of new rules. 
(c)  Rules adopted and promulgated as provided in this section shall have the same force and effect as the sections of this article. 
(d)  In adopting rules for plumbing control, the building official shall embody in them the most approved methods and practices for safety of life and property. 
(Code 1981, § 6-176; Code 1998, § 22-502) 
Sec. 22-413. - Compliance required. 
    No plumbing shall be installed in a building or structure nor shall an alteration or extension of an existing plumbing system be made except in conformity with this article or any rules that may be adopted and promulgated by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 6-177; Code 1998, § 22-503) 
Sec. 22-414. - Installation or maintenance by homeowner. 
    Nothing in this article or any code adopted by reference in this article shall prevent any homeowner from installing or maintaining plumbing within his own property boundaries, providing such plumbing work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the sections of this article or any code adopted by reference in this article nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property owner from obtaining a plumbing permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-178; Code 1998, § 22-504) 
Secs. 22-415-22-441. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-442. - Permit required. 
    No person shall connect any plumbing work with any sanitary or storm sewer, septic tank or sewage disposal system of any kind or install fixtures or appliances in new or existing systems, structures or premises or repair or add to any existing plumbing without a plumbing permit issued by the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 6-186; Code 1998, § 22-531) 
Sec. 22-443. - Fees. 
    A person desiring a plumbing permit shall pay such fees as are established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 6-190; Code 1998, § 22-532) 
Sec. 22-444. - Imposition of additional charges by building official. 
    The building official is authorized to make additional charges in accordance with the established fee schedule on any job for which a plumbing permit has been issued to cover any addition to that particular job or for work knowingly or unknowingly left out of the application for a permit. 
(Code 1981, § 6-191; Code 1998, § 22-533) 
Sec. 22-445. - Issuance of permit. 
    The permit required in this division shall be issued only by the recorder, upon receipt of an application issued by the building official. No application for a permit will be issued until the applicant therefor, if requested to do so by building official, submits detailed plans or drawings showing the work to be covered by the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 6-187; Code 1998, § 22-534) 
Sec. 22-446. - Inspections generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of or to supply water service to a plumbing system in a building or structure, unless the required inspection has been made and approval has been granted. 
(b)  At least two inspections shall be made on each plumbing job: 
(1)  The first, when the work is roughed-in and tested; and 
(2)  The second, when the work is finished and all fixtures set. 
On jobs where, due to size or type of construction, it would not be practical to have all plumbing ready for inspection at one time, inspections shall be made as often as is necessary. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to cover any plumbing, house drain or house sewer connection until such work has been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 6-188; Code 1998, § 22-535) 
Sec. 22-447. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The plumbing inspector shall have authority to enter any building or premises for the inspection of plumbing at any time during reasonable working hours. 
(Code 1981, § 6-189; Code 1998, § 22-536) 
Sec. 22-448. - Correction of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  If after inspection the plumbing inspector or the health department finds that plumbing devices, equipment or appliances, which are within the scope of this article, are in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating such shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs and changes required to place them in a safe and sanitary condition within five days or any longer period as specified by the plumbing inspector or the health department. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply promptly with any notice or instruction from the plumbing inspector or the health department to correct unsanitary conditions or faulty work, the building official, upon recommendation by the health department, shall have authority to request the city water department to discontinue water service to the offender until such notice or instructions have been complied with, and the water department is authorized to take such action. 
(Code 1981, § 6-192; Code 1998, § 22-537) 
Sec. 22-449. - Appeals. 
    When a plumbing installation is condemned pursuant to this article or when a plumbing permit is denied, the person aggrieved may, within five days after receiving written notice from the building official, file a petition in writing, for review of the action of the plumbing inspector, with the city manager. Upon receipt of the petition, the city manager shall at once proceed to determine if the plumbing installation complies with this article and within three days shall make a decision in accordance with his findings. 
(Code 1981, § 6-193; Code 1998, § 22-538) 
Secs. 22-450-22-466. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-467. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice means a person working under the direction and supervision of a licensed plumber for the purpose of learning the plumbing trade. 
    Helper means a person employed by a plumber to perform tasks which do not constitute actual plumbing work or the practice of the plumbing trade as defined in this section. 
    Plumber. 
(1)  The term "plumber" applies to all persons engaged in the plumbing trade on a fulltime or parttime basis to install, maintain, repair or replace plumbing or plumbing systems and as activities otherwise defined as practicing the plumbing trade. The term "plumber," for purposes of this article, shall also apply to persons on the maintenance staff of a hospital or similar institution, theater, office building, hotel, motel, tourist facility or court, apartment complex and a person in the employ of or a person who operates or maintains any single-family or multifamily residential structure which is used, in whole or in part, by subdivision into separate apartments or rooms of any nature whatsoever for the purpose of being leased, rented or otherwise made available to the public for occupancy, which requires the person to do more than maintain or repair existing plumbing or plumbing systems and fixtures within the buildings on an in-house basis. 
(2)  The term "plumber" does not apply to: 
a.  A person who performs minor repairs such as the repair or replacement of commodes or fixtures, faucets, water supply and drain lines under sinks and lavatories connecting a plumbing fixture or an appliance utilizing water with an installed existing plumbing system or the unclogging of sewer and septic lines; 
b.  Employees of municipal plants or other public utilities organized for the purpose of constructing, maintaining and operating works for the supply, purification and distribution of water, sewer trunk lines and laterals; and 
c.  Persons who are under the control of a federal regulatory body or authority granted by the state or to any person in the employ of a manufacturing or industrial plant for the purpose of performing repair, manufacturing and maintenance work on the premises occupied by the manufacturing or industrial plant and installation work on premises occupied only by the manufacturing or industrial plant; 
however, this exception does not apply, if plumbing work is done outside the main plant area by an independent contractor; such work shall be performed only by a duly licensed plumbing contractor and plumber after having obtained the necessary license and payment of the required license and permit fees to the city for such work. 
    Plumbing trade. 
(1)  The term "plumbing trade" means the installation, repair or maintenance of piping, fittings and fixtures involved in the distribution and use of water in a building as set out in the definition of plumber as provided in this section. 
(2)  The term "plumbing trade" does not include such work by persons excluded from the definition of plumber nor does it involve minor repairs, such as the repair or replacement of commodes or fixtures, faucets, water supply and drain lines under sinks and lavatories connecting a plumbing fixture or appliance utilizing water with an installed, existing plumbing system or the unclogging of sewer and septic lines. 
(Code 1981, § 6-201; Code 1998, § 22-566) 
Sec. 22-468. - Responsibility for work. 
    Every plumber shall be responsible for all plumbing work performed by his employees while acting within the course and scope of their employment for plumbing work within the scope of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-210; Code 1998, § 22-567) 
Sec. 22-469. - Use of licensed plumbers; responsibility for compliance with standards. 
    Plumbers shall use only licensed plumbers in the practice of the plumbing trade, except as otherwise provided in this article, and shall be responsible for ensuring that all work is performed in a safe and workmanlike manner and up to the standards of this type of work and shall see that all work is performed in accordance with the applicable codes as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6-211; Code 1998, § 22-568) 
Secs. 22-470-22-491. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Licenses 

Sec. 22-492. - Required; applicability to apprentices and helpers. 
(a)  No person shall practice the plumbing trade without a license issued by the recorder, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  A plumber's license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the practice of the plumbing trade on a fulltime or parttime basis and to perform actual plumbing work as set out in the definition of plumbing trade and plumber in section 22-467. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a plumber's license issued under this subdivision to allow any person who is not licensed as a plumber to do any actual plumbing work, except that nothing in this division shall preclude any person from working as an apprentice or a helper under the direct supervision and direction of a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1981, § 6-202; Code 1998, § 22-596) 
Sec. 22-493. - Examination. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, every person who desires to practice the plumbing trade in the city shall appear before the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners and be examined as to his qualifications and ability to perform such endeavors and be approved for a license. The plumber's examination may be oral, written or any combination thereof for applicants to demonstrate to the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners basic skills of the plumbing trade. The fee for the examination shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as circumstances require, in addition to the regular fee for issuance of a license. All other persons desiring to practice the plumbing trade shall be examined and required to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-203; Code 1998, § 22-597) 
Sec. 22-494. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a plumber's license shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as the circumstances require. 
(Code 1981, § 6-204; Code 1998, § 22-598) 
Sec. 22-495. - Bond. 
(a)  No person shall practice the plumbing trade within the city until such person shall secure and present to the building official a licensing bond executed and issued by a surety company duly qualified and authorized to do business in the state, in a penal sum determined and set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as circumstances require. 
(b)  The bond shall be payable to the city, for the use of the city and any citizen who may be damaged by the failure of such plumber to comply with this article or who may be damaged by any negligence committed or imperfect or defective work done by such plumber, while acting in the scope and course of his employment. 
(c)  The bond shall be so conditioned as to require plumbers to comply with all sections of this article. In such bond, the plumber shall indemnify and save harmless the city and all persons therein from loss, cost or damage caused by negligence or by inadequate, imperfect or defective work done by him or his employees while acting in the scope and course of their employment. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to relieve any plumber from giving bond as required by this section or other ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6-209; Code 1998, § 22-599) 
Sec. 22-496. - Issuance. 
    No license shall be issued pursuant to this subdivision by the recorder without a certificate of approval from the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners. Such approval for the license shall be signed by the chairperson and the secretary of the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners. 
(Code 1981, § 6-205; Code 1998, § 22-600) 
Sec. 22-497. - Expiration term. 
    A license to practice the plumbing trade shall expire December 31 unless sooner revoked or renewed. 
(Code 1981, § 6-206; Code 1998, § 22-601) 
Sec. 22-498. - Display. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensed plumber to display his license at his place of business or have evidence of such license on his person at all times on the job. 
(Code 1981, § 6-207; Code 1998, § 22-602) 
Sec. 22-499. - Revocation. 
    Any license to practice the plumbing trade within the city may be revoked by the mechanical, plumbing and gas board of examiners for good cause shown, after a hearing affording due process, for the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any city ordinance governing the installation of plumbing fixtures and equipment. 
(2)  Permitting the work to be carried on in an unworkmanlike manner by those employed by him. 
(3)  Using unqualified labor in performance of such work. 
(4)  Permitting the work to be done in a hazardous or dangerous manner. 
(5)  Incompetent work. 
(6)  Obtaining a permit for an unlicensed person not in his employ. 
(Code 1981, § 6-208; Code 1998, § 22-603) 
Secs. 22-500-22-521. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 22-522. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of chapter 3 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of such code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that copy of such code and revisions thereto shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 6-223; Code 1998, § 22-631; Ord. No. 4441, § 7, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 6430, § VI, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 22-523. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates this article or the code adopted by reference in section 22-522 shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 or more than as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1981, § 6-229; Code 1998, § 22-632; Ord. No. 4099, § III, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 22-524. - Enforcement. 
    The building official shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-225; Code 1998, § 22-633) 
Sec. 22-525. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The owner or operator of any swimming pool shall allow the building official and the health officer or other authorized official access to any swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool and appurtenances thereto at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection to ascertain compliance with this article and all other pertinent sections of this Code and city ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 6-226; Code 1998, § 22-634) 
Sec. 22-526. - Maintenance and lighting. 
(a)  All areas surrounding any swimming pool shall be maintained neatly, and no rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in or about any pool. 
(b)  No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with any swimming pool in such a manner as to be a nuisance or annoyance to neighboring properties. Such lighting shall not shine directly upon any abutting property. All lighting must be properly shielded. 
(Code 1981, § 6-224; Code 1998, § 22-635) 
Sec. 22-527. - Health hazards and nuisances. 
(a)  Every swimming pool in the city shall at all times comply with the requirements of the local department of health. 
(b)  Any nuisance or hazard to health which may develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool shall forthwith be abated and removed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool is located upon receipt of notice from the building official or the city health officer. 
(Code 1981, § 6-227; Code 1998, § 22-636) 
Sec. 22-528. - Fences. 
(a)  All swimming pools constructed, installed, established or maintained shall, unless prior approval has been given, be enclosed by a permanent fence of durable material at least four feet in height and shall be so constructed as not to have openings, mesh, holes or gaps larger than four square inches in any dimension except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal spacing shall not exceed three inches. All gates used in conjunction with the fence shall be equipped with approved latching devices and shall be latched at all times when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(b)  All portable pools, unless enclosed by a fence of the type and dimensions specified in subsection (a) of this section, shall, when not in use, be either: 
(1)  Emptied; or 
(2)  Covered with a suitable, strong protective covering, securely fastened or locked in place. 
(Code 1981, § 6-228; Code 1998, § 22-637) 
Secs. 22-529-22-549. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NUISANCE BUILDINGS OR PREMISES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Structures unfit for occupation and use, T.C.A. § 13-21-101 et seq.; removal of dangerous or defective conditions, T.C.A. § 68-102-117; municipal authority to repair, close or demolish unfit structures, T.C.A. § 13-21-102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-550. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance as defined by statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unimproved lot. This shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  Abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations; abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators or motor vehicles; 
b.  Structurally unsound fences or structures; 
c.  Lumber; 
d.  Trash; 
e.  Debris; or 
f.  Vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac which may prove hazardous for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist. 
(4)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(5)  Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health in violation of this division. 
(6)  Fire hazards. 
    Occupant means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises in fee simple and every mortgagee of record, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, as owner or as executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessor subletting or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessee and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by the lessor. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations or corporations who have interests of record in a structure or parcel of land or who have actual possession thereof. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public officer means the building official. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Code 1981, § 6-310; Code 1998, § 22-696) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 13-21-101. 
Sec. 22-551. - Findings and declaration of policy. 
    It is found and declared that there exist in the city structures in use which are or may become substandard with respect to structural sound-ness, equipment or maintenance or, further, that such conditions, including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance of exterior of premises, infestation, lack of essential heating or plumbing equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, or unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. It is further found and declared that because of lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums and that, if such are not curtailed and removed, the conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the conditions and that, by timely regulations and restrictions as contained in this article, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. 
(Code 1981, § 6-301; Code 1998, § 22-666) 
Sec. 22-552. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises; 
(2)  Establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential to make such facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; 
(3)  Fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants; 
(4)  Authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises; 
(5)  Fix penalties for the violation of this article; and 
(6)  Provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use. 
(Code 1981, § 6-302; Code 1998, § 22-667) 
Sec. 22-553. - Administration. 
    All inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on violations of this article shall be under the direction and supervision of the building official. The building official may designate such other employees to perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this article, including the making of inspections and holding of hearings. 
(Code 1981, § 6-312; Code 1998, § 22-697) 
Sec. 22-554. - Applicability. 
    Every residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building and the land on which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy or use shall comply with this article, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after September 15, 1992, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the building or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. This article shall also apply to mobile home parks. 
(Code 1981, § 6-313; Code 1998, § 22-698) 
Sec. 22-555. - Administration fees. 
    Every owner or person in possession, charge or control of any place or premises on which a nuisance is created, accumulated or produced which must be abated by the city as a result of his failure or refusal to comply with an order of the building official is liable for and shall pay an administration fee in addition to the cost of repair, alteration or improvement or vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the building official, which fee shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 6-303; Code 1998, § 22-668) 
Sec. 22-556. - Controlling standards. 
    If any section of this article imposes a higher standard than set forth in any other ordinance or under state laws, the standards set forth in this article shall prevail; but if this article imposes a lower standard than any other local ordinance or of state laws, the higher standard shall prevail. 
(Code 1981, § 6-314; Code 1998, § 22-699) 
State Law reference- Reasons for unfitness, T.C.A. § 13-21-102. 
Sec. 22-557. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
    No section of this article shall relive any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any other section or relieve any city official from enforcing any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 6-315; Code 1998, § 22-700) 
Sec. 22-558. - Care of premises. 
    Having adopted the property maintenance code by reference in section 22-96(d), it shall be unlawful, in conformance with such code, for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, icebox, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed in this section, including but not limited to weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 6-311; Code 1998, § 22-701) 
Secs. 22-559-22-579. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION 

Sec. 22-580. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human occupation or use or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    Occupant means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations or corporations who have interests of record in a structure or parcel of land or who have actual possession thereof. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public officer means the building official. 
    Structure means any dwelling or place of public accommodation. 
(Code 1981, § 6-321; Code 1998, § 22-731) 
Sec. 22-581. - Findings. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 13-21-101 et seq., it is found that there exist in the city structures that are unfit for human occupation or use due to: 
(1)  Dilapidation; 
(2)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; 
(3)  Lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or 
(4)  Other conditions rendering such structures unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6-320; Code 1998, § 22-732) 
Sec. 22-582. - Enforcing official. 
    The building official is designated as the public officer who shall exercise the powers prescribed in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 6-321.1; Code 1998, § 22-733) 
Sec. 22-583. - Powers of building official. 
    The building official is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and requirements of this division, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: 
(1)  Investigate conditions in the city in order to determine which structures are unfit for human occupation or use. 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations, provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(Code 1981, § 6-330; Code 1998, § 22-734) 
State Law reference- Power of public officers, T.C.A. § 13-21-107. 
Sec. 22-584. - Conditions rendering dwelling unfit for human habitation. 
    In addition to other standards set forth in this division, the building official may determine that a structure is unfit for human occupation or use, if he finds that conditions exist in such structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such structure, the occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the city. Such conditions without limiting the generality of the foregoing, may include the following: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(Code 1981, § 6-327; Code 1998, § 22-735) 
State Law reference- Reasons for unfitness, T.C.A. § 13-21-102; conditions justifying fining of unfitness, T.C.A. § 13-21-104. 
Sec. 22-585. - Institution of action and notification. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "public authority" means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city or state government relating to health, fire, building regulation or other activities concerning structures in the city. 
(b)  Whenever a petition is filed with the building official by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupation or use or whenever it appears to the building official on his own motion that any structure is unfit for occupation or use, the building official shall, after making a preliminary investigation and such investigation discloses a basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest of such structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the building official at a time and place therein fixed not less than ten days or more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The notice shall also state that the owners and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 6-322; Code 1998, § 22-736) 
Sec. 22-586. - Determination of and further notice by building official. 
(a)  If, after such notice and hearing as prescribed in section 22-585, the building official determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, the order shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such structure; to render it fit for human occupation or use or, if not adequately repaired, altered or improved within the time specified in the order, to vacate and close the dwelling as a place of human habitation or use; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, the order shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. 
(b)  The building official shall determine the value of the structure in question existing on the land, and the value of the land itself shall not be considered. If the structure can be made to conform to such standards as will make it properly habitable by an expenditure of not more than 50 percent of such value, the order referred to in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall conform to the first alternative in subsection (a)(1) of this section. If an expenditure of more than 50 percent of the value would be necessary to make the structure properly habitable, the order in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall conform to the second alternative in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Any repair, alteration or improvement instituted in compliance with this division shall be made in conformance with the zoning and building codes. 
(Code 1981, § 6-323; Code 1998, § 22-737) 
State Law reference- Filing and service of complaints and orders, T.C.A. § 13-21-102. 
Sec. 22-587. - Failure of owner to comply. 
    If the owner fails to comply with the order under section 22-586(a)(1), the building official may cause such structure to be repaired, altered or improved or be vacated and closed. If the building is vacated and closed, the building official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
    "This building is unfit for human occupation or use; the use or occupation of this building for human occupation or use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Code 1981, § 6-324; Code 1998, § 22-738) 
Sec. 22-588. - Failure of owner to remove or demolish. 
    If the owner fails to comply with an order as set forth in section 22-586(a)(2), the building official may cause such structure to be removed or demolished. 
(Code 1981, § 6-325; Code 1998, § 22-739) 
Sec. 22-589. - Creation of lien and payment into court. 
(a)  Under this division, the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the building official shall, upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property lies, be a lien in favor of the city against the real property on which such cost was incurred, second only to: 
(1)  Liens of the state, county and city for taxes; 
(2)  Any lien of the city for special assessments; and 
(3)  Any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. 
(b)  These costs shall be collected by the city tax collector at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. 
(c)  If the structure is removed or demolished by the building official, he shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the chancery court by the building official, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court and shall be disbursed by such court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(d)  However, nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 6-326; Code 1998, § 22-740) 
Sec. 22-590. - Service of complaints or orders. 
    Complaints or orders issued by the building official pursuant to this division shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail. However, if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the building official shall make affidavit to that effect, the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the complaint or order once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the register's office of the county in which the structure is located, and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 6-328; Code 1998, § 22-741) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-21-105. 
Sec. 22-591. - Enjoining enforcement of order. 
(a)  Any person affected by an order issued by the building official pursuant to this division may file a bill in the chancery court for an injunction restraining the building official from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon the filing of such bill, issue a temporary injunction restraining the building official pending the final disposition of the cause, provided that, within 60 days after the posting and service of the order of the building official, such person shall file such bill in the court. Hearings shall be had by the court on such bill within 20 days or as soon thereafter as possible and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. 
(b)  The court shall hear and determine the issue raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. In all such proceedings, the findings of the building official as to facts, if supported by evidence, shall be conclusive. Costs shall be in the discretion of the court. The remedies provided in this section shall be exclusive remedies, and no person affected by an order of the building official shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the building official or because of noncompliance by such person with any order of the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 6-329; Code 1998, § 22-742) 
Secs. 22-592-22-615. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROPERTY OTHER THAN OWNER-OCCUPIED RESIDENCES 

Sec. 22-616. - Prohibition. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by T.C.A. § 6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create, maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, or garbage or any combination of the preceding elements so as to endanger the health, safety, or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the infestation of rats and other harmful animals. 
(Code 1981, § 6-344; Code 1998, § 22-771; Ord. No. 6604, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6604, § I, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, changed the title of § 22-616 from "Applicability" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 22-617. - Designation of building official. 
    The provisions of T.C.A. § 6-54-113 are enforceable in the city, and the building official is designated as the public officer who shall exercise the powers set out in T.C.A. § 6-54-113 and the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 6-340; Code 1998, § 22-772; Ord. No. 6604, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6604, § I, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, changed the title of § 22-617 from "Enforcing official" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 22-618. - Institution of action and notification. 
(a)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-54-113, if it is determined by the building official that any owner of record of real property has created, maintained or permitted to be maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, underbrush or the accumulation of debris, trash, litter or garbage or any combination of such elements so as to endanger the health, safety or welfare of other citizens or so as to encourage the infestation of rats and other harmful animals, the building official shall provide notice to the owner of record to remedy the condition immediately. The notice shall be given by United States mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner of record. When an attempt at notification by United States mail fails or no valid last known address exists for the owner of record, the municipality may publish the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property sits for no less than two consecutive issues or personally deliver the notice to the owner of record. For purposes of sections 22-616 through 22-621, such publication shall constitute receipt of notice effective on the date of the second publication of the notice and personal delivery shall constitute receipt of notice immediately upon delivery. The notice shall state that the owner of the property is entitled to a hearing. The notice shall be written in plain language and shall also include but not be limited to the following elements: 
(b)  The notice shall state that the owner of the property is entitled to a hearing. The notice shall be written in plain language and shall also include, but not be limited to, the following elements: 
(1)  A brief statement of this section, which shall contain the consequences of failing to remedy the noted condition; 
(2)  The person, office, address and telephone number of the department or person giving notice; 
(3)  A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which shall be in conformity with the standards of cost in the community; and 
(4)  A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the notice, indicating the desire for a hearing. 
(Code 1981, § 6-341; Code 1998, § 22-773; Ord. No. 6604, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 22-619. - Failure of owner to comply. 
(a)  If the person fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten days after receiving the notice, the appropriate department or person shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable standards and the cost thereof assessed against the owner of the property. The city may collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent jurisdiction. The city may bring one action for debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom such costs have been assessed, and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. Upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property lies, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of the city, second only to liens of the state, county and city for taxes; any lien of the city for special assessments; and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be collected by the city tax collector at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. 
(b)  When the owner of an owner-occupied residential property fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten days after receiving the notice set out in Sec. 22-618, the appropriate department or person shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in accordance with reasonable standards in the community, with these costs to be assessed against the owner of the property. Subsection (a) shall apply to the collection of costs against the owner of an owner-occupied residential property, except that the city shall wait until cumulative charges for remediation equal or exceed $500.00 before filing the notice with the register of deeds and the charges becoming a lien on the property. After this threshold has been met and the lien attaches, charges for costs for which the lien attached are collectible as provided in subsection (a) for these charges. 
(c)  If the person who is the owner of record is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewerage or other materials, the ten-day period specified in subsection (a) shall be 20 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1981, § 6-342; Code 1998, § 22-774; Ord. No. 6604, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 22-620. - Rules; hearings; stay of enforcement. 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen or building official may make rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this division. The building official shall provide for a hearing upon request of the person aggrieved by the determination made pursuant to section 22-618. A request for a hearing shall be made within ten days following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to section 22-618. Failure to make the request within this time shall, without exception, constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the building official under this division may seek judicial review of the order or act. The time period established in section 22-619 shall be stayed during the pendency of a hearing. 
(Code 1981, § 6-343; Code 1998, § 22-775; Ord. No. 6604, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 22-621. - Supplemental to similar authority. 
    The provisions of these sections 22-616 through 22-621 are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, similar authority in the City's Charter or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 6604, § II, 9-20-2016) 
Secs. 22-622-22-643. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 22-644. - Compliance. 
    All residences, business houses, shops and other buildings shall be numbered according to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-29; Code 1998, § 22-801) 
Sec. 22-645. - East-west axis of reference. 
    Numbering under this article shall be done with reference to Broad Street, as streets may run east or west, from its southerly origin to its intersection with Gibson Mill Road, and with reference to Gibson Mill Road from its intersection with Broad Street to its intersection with Bloomingdale Pike, and with reference to Bloomingdale Pike from its intersection with Mill Street to the corporate line. 
(Code 1981, § 24-30; Code 1998, § 22-802) 
Sec. 22-646. - North-south axis of reference. 
    Numbering under this article shall be done with reference to the Clinchfield Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad, north or south, as streets may run north or south, beginning at a point nearest such railroad. 
(Code 1981, § 24-31; Code 1998, § 22-803) 
Sec. 22-647. - Odd numbers on east and south; even numbers on west and north. 
    Under this article, odd numbers shall be allotted to the east and south sides of the streets and even numbers to the west and north sides. 
(Code 1981, § 24-32; Code 1998, § 22-804) 
Sec. 22-648. - Assignment of numbers to square or block. 
    Numbering under this article shall be done in such manner that 100 numbers shall be assigned to each square or block regularly laid out. 
(Code 1981, § 24-33; Code 1998, § 22-805) 
Sec. 22-649. - Plats showing street numbers. 
    The department of developmental services shall prepare plats, on durable material, of each street numbered, showing the numbers given to each lot. 
(Code 1981, § 24-34; Code 1998, § 22-806) 
Sec. 22-650. - Issuance of numbers and certificates. 
    Under this article, all house numbers and certificates therefor shall be issued by the department of developmental services. 
(Code 1981, § 24-35; Code 1998, § 22-807) 
Sec. 22-651. - Use of other numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any numbers other than those assigned pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-36; Code 1998, § 22-808) 
Sec. 22-652. - Record of numbers and certificates issued. 
    The department of developmental services shall keep a record of all numbers and certificates for numbers issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-37; Code 1998, § 22-809) 
Sec. 22-653. - Duty of owners, tenants or occupants. 
    It shall be the duty of every property owner, tenant or occupant of a house, shop, residence, business house or other building to number such building and maintain such numbering in plain and legible figures, placed in a conspicuous place, and not suffer the number to be covered or hidden. No person shall refuse to number such house or building according to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-38; Code 1998, § 22-810) 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Privilege and excise taxes, T.C.A. § 67-4-501; occupation taxes, T.C.A. § 67-4-1701 et seq.; hotels, food service establishments and swimming pools, T.C.A. § 68-14-305; Pawnbrokers Act of 1988, T.C.A. § 45-6-201 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation, limitations, T.C.A. § 45-6-219; Junkyard Control Act of 1967, T.C.A. § 54-20-101 et seq.; scrap metal dealers, T.C.A. § 62-9-101 et seq.; Massage Licensure Act of 1995, T.C.A. § 63-18-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTELS AND OTHER LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel and Restaurant Inspection Act, T.C.A. § 68-14-101 et seq.; other regulations of hotels, motels, etc., T.C.A. § 62-7-101 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Register. 
(a)  Every person conducting an inn, hotel or lodging house under this article, who receives transient guests, shall keep or cause to be kept a register in permanent form acceptable to the recorder. 
(b)  In the register shall be recorded the true name in ordinary use and the residence of every person engaging or occupying a private room, except a private dining room, for any period of the day or night in any part of the premises controlled by a permit, together with a true and accurate record of the room assigned to such person and the day and hour when such room is assigned. 
(c)  The entry in a register of the name of the person and of the occupants of such room shall be made by the person so engaging the room, and the entry of the room assigned to such person and of the day and hour when such room is assigned shall be made by the person having charge, control or management of the premises. 
(d)  The register shall be retained for a period of at least one year after the date of the first entry therein. 
(e)  The register shall be open to the inspection of the city recorder or the police at all times. 
(Code 1981, § 11-81; Code 1998, § 26-26) 
Sec. 26-20. - Responsibility for registration. 
    Responsibility for registration shall rest equally upon the person conducting the inn, hotel or lodging house and upon the guest or occupant of a room therein. 
(Code 1981, § 11-84; Code 1998, § 26-27) 
Sec. 26-21. - Registration prerequisite to occupancy of room. 
    Until the entry of a name and the record of the room number has been made in the register required in this article, no person shall be allowed to occupy privately any room upon the premises. 
(Code 1981, § 11-82; Code 1998, § 26-28) 
Sec. 26-22. - Registration under false name. 
    No person shall write or cause to be written or, if in charge of a register, knowingly permit to be written any name or designation in a register other than the true name in ordinary use of the person registering or causing himself to be registered therein. 
(Code 1981, § 11-83; Code 1998, § 26-29) 
Secs. 26-23-26-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND MASSAGERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Massage Licensure Act of 1995, T.C.A. § 63-18-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any and all persons, other than massagers, who render any service to patrons of massage parlors. 
    Massage means the administration by any person of any physical or mechanical method of exerting or applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the body of another person, or the rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding, tapping, washing or otherwise manipulating a part of the whole of the human body or the muscles or joints thereof. 
    Massage parlor. 
(1)  The term "massage parlor" means any establishment, regardless of its name, having a fixed place of business where the administering of massages is the principal or main business purpose or activity that is conducted on the premises. 
(2)  The term "massage parlor" does not to include a hospital, nursing home, medical clinic or the office of a duly licensed physician, surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor or osteopath. 
    Massager means any person who administers a massage to another person at a massage parlor. 
    Permittee means the individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of individuals, of whatever form or character, which is the legal holder of a massage parlor permit as provided by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 11-156; Code 1998, § 26-56) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 63-18-102. 
Sec. 26-49. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply only to the extent that it does not conflict with state law, with regard to establishments subject to the Massage Licensure Act of 1995, T.C.A. § 63-18-101 et seq., and specifically applies to establishments not subject to the act. 
Sec. 26-50. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police is authorized to enter, examine and survey any premises in the city for which a massage parlor permit has been issued pursuant to this article during business hours to enforce this article. 
(Code 1981, § 11-160; Code 1998, § 26-57) 
Sec. 26-51. - Maintenance of daily register. 
    Every person issued a permit under this article shall maintain a daily register, showing the names and addresses of all patrons, along with the names of the massagers assigned and the fee charged. The daily register shall be kept in a permanent well-bound book; it shall be kept on file for at least one year. 
(Code 1981, § 11-163; Code 1998, § 26-58) 
Sec. 26-52. - Minimum standards. 
    No massage parlor shall be operated, established or maintained in the city that does not comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and material used in administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron. 
(2)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(3)  Clean linen and towels shall be provided for each massage patron. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(4)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and floors shall have surfaces that may be readily disinfected. 
(5)  Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets. 
(6)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. Separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet and massage room facilities shall be provided to male and female patrons. 
(7)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services. 
(9)  Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. 
(10)  Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas. 
(11)  Only two signs shall be permitted on the premises. A sign shall not exceed two feet by three feet and shall not be artificially illuminated other than by exterior floodlights or spotlights. The sign shall be approved by the building official. No other signs visible from the outside shall be allowed. 
(Code 1981, § 11-164; Code 1998, § 26-59) 
Sec. 26-53. - Sanitation requirements for massagers and patrons. 
    No massager shall administer a massage at a massage parlor if the massager knows or should know that he is not free of any contagious or communicable disease, nor shall a massager administer a massage at a massage parlor to any patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless the patron presents a statement from a physician licensed by the state certifying that the patron may be safely massaged and prescribing the conditions therefor. Every massager shall wash his hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before and after the administration of each massage. 
(Code 1981, § 11-165; Code 1998, § 26-60) 
Sec. 26-54. - Rules of conduct; posting required; hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his hands upon or to touch with any part of his body or to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital part of any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person or the vulva or breast of a female. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose his sexual or genital parts or any portion thereof to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in the massage parlor to expose the sexual or genital parts or any portion thereof of any other person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual or genital parts of his body. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage parlor any agent, employee or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in this article or to perform massages without a license. Violation of this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of the massage parlor permit. 
(e)  A massager issued a permit under this article shall not administer massages at any place other than at a massage parlor, which has also been issued a permit under this article. 
(f)  Every person owning, operating or managing a massage parlor shall post a copy of this article in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any massage parlor to remain open or provide services at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. or at any time on Sundays. 
(h)  The administering of massages shall not be conducted in private rooms or areas, but shall be conducted in separate general areas for males and females. 
(Code 1981, § 11-167; Code 1998, § 26-61) 
Secs. 26-55-26-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-82. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor in the city without a valid permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the services of a massager at a massage parlor in the city without a valid permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1981, § 11-157; Code 1998, § 26-91) 
Sec. 26-83. - Application and issuance procedures. 
(a)  Any person desiring a massage parlor permit to establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor in the city shall make application to the chief of police on an application form provided by the city. The application shall contain the name and address of the place where the applicant proposes to operate, maintain or establish a massage parlor in the city. Each massage parlor permit application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The application shall state thereon that: "It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement on this application. The making of a false statement shall constitute grounds for denial of an application or revocation of a permit." 
(c)  The application shall include a business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. It shall also include a detailed statement of any and all convictions, pleas of nolo contendere or forfeitures suffered by the applicant (if the applicant is a partnership or association, any partner or member thereof; if the applicant is a corporation, any officer, director or manager or any shareholder thereof) on any charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, crimes against nature or any section of this article or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction. 
(d)  The chief of police shall arrange to have the fingerprints of each applicant taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part of the application. There shall be filed with the application at least two portrait photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of application, which photograph shall be not less than two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the application and investigation fee, the chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the applicant, which shall include the following: 
(1)  The criminal record of the applicant. 
(2)  Communication with the employers, business associates or fellow employees of the applicant during the five years preceding the investigation. 
(3)  Determination of whether the premises proposed to be utilized by the applicant comply with this article and chapter 114, pertaining to zoning and all other building, fire, plumbing and electrical codes. 
(4)  Any and all other matters which the chief of police deems to be material to a reasonable consideration of the applicant. 
(f)  The chief of police shall file his investigative report, with all supporting material and documentation, with the city manager not later than 21 days following the date of application; however, the chief of police may file an amended report at any time additional material information concerning the applicant comes to his attention. 
(g)  Upon receipt of the report of the chief of police, the city manager shall docket the application on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen, at which time a hearing shall be conducted on the application. A legal notice announcing the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation. The board of mayor and aldermen, after a consideration of the application and investigative report, after an open examination of the applicant, after opportunity has been given for the introduction of additional information by any interested party and after a full and complete consideration of all relevant facts and circumstances, shall authorize the issuance of a massage parlor permit at the premises designated in the application within one week following the hearing, unless it finds that the application is deficient; the application contains false information; the applicant has not complied with all applicable laws and ordinances; the applicant has been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on a charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, crime against nature or any section of this article or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction. Notice of the time and place of the hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen shall be posted by the city in a conspicuous place upon the premises specified in the application at least ten days prior thereto, and notice shall remain in place until after the hearing. 
(h)  The board of mayor and aldermen may not authorize the issuance of a permit to an applicant whose proposed premises for the establishment or the maintenance or operation of a massage parlor is within a residential zone or within 500 feet, measured from property line to property line, of any church, school, hospital, funeral parlor, library, museum, playground or park. 
(Code 1981, § 11-158; Code 1998, § 26-92) 
Sec. 26-84. - Application for and issuance of massager's permit; monthly tests; required training. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to act as a massager in a massage parlor in the city shall make application to the chief of police on an application form provided by the city, which application form shall contain spaces for the applicant's name, address, telephone number, all previous addresses within the year immediately preceding the date of the application, date of birth, place of birth, height, weight, massage training and current employment. Each massager permit application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The application shall state thereon that: "It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement on this application. The making of a false statement shall constitute grounds for a denial of an application or revocation of a permit." 
(c)  The application shall also include a detailed statement of any and all convictions, pleas of nolo contendere or forfeitures suffered by the applicant on any charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, crimes against nature or any section of this article or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction. 
(d)  The chief of police shall arrange to have the fingerprints of each applicant taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part of the application. There shall be filed with the application at least two portrait photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of application, which photograph shall be not less than two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner. 
(e)  Every person who desires to act as massager at a massage parlor in the city shall attach to his application a certification from a physician licensed by the state that within the prior 30 days the applicant has submitted to a physical examination for contagious and communicable diseases and that the applicant is either free from any contagious or communicable diseases that would be of a public health nature or is incapable of communicating any such diseases to others. The physical examination shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea and a chest X-ray which shall be made and interpreted by a trained radiologist. 
(f)  Upon receipt of the application and investigation fee, the chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the applicant, which shall include the following: 
(1)  The criminal record of the applicant. 
(2)  Communication with the employers, business associates or fellow employees of the applicant during the five years preceding the investigation. 
(3)  Referral of the medical examination submitted with the application to the medical consultant of the city for review and comment. 
(4)  Any and all other matters which the chief of police deems to be material to a reasonable consideration of the applicant. 
(g)  The chief of police shall file his investigative report, with all supporting material and documentation, with the city recorder not later than 21 days following the date of application; however, the chief of police may file an amended report if any additional material information concerning the applicant comes to his attention. 
(h)  Upon receipt of the report of the chief of police, the city recorder shall, after a full and complete consideration of all relevant facts and circumstances, issue a massager's permit, unless it is found that the application is deficient; the application contains false information; the applicant has not complied with all applicable laws and ordinances; or the applicant has been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on a charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, crime against nature or any section of this article or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction. 
(i)  Every massager who possesses a valid permit for administering massages in a massage parlor in the city shall undergo a monthly culture for gonorrhea and a quarterly blood test for syphilis following the issuance of the massager permit. When the chief of police has cause to believe that the massager is capable of communicating any contagious diseases to others, he may at any time require an immediate physical examination of any such person. 
(j)  No person shall give or offer to give or hold one's self out to offer a massage or be licensed as a massager within the meaning of this article or employ or engage as an independent contractor any massager who gives or offers to give or holds one's self out to offer a massage unless such person shall have satisfactorily completed a course of study in body massage in an approved school of instruction or training, which is accredited by, approved by or recognized by the American Massage and Therapy Association or similar accrediting association. The course shall pertain to anatomy, physiology, hygiene, first aid, exercise therapy, massage techniques and related aspects of the art and science of massage or physical therapy. Such course of instruction or training shall include classroom or clinical training in therapeutic massage and reflexology techniques, classroom or clinical instruction or contraindications for massage and classroom or clinical or laboratory instruction to develop a knowledge of anatomy and physiology of the systems of the body with emphasis on the muscular and skeletal systems. Such training shall pertain to understanding of the benefits of massage and assisting the student in developing an awareness of massage as a therapeutic process through a period of one year's supervised or clinical training in the art and science of massage and physical therapy. 
(Code 1981, § 11-159; Code 1998, § 26-93) 
Sec. 26-85. - Display; alteration. 
(a)  Every permittee to whom a massage parlor permit shall have been granted shall display the massage parlor permit in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor or establishment so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. Every person to whom a massager permit shall have been granted shall, while in a massage parlor, openly display the permit so that it may be readily seen by patrons and other interested persons. 
(b)  No permit shall be altered or defaced in any manner by any permittee or massager. 
(Code 1981, § 11-166; Code 1998, § 26-94) 
Sec. 26-86. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Each massage parlor permit shall expire each year on the expiration date for the applicable business license issued by the city; each massager permit shall also expire on such date. The application for renewal of either a massage parlor permit or a massager permit shall be accompanied by an investigative fee as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. An application for renewal of a massager permit shall be accompanied by certification from a physician licensed by the state that within the prior 30 days the applicant has submitted to a physical examination for contagious and communicable diseases and that the applicant is either free from any contagious or communicable diseases that would be of a public health nature or is incapable of communicating any such diseases to others. The physical examination shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, and a tuberculosis (TB) skin test. The city recorder shall, after a complete review, issue renewal permits to massage parlor operators and massagers provided all applicable sections of this article have been met. 
(Code 1981, § 11-168; Code 1998, § 26-95) 
Sec. 26-87. - Transferability. 
    No permit issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1981, § 11-169; Code 1998, § 26-96) 
Sec. 26-88. - Suspension of massage parlor permit. 
    If the chief of police finds that the massage parlor, for which the massage parlor permit was issued, does not conform to this article or the permittee has refused the chief of police the right to enter the premises to enforce this article, the chief of police may temporarily suspend the massage parlor permit, pending a hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen. A copy of the temporary suspension shall be sent to the city manager for docketing on the next regular agenda of the board of mayor and aldermen and shall be sent to the permittee at his place of business by certified mail, which shall set forth the reason for suspension. No person shall operate a massage parlor when subject to an order of suspension. The board of mayor and aldermen may, after an open hearing, reinstate a suspended massage parlor permit when no fact or condition exists that would otherwise warrant the refusal to grant a massage parlor permit under this division. 
(Code 1981, § 11-161; Code 1998, § 26-97) 
Sec. 26-89. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any massage parlor permit or any massager permit granted under this division shall be revoked by the board of mayor and aldermen, after notice and hearing, if the permittee or massager has been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on any charge of prostitution, assignation, pandering, obscenity, lewdness, crime against nature or any section of this article or any provision of a similar law or ordinance in any other jurisdiction. 
(b)  The notice required by this section shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee or massager at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing before the city council. 
(c)  If any massager or other employee of any permittee violates any section of this article, it shall be presumed that such violation was with the knowledge and consent of the permittee; if any permittee fails to overcome the presumption, the massage parlor permit issued to him shall be subject to permanent revocation in the manner set out in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 11-162; Code 1998, § 26-98) 
Secs. 26-90-26-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FORTUNETELLERS, CLAIRVOYANTS AND SIMILAR PURSUITS 

Sec. 26-107. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business or occupation of, solicit for, or ply the trade of handwriting analyst for the purpose of fortunetelling, fortuneteller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist, palmist, phrenologist or other like business unless that person holds a valid, unexpired and unrevoked permit, issued by the city, to engage in these occupations. 
(Code 1998, § 26-121; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(a), 5-6-1997) 
Sec. 26-108. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking issuance of a permit to engage in any of the occupations enumerated in section 26-107 shall pay a permit application fee, to be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  An application shall be filed with the city manager or designee, on forms provided by such official. Such application shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
(1)  The name, social security number and residence of the applicant and how long the applicant has resided there; 
(2)  The particular place for which the permit is desired, designating the same by street and number, if practicable, and if not, by such other apt description as definitely locates it; 
(3)  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the business permitted is to be carried on; 
(4)  The name and address of the actual owner or owners of such business, and whether such business is a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or limited liability corporation; 
(5)  A statement that the applicant is willing to be fingerprinted by the police department of the city and to be investigated by municipal, county, state and federal law enforcement agencies concerning the applicant's background and record; 
(6)  A statement by the applicant that he agrees to comply with all the laws of the United States, the state and the city; 
(7)  An oath or affidavit by the applicant that the facts set forth in the application are true. 
(Code 1998, § 26-122; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(b), 5-6-1997) 
Sec. 26-109. - Applicant requirements. 
    The applicant, prior to being permitted, shall: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or older; 
(2)  Not have been convicted of, or currently be under indictment for, a crime of any grade or any ordinance violation involving the following categories of criminal conduct: homicide, rape, robbery, arson, assault, burglary, theft, extortion, fraud, forgery, false dealing, bribery, false personation, money laundering, perjury, false swearing or subordination or either, or gambling, within ten years of the date of application; 
(3)  Be referred to the chief of police or designee, for background investigation and fingerprinting; 
(4)  Furnish the police department of the city two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 21/2 inches by 23/4 inches; 
(5)  Appear in person, at the time and place directed, to answer any questions the city manager or designee may have regarding the application or the result of the investigation. 
(Code 1998, § 26-123; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(c), 5-6-1997) 
Sec. 26-110. - Employee permit. 
    Each employee of any such business must hold a valid, unexpired and unrevoked permit set out herein. 
(Code 1998, § 26-124; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(d), 5-6-1997) 
Sec. 26-111. - Determination of permit issuance. 
    The city manager or designee shall determine whether or not to issue the permit, in accordance herewith, within a reasonable time of the completion of the application, fingerprinting and receipt of a report on the background check conducted by the police department of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 26-125; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(e), 5-7-1997) 
Sec. 26-112. - Grounds for permit refusal. 
    The city manager or designee shall refuse, in writing, to issue a permit if, upon investigation, he finds that the applicant for a permit has concealed or misrepresented, or otherwise, any fact or circumstance on the application for a permit, or the applicant has not complied with all the provisions in this article. The city manager or designee shall deliver to the applicant a notice of his action, stating his reasons for his denial of the permit and informing the applicant of his right to appeal such denial. An appeal shall be taken, within ten days of the date of the denial, by filing with the city manager or designee a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager or designee shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice to the applicant, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the hearing decision of the city manager or designee shall have the right to subsequent appeal as set out in section 26-115. 
(Code 1998, § 26-126; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(f), 10-3-1996) 
Sec. 26-113. - Issuance of permit; renewal. 
    Upon approval of the application, a permit shall be issued and the permit shall remain valid for one year from the date of issuance. The permittee shall seek reissuance of the permit in the same manner as set out herein above, including payment of the permit application fee. There shall be no proration of the required permit application fee. 
(Code 1998, § 26-127; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(g), 10-3-1996) 
Sec. 26-114. - Permit revocation. 
    The city manager or designee shall revoke the permit of any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, or upon conviction of any matters set out in section 26-109(2). Such revocation shall be for a period of not less than one year, after not less than ten days' notice to the permit holder. Notice shall issue to the permit holder to show cause why his permit should not be revoked, and shall inform the permit holder of the date, time, and place of the show cause hearing, to be held in respect thereto, before the city manager or designee. Any permittee who is dissatisfied with the hearing decision of the city manager or designee shall have the right to subsequent appeal as set out in section 26-115. 
(Code 1998, § 26-128; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(h), 5-6-1997) 
Sec. 26-115. - Appeal. 
    Any party who is dissatisfied with the hearing decision of the city manager or designee shall, within ten days of said decision, request, in writing to the city manager or designee, that the board of mayor and aldermen review the decision. Such review should take place within a reasonable time, but in no event sooner than the next regular called meeting. The decision of the board of mayor and aldermen shall be final. The decision of the board of mayor and aldermen may be appealed by filing a petition of common law certiorari in the chancery court of the city within 60 days of the date of the decision of the board of mayor and aldermen. Any denial or revocation of a permit will be effective during appeal unless otherwise stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 26-129; Ord. No. 4369, § 1(i), 10-3-1996) 
Chapters 27-29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Courts generally, T.C.A. § 16-1-101 et seq.; municipal courts generally, T.C.A. § 16-18-101 et seq.; Municipal Court Reform Act, T.C.A. § 16-18-301 et seq.; municipal authority to establish office of municipal judge, T.C.A. § 16-18-101; duty of municipal judge to enforce laws for protection of public morals, T.C.A. § 6-54-401. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COURT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-19. - Sessions opened and adjourned as designated by judge; exception. 
    The city court shall be open on such days as the city judge shall designate, except such days shall not be on Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays recognized by the city, and shall continue in session or to an adjourned session until the disposition of the cases before it. 
(Code 1981, § 2-148; Code 1998, § 34-26) 
Sec. 30-20. - Officer to wait on court. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to wait upon the city court during all of its sitting. 
(Code 1981, § 2-149; Code 1998, § 34-27) 
Sec. 30-21. - Commitment and bail. 
(a)  Any person arrested may be confined in the city jail until a hearing in the city court, unless such person shall give an appearance bond with surety approved by the city judge, in which event such person shall be admitted to bail by the city judge. 
(b)  Any person arrested for public drunkenness and who is not admitted to the detoxification center or who, although admitted to the detoxification center, leaves before being certified sober or no longer incapacitated by the center medical director or his deputy may be confined in the city jail until a hearing in the city court, unless such person after becoming sober shall give an appearance bond with surety approved by the city judge, in which event such person shall be released on bail for his appearance at his trial. 
(Code 1981, § 2-150; Code 1998, § 34-28) 
Sec. 30-22. - Continuances. 
    Upon good cause shown, the judge of the city court may, in his discretion, continue as provided by law the hearing of any case pending in such court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-151; Code 1998, § 34-29) 
Sec. 30-23. - Appearance of intoxicated person. 
    If, in the opinion of the city judge, any person brought before him to answer any charge is too intoxicated to understand his situation or to attend to the trial properly, he may commit such person to the city jail or holding facility until he becomes rational. 
(Code 1981, § 2-153; Code 1998, § 34-31) 
Sec. 30-24. - Forfeiture of bond. 
    In every case when the person accused has been released upon bond and fails to appear, the city court shall enter judgment upon such bond against the principal and sureties for the full amount of the penalty thereof. After the expiration of two days from the rendition of such judgment, the city judge shall issue a fieri facias to the chief of police or any police officer who shall execute such. 
(Code 1981, § 2-154; Code 1998, § 34-32) 
Sec. 30-25. - Imposition of costs. 
(a)  Court costs, in an amount established from time to time by ordinance of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall, except as set forth in this section, be imposed in all cases commenced in city court; provided, effective July 1, 2011, on citations or notices of violations issued pursuant to article VIII, division 2 of chapter 98, court costs shall be imposed in accordance with T.C.A. § 55-8-198. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, court costs shall not be imposed for the following: 
(1)  Parking violations, seat belt violations or any other violation where court costs are prohibited by state law; 
(2)  Any adjudication of the matter resulting in a judgment of not guilty; or 
(3)  Any voluntary dismissal of the case by the city attorney when the city attorney agrees to a suspension of costs. 
(Code 1998, § 34-33; Ord. No. 4081, § II(2-155), 7-18-1995; Ord. No. 6092, § I, 6-21-2011) 
Sec. 30-26. - Trial and disposition of cases. 
    Upon failure of any person to appear before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him, the case may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the court shall be valid and binding subject to the defendant's right of appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 2-156; Code 1998, § 34-34) 
Sec. 30-27. - Execution on judgments. 
(a)  Where the city court judge has entered a judgment for fines and costs and the fines and costs remain unpaid for 30 days thereafter, the city court is authorized by and through its clerk to issue execution thereon from the city court in the same manner and methods as prescribed in T.C.A. §§ 26-1-101-26-3-117. The clerk shall assess the same fees and costs as allowable for clerks of general sessions court. 
(b)  For purposes of service of a levy of execution or execution by garnishment, the police officers are empowered to serve such anywhere in the county. 
(Code 1981, § 2-157; Code 1998, § 34-35) 
Sec. 30-28. - Driver education course requirement. 
(a)  In addition to all other fines, fees, costs and punishments now prescribed by law, unless otherwise prohibited by law, any person charged with a violation of chapter 98 by officers of the city police department may be required, at the discretion of the judge of the city court, to attend a driver education course approved by the state department of safety in addition to or in lieu of any portion of other penalty imposed. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, verification of completion of an approved driver education course in compliance with the order of the court and upon payment of any court costs shall result in dismissal of the violation of chapter 98, that is a moving traffic offense; however completion of the course does not suspend or reduce any court costs assessed to the citation. 
(c)  Credit may be received for attending an approved driver education course for one moving violation whether ordered by the city court or any other court but no more than once every five-year period, except when the driver is age 16 years of age at the time of the violation in which case the court may allow one additional credit, or for any person for whom the prior credit or course attendance was more than five years previous. 
(d)  The city court clerk shall provide a list of approved entities located in the city to any person ordered to attend a driver improvement course. 
(Code 1998, § 34-36; Ord. No. 5523, § I, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 30-29. - Court costs. 
(a)  The court costs for the city court are hereby established as follows: city court costs for the city are $60.00 per citation, which includes $1.00 that will be transmitted to the state treasurer, as required by Tennessee Municipal Court reform act of 2004, T.C.A. § 16-18-301 et seq., provided however, if an electronic citation was issued, in addition to the $60.00 court costs, $5.00 shall be added to the court costs as set out in subsection (b). Additionally, the court clerk of the city court is authorized to collect and transmit the state litigation tax or fee or any other tax, fee or cost required to be collected by the state on court citations or cases. 
(b)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 55-10-207(e), the city court clerk shall charge and collect an electronic citation fee of $5.00 for each citation, which results in a conviction. 
(c)  As used in this section "electronic citation" means a written citation or an electronic citation prepared by a law enforcement officer on paper or on an electronic data device with the intent the citation shall be filed, electronically or otherwise, with a court having jurisdiction over the alleged offense. 
(Code 1998, § 34-37; Ord. No. 5291, § I, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 5493, § I, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 6322, § I, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 6440, § I, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 30-30. - Court clerk. 
    There is hereby established the position of the court clerk of the city court, which shall not be an additional personnel position but shall be filled by appointment by the chief of police with a current employee, and the clerk shall perform such duties as required by the Tennessee Municipal Court Reform Act of 2004, T.C.A. § 16-18-301 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time and other duties as assigned by the chief of police. 
(Code 1998, § 34-38; Ord. No. 5291, § II, 4-5-2005) 
Secs. 30-31-30-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY JUDGE 

Sec. 30-49. - Office created; term. 
    The office of city judge is created in accordance with section 2, article VIII of the Charter, with a term of two years starting on January 1 of even-numbered years. 
(Code 1981, § 2-163; Code 1998, § 34-61) 
Sec. 30-50. - Bond. 
    The city judge shall file a bond of $1,000.00 with the city recorder to cover the faithful performance of his duties as city judge. 
(Code 1981, § 2-164; Code 1998, § 34-62) 
Chapters 31-33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Disasters, emergencies and emergency management, T.C.A. § 58-2-101 et seq.; emergency management powers of political subdivisions, T.C.A. § 58-2-110; Emergency Communications District Law, T.C.A. § 7-86-101 et seq.; Mutual Aid and Emergency and Disaster Assistance Agreement Act of 2004, T.C.A. § 58-8-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISASTERS, EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, except persons officially designated for duty with reference to the state of emergency or those lawfully on the streets. 
    Emergency means an occurrence, or threat thereof, whether natural, technological, or manmade, in war or in peace, that results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population, or substantial damage to or loss of property; provided that natural threats may include disease outbreaks and epidemics. 
    Manmade emergency means an emergency caused by an action against persons or society, including, but not limited to, enemy attack, sabotage, terrorism, civil unrest, or other action impairing the orderly administration of government. 
    Natural emergency means any emergency caused by a natural event, including, but not limited to, a storm, a flood, a drought, or an earthquake. 
    Technological emergency means an emergency caused by a technological failure or accident, including, but not limited to, an explosion, transportation accident, radiological accident, or chemical or other hazardous material incident. 
(Code 1981, § 7-31; Code 1998, § 30-1) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 58-2-101. 
Sec. 34-20. - Violations. 
    Any person violating the orders issued by the chief administrative officer pursuant to this article during a proclaimed state of emergency shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1981, § 7-37; Code 1998, § 30-2) 
Sec. 34-21. - Proclamation of state of emergency. 
    When, in the judgment of the mayor, a state of emergency exists, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the emergency. A copy of the proclamation shall be filed with the city recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 7-32; Code 1998, § 30-3) 
State Law reference- Authority for local declaration of state of emergency, T.C.A. § 58-2-110(3)(A)(vi). 
Sec. 34-22. - General curfew. 
    After proclamation of a state of emergency by the mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during the hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. The proclamation and general curfew shall have the force and effect of law and shall continue in effect until rescinded in writing by the mayor, but not to exceed 15 days. 
(Code 1981, § 7-33; Code 1998, § 30-4) 
Sec. 34-23. - Approval of proclamation and general curfew by board of mayor and aldermen. 
(a)  Actions taken by the mayor under sections 34-21 and 34-22 are subject to approval by the board of mayor and aldermen, and if approval has not been given prior to such actions, the board of mayor and aldermen shall meet within 72 hours after the proclamation of a state of emergency in order to approve or disapprove such actions. 
(b)  Actions taken by the mayor under sections 34-21 and 34-22 invoking a general curfew are subject to approval by the board of mayor and aldermen, and if approval has not been given prior to such actions, the board of mayor and aldermen shall meet within 24 hours after the establishment of a general curfew in order to approve or disapprove such actions. 
(Code 1981, § 7-34; Code 1998, § 30-5) 
Sec. 34-24. - Issuance of certain orders authorized. 
    After proclamation of a state of emergency, the mayor may, at his discretion, in the interest of public safety and welfare: 
(1)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(2)  Order the closing of all establishments wherein beer or alcoholic beverages are served. 
(3)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer. 
(5)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(6)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(7)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(8)  Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distributing, dispensing or giving away of firearms or ammunition. 
(9)  Issue such other orders as are necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(10)  Proclaim a state of emergency and give such notification as may be necessary to comply with 49 CFR 390-390.25, as may be amended or supplemented from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 7-35; Code 1998, § 30-6) 
State Law reference- Emergency management powers of political subdivisions, T.C.A. § 58-2-110. 
Sec. 34-25. - Persons to whom curfew inapplicable. 
    Any curfew, as defined in section 34-19, shall not apply to persons lawfully on the streets and public places during a state of emergency who have obtained permission of the chief of police or other law enforcement officer then in charge of municipal law enforcement, which permission shall be granted on good cause shown. This curfew also shall not apply to medical personnel in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1981, § 7-36; Code 1998, § 30-7) 
Secs. 34-26-34-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency Communications District Law, T.C.A. § 7-86-101 et seq. 

Sec. 34-54. - Created. 
    There is established the emergency communications district of the city, the jurisdiction and boundaries of which shall be coterminous with the corporate limits of the city, as may be established. 
(Code 1981, § 2-250; Code 1998, § 38-26) 
State Law reference- Methods of creation, T.C.A. § 7-86-104. 
Sec. 34-55. - Board of directors. 
    A board of directors, to be composed of nine members to govern the affairs of the emergency communications district, is authorized. The chief of police and fire chief shall be ex officio voting members of the board for whom designees may act in their absence. The remaining seven members of the board shall be citizens of the city and shall be appointed by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 2-251; Code 1998, § 38-27; Ord. No. 5265, § I, 12-7-2004) 
Sec. 34-56. - Rules. 
    The following rules shall guide the operations of the emergency communications district: 
(1)  Members of the board of directors shall serve for a term of four years. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms. 
(2)  Members of the board of directors shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  The board of directors shall have complete and sole authority to appoint a chairperson and any other officers it may deem necessary from among the membership of the board of directors. 
(4)  A majority of the board of directors shall constitute a quorum, and all official actions of the board shall require a quorum. 
(5)  The board shall have authority to employ such employees, experts and consultants as it may deem necessary to assist the board in the discharge of its responsibilities to the extent that funds are made available. 
(6)  The board shall have the authority to establish or make available for the benefit and welfare of its employees such pension, insurance or other employee benefit plans as it may deem appropriate, including participation in the Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System in accordance with T.C.A. § 8-35-201 et seq. 
(7)  No employee of the emergency communications district shall be a member of the board of directors. 
(8)  The board of directors shall have such other powers and duties as may be established by law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-252; Code 1998, § 38-28) 
Secs. 34-57-34-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTOMATIC POLICE OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 34-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system. 
(1)  The term "alarm system" means any alarm device which automatically dials the emergency telephone number of the police department and which uses a pretaped or prerecorded message to alert the police that an emergency exists or that the services of that department or that of the fire department are needed. The term "alarm system" also means any alarm device which automatically emits an audible, visual or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard or emergency and which is intended to alert persons outside the building to the existence of the hazard or emergency. The term also includes fire alarms for the purposes of this article. 
(2)  The term "alarm system" does not include alarm signals transmitted to privately operated central stations. 
(Code 1981, § 16-41; Code 1998, § 38-56) 
Sec. 34-87. - Limitations on dialing devices. 
    No person shall use, operate or install any dialing device that will, upon activation, automatically dial, call or connect to any telephone number other than such telephone number designated by the police department. No person shall use, operate or install any dialing device that will, upon activation, automatically dial, call or connect with the telephone number designated by the police department, for the purpose of receiving such alarm messages, more than twice for any one incident. Any system installed must comply with this section. 
(Code 1981, § 16-44; Code 1998, § 38-57) 
Sec. 34-88. - Delay in burglar alarm systems. 
    Upon activation of a burglary (break-in) alarm, there shall be a mandatory delay of at least 15 seconds before the transmission of a signal to the police department to enable the user to abort the signal if it was triggered inadvertently. This delay shall not be applicable to a robbery (holdup), fire or medical emergency alarm. Any system installed shall comply with this section. 
(Code 1981, § 16-45; Code 1998, § 38-58) 
Sec. 34-90. - Filing requirements. 
(a)  The user of every alarm system maintained in the city, except an alarm system installed in a motor vehicle, shall, within ten days of the installation thereof, file the following information with the city recorder and police department communications manager or his designee: 
(1)  The type of alarm system. 
(2)  The street address and the nearest cross street of the building that houses the alarm. 
(3)  For commercial premises, the name, address and telephone number of an authorized representative and an alternate who will be able to respond when called by the police department to deactivate the alarm system, if necessary, and to provide an up-to-date list at the central dispatch facility, amending the information from time to time as the authorized representative or alternate should quit or be discharged. 
(4)  For a private residence, the name, address and telephone number of a person who is not a resident of the private residence in question and who will be able to deactivate the alarm system. 
(b)  Such filing requirements are applicable to all alarm systems, whether the systems are or are not directly connected to the police department numbers or are merely audible alarms. 
(Code 1981, § 16-48; Code 1998, § 38-60) 
Sec. 34-91. - False alarms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally cause a false alarm, and any person who intentionally causes a false alarm shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any person who three times causes to be sounded a false alarm, because of lack of due diligence in maintaining or operating the equipment, inadvertence or inexcusable neglect, shall be subject to a response charge. The response charge shall be stated on the permit issued in accordance with this article, and the response charge shall be set and published from time to time by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. The number of false alarms and the response charge may be subsequently amended by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time as circumstances require. 
(c)  Physical and mental health care facilities are specifically exempted from this section. 
(Code 1981, § 16-50; Code 1998, § 38-61) 
Sec. 34-92. - Disconnection. 
    If an alarm system emitting an audible, visual or other similar response shall fail to be deactivated within the time limitations specified in section 34-89, the city shall have the right to take such action as may be necessary in order to disconnect any such alarm. 
(Code 1981, § 16-51; Code 1998, § 38-62) 
Chapters 35-37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Environmental protection generally, T.C.A. § 68-201-101 et seq.; Tennessee Air Quality Act, T.C.A. § 68-201-101 et seq.; stormwater management, T.C.A. § 68-221-1101 et seq., Tennessee Safe Drinking Water Act of 1983, T.C.A. § 68-221-701 et seq.; Water Quality Control Act of 1977, T.C.A. § 69-3-123 et seq.; Litter Prevention and Control Law, T.C.A. § 4-7-301 et seq.; soil conservation generally, T.C.A. § 43-14-101 et seq.; miscellaneous safety and environmental regulations, T.C.A. § 68-101-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance known or invented, used or designed for navigation and for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" shall include helicopters, lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in chapter 86. 
    Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the transporting, handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, or any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and, in addition, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Park means a public park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city and the buildings and structures thereon owned or used by the city and devoted to active, inactive or passive recreation. 
    Private premises means any privately owned parcel of land, dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited temporarily or continuously and whether uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such land, dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, grounds and buildings and commons. 
    Refuse means all organic and inorganic waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned or junk automobiles, other junk, market and industrial waste. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public way, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1981, § 12-1; Code 1998, § 42-26) 
Sec. 38-20. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates a section of this article shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $25.00 and not more than as provided in section 1-14. However, the judge in his discretion may allow an individual convicted of a violation of this article to remove the litter from a section of the state highway system or city street system in lieu of such penalty. 
(Code 1981, § 12-23; Code 1998, § 42-27; Ord. No. 4099, § IV, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 38-21. - Persons authorized to initiate prosecution. 
    Prosecution for a violation of this article may be initiated by a peace officer who witnessed the offense while on any public highway, street or road or upon a public park or recreation area or upon any other public property except that designated for that use, or by any private citizen who witnessed an offense or discovered incriminating evidence and who is willing to make the initial charge and testify thereto. 
(Code 1981, § 12-22; Code 1998, § 42-28) 
Sec. 38-22. - Deposit in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public places such as drive-in eating establishments and mall parking areas other than in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps, except as may be permitted by the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 12-2; Code 1998, § 42-29) 
Sec. 38-23. - Placement in receptacles to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. Private receptacles shall be made secure from overturning and scattering of the contents by dogs or other animals. 
(Code 1981, § 12-3; Code 1998, § 42-30) 
Sec. 38-24. - Sweeping into gutters; cleanliness of sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any place or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter. 
(b)  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk and parkway in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1981, § 12-4; Code 1998, § 42-31) 
Sec. 38-25. - Throwing by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street, alley, road, public way or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1981, § 12-6; Code 1998, § 42-32) 
Sec. 38-26. - Evidence of discharging from vehicle. 
    If the throwing, dumping or depositing of litter was done from a motor vehicle, except a motorbus, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping or depositing was done by the driver of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 12-21; Code 1998, § 42-33) 
Sec. 38-27. - Truck loads causing litter; tires carrying mud, oil or other substance. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 1981, § 12-7; Code 1998, § 42-34) 
Sec. 38-28. - Dropping from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Code 1981, § 12-8; Code 1998, § 42-35) 
Sec. 38-29. - Deposit in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 12-9; Code 1998, § 42-36) 
Sec. 38-30. - Lakes and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, river, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere. 
(Code 1981, § 12-10; Code 1998, § 42-37) 
Sec. 38-31. - Occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1981, § 12-11; Code 1998, § 42-38) 
Sec. 38-32. - Maintenance of property. 
    The owner, occupant or person in control of any private property or business property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. 
(Code 1981, § 12-12; Code 1998, § 42-39) 
Sec. 38-33. - Posting notices. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract attention of the public to any lamppost, public utility pole or tree or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or permitted by law. When permitted, these signs must be removed by the person putting them up, after their period of usefulness is over. 
(Code 1981, § 12-18; Code 1998, § 42-40) 
Sec. 38-34. - Abandoned automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, suffer or allow the accumulation of any old, abandoned or worthless automobile or parts thereof upon any private property or vacant lot owned, occupied or under the control of such person. Such accumulation is declared a nuisance. The occupant of such lot or the tenant, if he is not the owner, shall not be penalized for such nuisance if, after being notified in writing by the city manager or his designee of such condition, he shall give the notice to the owner and after such notice the owner shall remove from the property such old, abandoned or worthless automobiles within five days after such notice. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the owner of the property and the tenant or occupant, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 12-19; Code 1998, § 42-41) 
Secs. 38-36-38-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 38-59. - Distributing in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, public way or other public place. 
(Code 1981, § 12-13; Code 1998, § 42-71) 
Sec. 38-60. - Placing on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle, unless placed in or on such vehicle in such a manner as to prevent the handbill from being blown or carried about by the elements. 
(Code 1981, § 12-14; Code 1998, § 42-72) 
Sec. 38-61. - Depositing on vacant premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1981, § 12-15; Code 1998, § 42-73) 
Sec. 38-62. - Distribution on posted private property. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by the owner, occupant or agent thereof not to do so or if there is placed on the premises a sign bearing the words "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisements" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the owner, occupant or agent of the premises does not desire to be molested or have his right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1981, § 12-16; Code 1998, § 42-74) 
Sec. 38-63. - Distribution at inhabited private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or agent then present in or upon such private premises with permission to do so. However, for inhabited private premises that are not posted, as provided in this division, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises unless requested not to do so and provided the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the handbill from being blown or drifting about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places. 
(Code 1981, § 12-17; Code 1998, § 42-75) 
Secs. 38-64-38-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6632, § I, adopted Dec. 20, 2016, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5663, § I(42-75-42-117), adopted Mar. 4, 2008; Ord. No. 6146, § I(42-77), adopted Nov. 1, 2011; and Ord. No. 6268, § I, adopted Nov. 20, 2012. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-85. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Active channel means the area of the stream that is most subject to water flow and that includes the portion of the channel below the top of bank. 
    Aquatic resource alteration permit (ARAP) means a permit issued by the state department of environment and conservation (TDEC) for physically altering waters (streams and wetlands) of the state. 
    As-built certification means as-built, field-verified plans signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer and/or a registered land surveyor, both licensed to practice in the state, showing contours, elevations, grades, locations, and stormwater management facilities. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, structural controls and other management practices designed to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. BMPs may include structural devices, such as stormwater management facilities, non-structural practices such as buffers or natural open spaces, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    Borrow pit means an excavation from which erodible material (typically soil) is removed to be used as fill for another site, and there is no processing or separation of erodible material conducted at the site, and is considered a construction activity for the purposes of this article. 
    Buffer zone or "water quality riparian buffer" is a strip of dense undisturbed native vegetation, either original or re-established, that borders streams and rivers, ponds and lakes, wetlands and seeps. Buffer zones are established for the purposes of slowing water runoff, enhancing water infiltration and minimizing the risk of any potential sediments, nutrients or other pollutants from leaving the upland area and reaching surface waters. Building official means the city's representative charged with issuing land disturbing permits. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Channel means a natural or manmade watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clearing. 
(1)  The term "clearing" means, in the definition of discharges associated with construction activity, the removal of vegetation and/or disturbance of soil prior to grading or excavation in anticipation of construction activities. Clearing may also refer to wide area land disturbance in anticipation of nonconstruction activities; for instance, cleared forested land in order to convert forest land to pasture for wildlife management purposes. 
(2)  The term "clearing" does not refer to clearing of vegetation along roadways, highways or powerlines for sight distance or other maintenance and/or safety concerns, or cold planing, milling, and/or removal of concrete and/or bituminous asphalt roadway pavement surfaces. 
    Common plan of development or sale is broadly defined as any announcement or documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, computer design, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor markings, etc.) indicating construction activities may occur on a specific plot. A common plan of development or sale identifies a situation in which multiple areas of disturbance are occurring on contiguous areas. This applies because the activities may take place at different times, on different schedules, by different operators. 
    Construction means any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used, including preparation work at such premises. 
    Construction-related wastes means refuse or unused materials that result from construction activities. The term "construction-related wastes" can include, but are not limited to, unused building and landscaping materials, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste and concrete truck washout. 
    Contaminant means any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Conveyance means the capacity of a channel or a pipe to carry stormwater. 
    Covenants for permanent maintenance of stormwater facilities and best management practices means a legal document executed by the property owner, a homeowners' association or person as owner of record, and recorded with the county (Sullivan or Hawkins) register of deeds which guarantees perpetual and proper maintenance of stormwater facilities and best management practices. 
    Cross drain means a pipe used to convey stormwater from one side of a roadway to another. A cross drain can also be called a "culvert." 
    Design professional means an engineer, landscape architect, or architect competent in civil and site design and licensed to practice in the state. 
    Development means new and redevelopment projects that disturb equal to or greater than one acre, or less than one acre if part of a larger common plan of development or sale. and includes, but is not limited to, providing access to a site, clearing of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing utilities, roads and other services such as parking facilities, stormwater management and erosion control systems, potable water and wastewater systems, altering land forms, or construction or demolition of a structure on the land. 
    Director means the public works director or designee who is responsible for the approval of development and redevelopment plans, and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
    Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked or placed by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the stormwater system by any means intentional or otherwise. 
    Disturbed area means the portion of any site that has been altered from existing conditions, including but not limited to the following: providing access to a site, clearing of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing utilities and other services such as parking facilities, stormwater management and erosion control systems, potable water and wastewater systems, altering land forms, or construction or demolition of a structure on the land. 
    Drainage basin means the area contributing stormwater runoff to a single point. 
    Drainage system means the system of pipes, channels, culverts and ditches that convey stormwater from and through public and private land in the city. 
    Erosion means the removal of soil particles by the action of water, air, ice, gravity or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by manmade activities or effects. 
    Excavation means a cavity or hole in the land surface that is caused by the cutting, digging, or scooping and removal of soil, rock or other materials. 
    Exceptional Tennessee waters are surface waters of the State of Tennessee that satisfy the characteristics as listed in Rule 0400-40-03-.06 of the official compilation rules and regulations of the State of Tennessee. Characteristics include waters within state or national parks, wildlife refuges, wilderness or natural areas; state or federal scenic rivers; Federally-designated critical habitat; waters within an area designated as lands unsuitable for mining; waters with naturally reproducing trout; waters with exceptional biological diversity or; other waters with outstanding ecological or recreational value as determined by the department. 
    Filling means any deposit or stockpiling of dirt, rocks, stumps or other natural or manmade solid waste material. 
    Grading means any clearing, excavating, filling or other disturbance of terrain. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance designated under 40 CFR 116, as amended, pursuant to section 116 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Hotspot means an area where the land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Illicit connections means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system. 
    Impervious area means impermeable surfaces which prevent the percolation of water into the soil including, but not limited to, pavement, parking areas and driveways, packed gravel or soil, or rooftops. 
    Illicit discharge means an intentional or unintentional discharge of water into the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely stormwater, except as otherwise set out in section 38-314(b). 
    Inspector means a person that has successfully completed (has a valid certification from) the "Fundamentals of Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Level I" course or equivalent course. 
    Land disturbing activity means any activity on a property that results in a change in the existing soil (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. The term "land disturbing activities" include, but are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, logging and/or tree chipping operations (excluding silviculture operations), haul roads associated with the development and excavation. 
    Land disturbing permits means a building, demolition or grading permit approved by the director and issued by the building official, authorizing commencement of land disturbing activities. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, and storm drains) designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the program administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to the waters of the United States. 
    NOI means notice of intent as identified in the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities and administered by the City of Kingsport QLP. 
    NOC means notice of coverage as identified in the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities and administered by the City of Kingsport QLP. 
    NOT means notice of termination as identified in the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities and administered by the City of Kingsport QLP. 
    Obstruction means the accumulation of debris, whether intentional or otherwise, resulting in the interference of flow through a watercourse. 
    Outfall means the terminus of a stormwater system where the contents are released into a larger public or private stormwater management system, or into a stream. 
    Owner/operator/person (owner) means any party associated with a construction project that meets any of the following two criteria: 
(1)  The party has design control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to authorize modifications to those plans and specifications (this will typically be the owner or developer); 
(2)  The party has day-to-day operational control of those activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWPPP or comply with other permit conditions). (This will typically include the general contractor and would also include erosion prevention and sediment control contractors); or 
(3)  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization or entity, including governmental entities or any combination thereof. 
    Peak discharge means the maximum, instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event. The term "peak discharge" also means the maximum discharge computed for a given design flood event. 
    Plan means the stormwater management plan. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste or any other substance that is detrimental to the quality of the waters of the state. 
    Priority construction activity means land disturbing activities that are located in a watershed that discharges directly into waters recognized by the state as unavailable parameter waters impaired for siltation or habitat alteration, or exceptional Tennessee waters. A property is considered to have a direct discharge, if stormwater runoff from the property does not cross any other property before entering the water of the state. 
    Public water means stormwater runoff that originates in whole or in part from or is conveyed by publicly owned facilities such as roads. 
    Qualifying local program (QLP) is an MS4 stormwater management program for discharges associated with construction activity that has been formally approved by TDEC as having met specific minimum program requirements, including those identified in 40 CFR § 122.44(s). 
    Runoff means the water resulting from precipitation that is not absorbed by the soil. 
    Sanitary sewer means a system of underground conduits that collects and delivers wastewater from toilets, sinks and other plumbing fixtures to a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Sediment means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
    Sewage means human wastes carried by water from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such industrial wastes, stormwater or other water as may be present; or any substance discharged from a sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Sinkhole means a depression characterized by closed contours on a topographic map. A sinkhole throat, or opening to the subsurface, may or may not be visible. Field verification may be required in areas where the depth of the depression is below the tolerance of currently available topographic mapping. The extent of the area considered to be a sinkhole is, at a minimum, the limits determined by the 100 year water surface elevation, assuming plugged conditions (zero cubic feet per section (cfs) outflow). 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodway and/or floodplain that is subject to flooding during the 100 year frequency storm. The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its flood hazard boundary map dated April 2, 1981, and any revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
    Stormwater means runoff from rain, snow or other forms of precipitation, which results in surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater control measures (SCMs) are permanent practices and measures designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from development. 
    Stormwater management facilities means structures and constructed features designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the stormwater system. The term "stormwater management facilities" include, structural or nonstructural measures, or both, to control the increased volume, rate and quality of stormwater runoff caused by manmade changes to the land. 
    Stormwater management manual (manual) means the document, as amended from time to time, adopted by the city to provide guidance in understanding and implementing the requirements for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management plan (plan) means an engineering plan for the design of stormwater management facilities and best management practices for a proposed development or redevelopment. 
    Stormwater master plan means an engineering and planning study for the drainage system of a watershed that consists of a plan for stormwater management in the watershed. The stormwater master plans can address flooding problems, water quality problems, potential stormwater capital improvements, land use patterns and regulatory issues for existing and future conditions. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a written plan (including site maps, plats, drawings or other graphic representations) that identifies construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the stormwater, and a description of best management practices to control these pollutants and keep sediments on site. 
    Stormwater system means the system of roadside drainage, roadside curbs and gutters, curb inlets, swales, catchbasins, culverts, cross drains, headwalls, junction boxes, outlets, manholes, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, sinkholes, channels, creeks, streams, storm drains, water quality best management practices and similar conveyances and facilities, both natural and manmade, located within the city which are designated or used for collecting, storing, or conveying stormwater, or through which stormwater is collected, treated, stored or conveyed, whether owned or operated by the city or other owner/operator/ person. 
    Stream means a surface water that is not a wet weather conveyance (TCA 69-3-10.(40)). Stream include linear watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected such that the use of it requires a more or less permanent location on or in the ground. 
    Subdivision means the division, subdivision or resubdivision of any lot or parcel of land as defined in the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Kingsport and its Planning Region," on file in the city clerk's office. 
    Surface water means waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially. 
    TDEC means the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
    Top of bank means the uppermost limit of the active channel of a stream containing normal flows, usually marked by a break in slope. 
    Total maximum daily load (TMDL) means a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a body of water can receive and still meet water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the source of the pollutant. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, as authorized on an approved plan. 
    USACE means the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Unavailable parameters waters means any stream segment that has been identified by TDEC as failing to support classified uses. 
    Utility, public or private, means any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under certification of convenience and necessity provides the public with electricity, natural gas, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar service. 
    Vegetation means an intentionally cultivated collection of plant life, including trees, shrubs, bushes, and grass, but does not include plant life that was not intentionally planted. 
    Waste site means an area where waste material from a construction site is stored or deposed of, and when the material is erodible, such as soil, the site must be treated as a construction site. 
    Water quality volume means the volume of stormwater runoff from a proposed development or redevelopment that must be controlled for water quality treatment. 
    Water quality volume credit area means an area within the proposed development or redevelopment for which a reduction of the water quality volume can be obtained. 
    Watercourse means a channel, natural depression, gully, stream, creek, pond, reservoir or lake in which stormwater runoff and floodwater flows either regularly or infrequently. The term "watercourse" includes major drainageways for carrying urban stormwater runoff. 
    Waters or waters of the state means any and all waters, public or private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof except those bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters. 
    Watershed means a region or area bounded peripherally by a divide and draining ultimately to a particular watercourse or body of water. 
    Wet weather conveyance means, notwithstanding any other law or rule to the contrary, man-made or natural watercourses, including natural watercourses that have been modified by channelization: 
(1)  That flow only in direct response to precipitation runoff in their immediate locality; 
(2)  Whose channels are at all times above the groundwater table; 
(3)  That are not suitable for drinking water supplies; and 
(4)  In which hydrological and biological analyses indicate that, under normal weather conditions, due to naturally occurring ephemeral or low flow there is not sufficient water to support fish, or multiple populations of obligate lotic aquatic organisms whose life cycle includes an aquatic phase of at least two (2) months. 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determination shall be made by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the state department of environment and conservation, and/or the natural resources conservation service. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-86. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Apply to all areas located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  Apply to all development unless exempted pursuant to Sec 38-141. 
(3)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the public stormwater system, while maintaining and improving the quality of the receiving waters of the state. 
(4)  Enable the city to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges. 
(5)  Allow the city to exercise the powers granted in T.C.A. § 68-221-1105, which provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to: 
a.  Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality; 
b.  Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this statute, which may include the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits; 
c.  Establish standards to regulate the quantity and contaminants of stormwater as may be necessary to protect water quality; 
d.  Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed subdivisions or commercial developments; 
e.  Issue permits for stormwater discharges or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities; 
f.  Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution or condition of the permit; and 
g.  Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-87. - Responsibility. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to imply a warranty or the assumption of responsibility on the part of the city for the suitability, fitness or safety of any structure with respect to flooding, water quality, or structural integrity. This article is a regulatory instrument only, and is not to be interpreted as an undertaking by the city to design any structure or facility. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-88-38-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-118. - Duties and authority of director. 
(a)  The director has the authority to adopt additional policies, criteria, specifications, standards, rules, regulations, and guidance for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and the stormwater management manual. The manual shall be enforceable, consistent with other provisions of this article, as if it were a part of this article. 
(b)  The director shall have the authority to prepare, or have prepared, master plans for drainage basins and to establish regulations or direct capital improvements to carry out said master plans. 
(c)  In the event that the director determines that a violation of any provision of this article has occurred, or that work does not have a required plan or permit, or that work does not comply with an approved plan or permit, the director may issue enforcement responses as defined in division 10 of this article, pertaining to enforcement, to the owner subject to the right of appeal set out in section 38-343. 
(d)  The director and the staff under the director's supervision shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-119. - Stormwater appeals board-established; composition. 
(a)  There is created and established, pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1106 et seq., the stormwater appeals board, referred to in this article as "appeals board," which shall be composed of four members as follows: 
(1)  A member of the board of mayor and alderman, who shall serve as chair, but shall have no vote unless there is a tie among voting members; 
(2)  A member of the planning commission; 
(3)  The head of the planning department or designee; and 
(4)  The building official. 
(b)  All appeals board members shall serve without pay or other compensation. 
(c)  The appeals board shall promulgate such procedural rules as may be deemed necessary in the interest of justice, fairness and impartiality. 
(d)  All members of the appeals board, except the planning director and building official shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-120. - Same-duties and authority. 
    The appeals board shall have the power, duty and responsibility to: 
(1)  Hear appeals from orders issued by the director assessing penalties, damages or revoking or modifying permits; 
(2)  Affirm, modify or revoke such actions or orders of the director; 
(3)  Issue notices of appeals and subpoenas requiring attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence; 
(4)  Administer oaths and examine witnesses; 
(5)  Take such testimony as the appeals board deems necessary; and 
(6)  Hear appeals of owners for the purpose of reviewing the denial of a permit or imposition of terms or conditions in permits or any exceptions granted by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-121-38-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 38-139. - General requirements. 
(a)  Land disturbing activity or construction that in any way causes off-site sedimentation or sediment discharges to waters of the state or that causes the city to be in violation of its NPDES general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems, or its replacement, shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  No owner of any property within the city shall commence land disturbing activity greater than or equal to one acre unless a land disturbing permit is issued by the building official; provided this subsection (b) shall not apply if the land disturbance is less than one acre if part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more, or is a small lot as set out in section 38-142. The issuance of a land disturbing permit shall be conditioned upon the receipt and approval by the director of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and an NOC provided by the city. 
(c)  The city shall serve as the plan approval agency only, and in no instance are its regulations to be construed as designing erosion prevention and sediment control measures or other stormwater management facilities. 
(d)  No building permit, where applicable, shall be issued until the owner has obtained and is in compliance with the land disturbing permit. 
(e)  All land disturbing activities shall employ adequate erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs. 
(f)  No land disturbing activities shall commence until a certified erosion prevention and sediment control inspector has been appointed by the owner and acknowledged by the director. Inspections must be performed in accordance with subsections 3.1.2 and 3.5.8 of the CGP. 
(g)  The owner must notify the director ten working days in advance of the commencement of construction. 
(h)  A pre-construction meeting with construction site operators shall be held prior to commencement of land disturbing activity. 
(i)  At completion of land disturbing activities and approval of stormwater management facilities by the director, a copy of the signed notice of termination (NOT) shall be provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-140. - Design criteria. 
    The city adopts as its erosion and sediment control design standards and best management practices manual the TDEC Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
Sec. 38-141. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (swppp). 
(a)  The requirements of the plan are as follows: 
(1)  The SWPPP shall be sealed by a qualified design professional licensed in the state provided the narrative portion of the SWPPP may be prepared by an individual that has a working knowledge of erosion prevention and sediment controls, such as a certified professional or a person that has successfully completed the Level II Design Principles for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control for Construction Sites course; 
(2)  BMPs shall meet or exceed the requirements of the TDEC Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Handbook; 
(3)  The SWPPP shall be subject to any additional requirements set forth in the city's subdivision regulations, chapter 114, zoning, or other city ordinances or regulations; and 
(4)  Construction at the site in accordance with the approved plan must commence within one year from the issue date of the grading permit, or the grading permit will become null and void and the plan must be resubmitted for approval. 
(b)  Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and sections 3, 4 and 5.4 of the Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges Associated with Construction Activities, as amended, or any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the owner or requested by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-142. - Small lot erosion prevention and sediment control plan. 
(a)  All land disturbing activities that affect less than one acre and are not part of a larger common plan of development shall adhere to the requirements of this subsection. 
(b)  Submittal of a small lot erosion prevention and sediment control plan is required and must be reviewed and approved by the director prior to issuance of a land disturbing permit. 
(c)  Small lot erosion prevention and sediment control plans shall include the following: 
(1)  Address/location of land disturbing activity; 
(2)  Owner's name and contact information; 
(3)  Building, grading or demolition permit number (if available); 
(4)  Location of streams, wetlands, ponds, sinkholes, easements, existing drainage structures with respect to the site; 
(5)  A description of erosion prevention and sediment control measures; 
(6)  Approximate disturbed area limits; 
(7)  Location of silt fences; 
(8)  Location of stabilized construction exits; and 
(9)  Roof drainage accommodations. 
(d)  The director has the discretion to require a fully engineered erosion prevention and sediment control plan in lieu of a small lot plan. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-143. - Land disturbing requirements. 
(a)  Land disturbing activity subject to approval. Except as otherwise provided in this section, an owner shall not initiate any land disturbing activity until the city has issued written approval by the director, the SWPPP is approved by the director and an NOC supplied (where applicable), the appropriate fees are paid and any required performance bond or financial assurance is provided, as may be required in section 38-347. Such permit shall expire two years from the date of issuance. Once a permit has expired, it is a violation to continue work on the property for which the permit has been granted without obtaining a renewal of such permit, which shall include the submission and approval of a plan as set out in this article and other requirements to obtain a permit as set out in or authorized by this article. 
(b)  Certain activities excepted. No approval shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Building grading and excavation. Finished grading and excavation below the finished grade for basements and footings of a single-family or duplex residential structure, for retaining walls, swimming pools, cemeteries for human or animal burial or accessory structures related to single-family residences or duplex structures authorized by a valid building permit, provided the disturbed material or fill is handled in such a manner as to conform to any approved erosion prevention and sediment control plan for the area or, where no such plan is in effect, such work must be done in a manner which presents no significant erosion hazard. 
(2)  General excavation. An excavation or fill, provided it: 
a.  Is less than four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point, as measured from the original grade; 
b.  Does not result in a total quantity of more than 100 cubic yards of material being removed from, or deposited on or disturbed on any lot, parcel or subdivision thereof; 
c.  Does not constitute a potential erosion hazard or act as a source of sedimentation to any adjacent land or watercourse; 
d.  Has no final slopes greater than or equal to one foot vertical in two feet horizontal; 
e.  Has proper vegetative cover reestablished as soon as possible on all disturbed areas; and 
f.  Has no fill placed on a surface having a slope steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(3)  Agricultural. Accepted agricultural land management practices such as plowing, cultivation; nursery operations such as the removal and transplanting of cultivated sod, shrubs and trees; tree cuttings at or above existing ground level; and logging operations leaving the stump, ground cover and root mat intact. 
(4)  Landscaping. Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed lots or parcels, provided the aggregate are affected or stripped at any one time does not exceed 10,000 square feet and is not within a designated floodplain; the grade change does not exceed 18 inches at any point and does not alter the drainage pattern; vegetative cover is reestablished as soon as possible on all disturbed areas, use of kudzu is prohibited; and the grading does not involve a quantity of material in excess of 100 cubic yards. 
(5)  Utilities. The installation of water and sewer lines, telephone lines, electricity lines, gas lines or other public service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-144. - Compliance. 
    The owner is responsible for maintaining compliance with the approved SWPPP, and land disturbance permit. The approved SWPPP shall be followed during the entire duration of construction at the site. The director may require reports or records from the owner. No land disturbing activity shall be allowed to commence without prior SWPPP approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-145. - Amendments to the approved swppp. 
(a)  The owner must modify and update the SWPPP in accordance with section 3.4.1 of the state construction general permit No. TNR100000. 
(b)  The SWPPP, as amended, shall be submitted to the director for approval. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-146-38-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMANENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 38-168. - General requirements. 
(a)  Owners of land development activities not exempted under section 38-141 shall be required to obtain a land disturbing permit. As a condition of this permit, a stormwater management plan (plan) shall be submitted in accordance with section 2.3.1 of the manual. 
(b)  The plan shall include the specific required elements that are listed and/or described in the manual. The director may require submittal of additional information in the plan as necessary to allow an adequate review of the existing or proposed site conditions. 
(c)  The plan shall be subject to any additional requirements set forth in the minimum subdivision regulations, design standards, chapter 114, pertaining to zoning, or other city regulations. 
(d)  Plans shall be prepared and stamped by a design professional. Portions of the plan that require hydraulic or hydrologic calculations and design shall be prepared and stamped by a professional engineer competent in civil and site design and licensed to practice in the state. 
(e)  The approved plan shall be adhered to during grading and construction activities. Under no circumstances is the owner or operator of land disturbing activities allowed to deviate from the approved plan without prior approval of a plan amendment by the director. 
(f)  The approved plan shall be amended if the proposed site conditions change after plan approval is obtained, or if it is determined by the director during the course of grading or construction that the approved plan is inadequate. 
(g)  Requirements for the permanent operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities, BMPs, buffer zones and water quality volume credit areas shall be submitted with the plan for approval by the director. These will be presented through the declaration of a protective covenant, for permanent maintenance of stormwater facilities and BMP's, which shall be enforceable by the city. The covenant shall be recorded with the deed and shall run with the land and continue in perpetuity. 
(h)  Stormwater management facilities, BMPs, buffer zones and areas that receive water quality volume reductions shall be placed into a permanent management stormwater easement of sufficient area that is recorded with the deed to the parcel and held by the city. 
(j)  A right-of-way or permanent easement of sufficient width shall be provided for vehicular and equipment ingress and egress for access to all stormwater management facilities, BMPs and areas that receive water quality volume reductions from a driveway, public or private road. 
(k)  Owners of land development activities not exempted from submitting a stormwater management plan may be subject to additional watershed or site-specific requirements than those stated in section 38-140 in order to satisfy local or state NPDES, TMDL or other regulatory water quality requirements for developments or land uses that are considered pollutant hotspots, discharging to critical areas with sensitive resources or in areas where the director has determined that additional restrictions are needed to limit adverse impacts from the proposed development on water quality or channel protection. 
(l)  The director may waive or modify any of the requirements of this division if adequate water quality treatment and/or channel protection is suitably provided by a downstream or shared off-site stormwater facility, or if engineering studies determine that installing the required stormwater management facilities would adversely impact water quality, increase channel erosion or downstream flooding. 
(m)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions or existing ordinances and regulations. However, where a provision of this article and other regulations conflict or overlap, the provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements on the owner shall control. The owner is required to notify the director of any such regulatory conflicts upon submittal of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-169. - Design criteria. 
(a)  All developments that must submit a stormwater management plan shall provide water quality treatment in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Stormwater runoff from the development site must be treated for water quality prior to discharge from the development site in accordance with the stormwater treatment standards and criteria provided in the manual. 
(2)  Water quality treatment shall be achieved through the use of one or more structural and/or nonstructural SCMs that are designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria, guidance, and specifications provided in the manual. 
(3)  Stormwater quality control methods, designs or technologies not provided in the manual may be submitted for approval if it is proven that such alternatives will meet or exceed the water quality control requirements set forth in the manual and this chapter. 
(4)  SCMs shall not be installed within public rights-of-way or on public property without prior approval of the director. 
(b)  All developments that must submit a plan shall provide downstream channel protection using the design criteria and guidance provided in section 3.4 of the manual. 
(c)  All developments that must submit a plan shall provide a downstream impact analysis addressing overbank flood control in accordance with section 3.5 of the manual. 
(d)  All developments that must submit a plan shall establish, protect and maintain a buffer zone, in accordance with the policies criteria and guidance set forth in the manual. Exemptions from this requirement are as follows: 
(1)  The perimeter of waterbodies that have no known connection to streams, other ponds, lakes or wetlands. 
(2)  Stormwater management facilities or BMPs that are designed, constructed and maintained for the purposes of stormwater quality and/or quantity control, unless expressly required by the design standards and criteria for the facility are provided in the manual. 
(e)  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, all developments that must submit a stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Account for both on-site and off-site stormwater; 
(2)  Maintain natural drainage divides and hydrologic characteristics; 
(3)  Provide soils information; and 
(4)  Control stormwater runoff and provide peak discharge/volume control in accordance with this article using: 
a.  Predeveloped conditions unless otherwise specified by the director; 
b.  NOAA Atlas 14 rainfall data; 
c.  Post-development versus pre-development hydrologic/hydraulic modeling that shows attenuation of developed site runoff. Developed discharge from a site shall be less than or equal to pre-development discharge for the 2 year through 100-year design storms; 
d.  Longitudinal storm drains designed for a ten-year frequency storm, provided that no residential or commercial structures are flooded by a 100-year frequency storm; 
e.  Roadway cross drains designed for a ten-year frequency storm for a local street and 100-year frequency storm for a collector street, provided no residential or commercial structures are flooded by the 100-year frequency storm. All pipes lying under the roadway shall be reinforced concrete unless otherwise approved by the director; 
f.  Drainage easements delineating the 100-year frequency storm flood fringe to prevent flooding and future disturbance; and 
g.  Pipe materials approved by the director. 
(f)  Pursuant to the City of Kingsport Zoning Ordinance, a floodplain development permit is required for all development or redevelopment within federally designated floodplains as shown on the applicable FEMA flood insurance rate map(s) of latest issue. 
(g)  The rational method shall be used to determine peak flow rates only. National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) methods and those provided in the manual for water quality and channel protection shall be used in determining storage requirements. 
(h)  All supporting hydrologic and hydraulic assumptions shall be submitted, as well as all maps and references used in calculations. 
(i)  The design must not adversely affect adjacent or neighboring properties. 
(j)  The city may allow stormwater control measures to be implemented at another location within the same USGS 12-digit hydrologic unit code (HUC) watershed as the original project. Off-site mitigation must treat a minimum of 1.5 times the amount of water not treated on site. The off-site mitigation location must be approved by the city. 
(k)  If the project cannot meet pollutant removal standards, and cannot provide for off-site mitigation, the city may allow the owner to make payment in a public stormwater project fund at a level sufficient to design, install, and maintain the stormwater mitigation measures. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-170. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Developments that conform to the criteria in subsection (c) of this section are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, unless the director has determined that stormwater quality management is needed to satisfy local or state NPDES, TMDL or other regulatory water quality requirements, or the proposed development will be a pollutant hotspot, or to limit adverse stormwater quality or channel protection impacts of the proposed development. 
(b)  The exemptions listed in subsection (c) of this section shall not be construed as exempting these developments from compliance with stormwater requirements stated in the minimum subdivision regulations, chapter 114, pertaining to zoning, or other city regulations. 
(c)  The following developments are exempt from the requirements for a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Residential or nonresidential developments that disturb less than one acre of land and are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more; 
(2)  Minor land disturbing activities such as residential gardens and residential or nonresidential repairs, landscaping or maintenance work; 
(3)  Individual utility service connections, unless such activity is carried out in conjunction with the clearing, grading, excavating, transporting, or filling of a lot for which a plan would otherwise be required; 
(4)  Installation, maintenance or repair of individual septic tank lines or drainage fields, unless such activity is carried out in conjunction with the clearing, grading, excavating, transporting or filling of a lot for which a plan would otherwise be required; 
(5)  Installation of posts or poles; 
(6)  Farming activities, existing nursery and agricultural operations, but not including construction conducted as a permitted principal or accessory use by chapter 114, zoning; 
(7)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs, provided that the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with city requirements as soon as practicable; 
(8)  Additions or modifications to existing, individual, single-family structures; 
(9)  Silvicultural activities; and 
(10)  State and federal projects subject to the submission requirements of TDEC. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-171. - Special pollution abatement requirements. 
(a)  A special pollution abatement plan shall be required for the following land uses, which are considered pollutant hotspots: 
(1)  Vehicle, truck or equipment maintenance, fueling, washing or storage areas, including but not limited to: 
a.  Automotive dealerships; 
b.  Automotive repair shops; and 
c.  Carwash facilities; 
(2)  Recycling and/or salvage yard facilities; 
(3)  Restaurants, grocery stores and other food service facilities; 
(4)  Commercial facilities with outside animal housing areas, including animal shelters, fish hatcheries, kennels, livestock stables, veterinary clinics or zoos; and 
(5)  Other producers of pollutants identified by the director as a pollutant hotspot using information provided to or collected by the director, or reasonably deduced or estimated by the director from engineering or scientific study. 
(b)  A special pollution abatement plan may be required for land uses or activities that are not identified by this article as hotspot land uses, but are deemed by the director to have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
(c)  The special pollution abatement plan shall be submitted as part of the plan, and the BMPs submitted on the plan shall be subject to all other provisions of this article. Technical requirements for the plan shall be based on the provisions and guidelines set forth in the stormwater management manual. 
(d)  BMPs specified in the special pollution abatement plan must be appropriate for the pollutants targeted at the site and must be approved with the plan. 
(e)  A special pollution abatement plan will be valid for a period of five years, at which point it must be renewed. At the time of renewal, any deficiency in the pollutant management method must be corrected. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-172. - Sinkhole requirements. 
    The following sinkhole and drainage well plan information or approval from the appropriate regulating agency must be provided prior to the alteration of the natural drainage for watershed discharging to such features as sinkholes and drainage wells: 
(1)  Proposed on-site and offsite drainage channels that are tributary to a sinkhole throat or drainage well inlet shall be delineated, along with appropriate hydraulic calculations to define the existing and altered (if appropriate) 100-year floodplain and to confirm that off-site flooding will not be increased; 
(2)  Detailed contours are to be shown for all sinkholes that are to receive stormwater runoff from the site. These contours are to have a maximum interval of two feet and are to be verified by field surveys; 
(3)  A geologic investigation of all sinkholes receiving stormwater runoff from the site shall be performed. The report from this investigation shall he signed and sealed by a registered professional experienced in geology and groundwater hydrology and shall contain the following: 
a.  Location and nature of aquifers; 
b.  Potential for siltation problems; 
c.  Foundation problems that may be expected around sinkholes; 
d.  Details of drainage structures to be built in sinkholes; 
e.  Any other factors relevant to the design of drainage from sinkholes; 
f.  Plans showing the 100-year flood-plain; 
g.  The 100-year floodplain shall be designated as a drainage easement on final subdivision plat; and 
h.  Details of plan for grading and clearing of vegetation within the 100-year floodplain; 
(4)  Compliance with any and all conditions that may be required by the federal government or the state shall be documented. The state division of groundwater is the primary regulatory agency for sinkholes and drainage wells. Drainage into a sinkhole may require a permit for a Class V well under rules for underground injection control (UIC); and 
(5)  Demonstration that development will not occur within the area flooded by the 100 year flood. The 100-year flood elevation may be lowered by construction of a detention pond. Calculations that document a lowering of the 100-year flood elevation shall be based on the 100 year, 24 hour storm using an appropriate safety factor for discharge into the sinkhole. 
Sec. 38-173. - Drainage requirements. 
(a)  Private drainage systems, where drainage originates in its entirety on private property and terminates on same said property, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
(b)  Private drainage originating on private property and draining to an adjacent parcel of private property shall be resolved by the owners involved. 
(c)  In cases where flooding stemming from the drainage system or streams are of significant magnitude, the health and welfare of private and/or public property may prompt the city to participate in mitigating the frequency and effects. All such projects shall meet with the approval of the director prior to implementation. 
(e)  The requirements of subsections (a) through (d) of this section may be waived and emergency measures taken to protect the public safety during those circumstances in which, due to unforeseen events, development and/or acts of nature, the public welfare requires it. The director shall have the power to exercise all due discretion, judgment and executive directives to address any such situation and/or emergency. 
(f)  No watercourse shall be obstructed. 
(g)  Stormwater drainage shall not: 
(1)  Adversely impact adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Circumvent stormwater management facilities for which that flow contribution was designed; or 
(3)  Be directed through a curb without a permit approved by the director. 
(h)  Additional curbing to control stormwater shall be installed only with approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-174-38-198. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS 

Sec. 38-199. - General requirements. 
    Owners who hold NPDES general, individual and/or multisector permits shall provide either a copy of such permit or the permit number assigned to them by the state department of environment and conservation to the director no later than 60 calendar days after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-200-38-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - AS-BUILT CERTIFICATIONS 

Sec. 38-225. - General requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the release of a performance bond required in section 38-347, certificate of occupancy or approval of final plat, an as-built certification shall be provided to the director, certifying that all drainage and treatment structures or facilities, BMPs, volumes, sizes, slopes, locations, elevations and hydraulic structures have been field verified, represent the as-built field conditions, and comply with the approved stormwater management plans, and that all required protective covenants have been properly filed with the appropriate register of deeds. Features such as roadway lines, grades, cross slopes, locations, contours, elevations, boundaries of buffer zones and areas that receive stormwater quality volume credits shall be provided to verify approved plans. Other contents of the as-built certification must be provided in accordance with guidance provided in the manual. 
(b)  As-built certifications shall include sufficient design information to show that stormwater management facilities required by this article will operate as approved. This shall include all necessary computations used to determine percent pollutant removal, the flow rates and treatment volumes required to size stormwater management facilities and BMPs. 
(c)  The as-built certification must be stamped by the appropriate design professional required to stamp the original plan, as stated in section 38-168(d). 
(d)  The owner shall also supply stormwater management facility certification forms, provided by the city, attesting that the facilities are constructed according to the approved design. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-226-38-252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTIONS, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 38-253. - Right-of-entry. 
(a)  During and after construction, the director may enter upon any property which has a stormwater management facility, BMP, buffer zone, water quality volume credit area, discharges or contributes, or is believed to discharge or contribute, to stormwater runoff or the stormwater system, streams, natural drainage ways or via any other private or public stormwater management system during all reasonable hours to inspect for compliance with the provisions of this article, or to request or perform corrective actions. 
(b)  Failure of an owner to allow such entry onto a property for the purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be cause for the issuance of a cease and desist order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy, and/or civil penalties and/or damage assessments in accordance with division 10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-254. - Requirements. 
(a)  The owners of stormwater management facilities, BMPs, buffer zones and water quality volume credit areas shall at all times inspect, properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of stormwater treatment and control (and related appurtenances), and all buffer zones and water quality volume credit areas in such a manner as to maintain the full function of the facilities or BMP's which are installed or used by the owners to achieve compliance with this article. 
(b)  Inspection and maintenance of privately owned stormwater management facilities, BMP's, buffer zones and water quality volume credit areas shall be performed at the sole cost and expense of the owners of such facilities/areas. 
(c)  Inspection and maintenance shall be performed in accordance with specific requirements and guidance provided in the manual. Inspection and maintenance activities shall be documented by the owner or their designee, and such documentation shall be maintained by the owner for a minimum of three years, and shall be made available for review by the director upon request. 
(d)  The director has the authority to impose more stringent inspection requirements as necessary for purposes of water quality protection and public safety. 
(f)  The removal of sediment and/or other debris from stormwater management facilities and BMP's shall be performed in accordance with all city, state, and federal laws. Guidelines for sediment removal and disposal are referenced in the manual. The director may stipulate additional guidelines if deemed necessary for public safety. 
(g)  The director may order corrective actions as are necessary to properly maintain and operate erosion prevention and sediment control measures, BMP's stormwater management facilities, buffer zones and/or water quality volume credit areas within the city for the purposes of stormwater pollution prevention, water quality treatment, channel erosion protection, adherence to local performance standards and/or public safety. If the owner fails to perform corrective actions, the director shall have the authority to order the city or others to take corrective actions. In such cases where a performance bond exists, the city shall utilize the bond to perform the corrective actions. In such cases where a performance bond does not exist, the owner shall reimburse the city for all of its direct and related expenses. If the owner fails to reimburse the city, the city is authorized to file a lien for said costs against the property and to enforce the lien by judicial foreclosure proceedings. 
(h)  This article does not authorize access to adjoining private property by the owner or site operator. Arrangements concerning removal of sediment or pollutants on adjoining property must be settled by the owner or operator with the adjoining land owner. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-255-38-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PERMIT CONTROLS AND SYSTEM INTEGRITY 

Sec. 38-281. - General requirements. 
(a)  Any alteration, improvement, or disturbance to stormwater management facilities, buffer zones or water quality volume credit areas shown in as-built drawings shall be prohibited without written authorization from the director. This does not include alterations that must be made in order to maintain the intended performance of the stormwater management facilities or BMPs. 
(b)  Other state and/or federal permits that may be necessary for construction in and around streams and/or wetlands shall be approved through the appropriate lead regulatory agency prior to submittal of a stormwater management plan to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-282-38-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 38-305. - General requirements. 
(a)  Except as set out in subsection (b) of this section, no owner shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, whether intentional or not, is prohibited. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the following are not illicit discharges unless identified as significant contributors of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water; 
(2)  Diverted stream flows permitted by the state; 
(3)  Rising groundwater; 
(4)  Groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers; 
(5)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(6)  Foundation or footing drains; 
(7)  Water discharged from crawl space pumps; 
(8)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(9)  Springs; 
(10)  Individual, residential washing of vehicles; 
(11)  Flows from natural riparian habitat or wetlands; 
(12)  Swimming pools (if dechlorinated, less than one part per million chlorine); 
(13)  Street cleaning and deicing; 
(14)  Discharges from firefighting activities; 
(15)  Pursuant to a valid and effective NPDES permit issued by the state; 
(16)  Discharges necessary to protect public health and safety, as specified in writing by the city; 
(17)  Dye testing permitted by the city; 
(18)  Water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
(19)  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; and 
(20)  Discharges authorized by the construction general permit (CGP). 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-306. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
    The construction, use, maintenance, and continued existence of illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system are prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, even if the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-307. - Elimination of discharges or connections. 
(a)  Any owner of a property, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at such owner's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Any owner of a property or premises where an illicit connection is located shall be required, at such owner's expense, to eliminate the connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  No person shall dump or otherwise deposit outside an authorized landfill, convenience center or other authorized garbage or trash collection point, any trash or garbage of any kind or description on any private or public property, occupied or unoccupied, inside the city. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-308. - Notification of spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirement of law, when any owner or tenant, or agent thereof or any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of a pollutant which results in, or may result in, a discharge into stormwater and/or the municipal separate stormwater system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
(b)  When any owner or tenant, or agent thereof or any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of hazardous substance such person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence by emergency dispatch services, and shall notify the director no later than the next business day of the release of hazardous materials. 
(c)  When any owner or tenant, or agent thereof or any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of nonhazardous substance such person shall notify the director no later than the next business day. 
(d)  Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director within three business days of the telephone notice. 
(e)  If the discharge of a pollutant emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(f)  Documented illicit discharges shall be responded to no more than seven days from detection, and eliminated as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-309. - Actions in violation of the city's NPDES permit. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, no person or entity shall allow any discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system that would be a violation of the city's NPDES general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer system or would cause the city to be in violation of its permit. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-310-38-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-331. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive and the director may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant owner. The director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant owner that is in violation. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-332. - Adoption of enforcement response plan. 
    An enforcement response plan, including a schedule of civil penalties which may be assessed for certain specific violations or categories of violations, shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this section may be in addition to any other penalty assessed by a state or federal authority. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-333. - Show cause hearing. 
    An owner that has been issued an assessment of damages or civil penalty or order under this article may within ten days from such action submit a written request to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Upon receipt by the director of a timely request for a show cause hearing the director shall within a reasonable time notify the owner of the time and place for the hearing. In the written request for a show cause hearing the owner is responsible for providing the director an address, email address, fax number, or such for the receipt of the notice of the show cause hearing. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for the director taking any other action against the owner, but, except as otherwise provided by section 38-346, an offer of a show cause hearing by the director shall be made before taking further action on the administrative order or assessment of damages or civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-334. - Appeals process. 
(a)  Except in emergency suspensions pursuant to section 38-346, any owner against whom an assessment for damages or civil penalty or order has been made for a violation of this article, or a permit denied, revoked, suspended by the director, shall have 30 days after having been notified of the assessment or order, or after a permit has been denied, revoked or suspended, to appeal the action to the stormwater appeals board by filing with the city recorder a written petition for appeal setting forth the grounds and reasons for the appeal, and the owner shall serve a copy of the petition for appeal on the director. The failure to serve the city recorder within 30 days with the written petition for appeal is jurisdictional, and if an appeal is not taken within the 30 days the matter shall be final. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written petition for appeal the city recorder shall give the owner 30 days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The director and the owner may agree to a continuance of the hearing; a continuance will be granted when there are not at least three members of the appeals board present for the hearing; the chairman of the appeals board may grant a continuance of the hearing for good cause shown; or as may otherwise be governed by its rules of procedure. 
(c)  An appeal to the appeals board shall be a de novo review. 
(d)  The appeals board shall have the authority to establish written rules of procedure for the conduct of its hearings, provided hearings before the appeals board shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The presence of at least three members of the appeals board shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. 
(2)  A verbatim record of the proceedings shall be taken. The transcript so recorded shall be made available to any party upon prepayment of a charge adequate to cover the costs of preparation. 
(3)  In connection with the hearing, subpoenas shall be issued in response to any reasonable request by any party to the hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the chancery court shall have jurisdiction, upon application of the appeals board or the director, to issue an order requiring such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require, and any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished as contempt under law. 
(4)  Testimony before the appeals board shall be given under oath or affirmation, but the rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(5)  On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the appeals board shall by majority vote of the members present make findings and enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further the purposes of this article, which shall be done orally at the hearing or, if recessed, when the hearing is reconvened. 
Such decisions and orders of the appeals board shall by reduced to writing, signed by one of the members present at the hearing and filed with the city recorder, as an official act of the appeals board, which writing shall be maintained in the permanent records of the city recorder and shall serve as entry of the decision. A copy shall be delivered to the director and the petitioner or mailed to them at their last known addresses. 
(6)  Any person to whom an emergency order is directed pursuant to section 38-346 shall comply therewith immediately, but on petition to the appeals board shall be afforded a hearing not later than three working days from the receipt of such petition. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-335. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1106(a), any owner in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $50.00 or more than $5,000.00 per day for each day of violations. Each day of violation may constitute a separate violation. This penalty may be determined by application of the enforcement response plan as defined in section 38-341. 
(b)  The director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the penalty to assess, the director shall consider the factors listed in section 38-345, the enforcement response plan and may consider all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, the compliance history of the owner and any other factor provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-336. - Method of assessment for noncompliance. 
    Civil penalties shall be assessed in the following manner: 
(1)  The director may issue an assessment against any owner responsible for the violation; 
(2)  Any person against whom an assessment has been issued may secure a review of said assessment by filing with the director a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons for their objections and asking for a hearing on the matter before the appeals board. If a petition for review of the assessment is not filed within 30 days after the date the assessment is served, the owner shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and it shall become final; 
(3)  If any assessment becomes final because of an owner's failure to appeal the city's assessment, the director may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution of said judgment, and the court in such proceedings shall treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment. Upon final order, if payment is not made, the director may issue a cease and desist order; 
(4)  In assessing a civil penalty, the following factors may be considered: 
a.  The harm done to the public health or the environment; 
b.  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
c.  The economic benefit gained by the violator; 
d.  The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation; 
e.  Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the city; 
f.  The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for specific categories of violations; and 
g.  Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment; 
(5)  Damages may also include any expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing the requirements of this article; removing, correcting and terminating any discharge or connection; and also compensation for any actual damages to the property or personnel of the city caused by the violation, and any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing violations of this article. 
(6)  Where the director has issued progressive enforcement to achieve compliance with this article, and in the judgment of the director such has not been successful, the director may refer the violation to TDEC. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-337. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  Under this article, if the director finds that an emergency exists imperatively requiring immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare; the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply; the director may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the director deems necessary to meet the emergency, including suspension of a permit issued under this article. 
(b)  Any owner notified of a suspension shall immediately eliminate the violation. If an owner fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to remedy the endangerment. The director may allow the owner to recommence when the owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(c)  An owner that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge or connection presenting imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare; the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply; shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge or connection and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause hearing under section 38-342. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(e)  Any owner whose permit or operation is suspended pursuant to this section, on petition to the appeals board, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in no case shall such hearing be held later than three working days from the receipt of such a petition by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-338. - Financial assurance. 
(a)  A performance bond and/or certificate of occupancy which guarantees satisfactory completion of construction work related to stormwater management facilities, channel protection, buffer zones and any BMP's shall be required. Prior to release of the performance bond and/or certificate of occupancy, the owner shall provide the city with an accurate as-built of the property and an executed protective covenant for all BMPs, buffer zones and areas that a final operations and maintenance plan, which shall include an executed legal document entitled covenants for permanent maintenance of stormwater facilities and BMP's. The owner shall record these items in the office of the county register of deeds. The location of the stormwater management facilities, BMP's, vegetated buffers, water quality volume credit areas and the water quality easements associated with these facilities/areas shall be shown on a plat that is also recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Performance bonds shall name the city as beneficiary and shall be guaranteed in the form of a surety bond, cashier's check or letter of credit from an approved financial institution or insurance carrier. The surety bond, cashier's check or letter of credit shall be provided in a form and in an amount to be determined by the director. The actual amount shall be based on submission of plans and estimated construction, installation or potential maintenance and/or remediation expenses. 
(c)  The city recorder may refuse brokers or financial institutions the right to provide a surety bond, cashier's check or letter of credit based on past performance, ratings of the financial institution or other appropriate sources of reference information. 
(d)  The director may decline to approve a plan or issue or reissue a permit to any owner who has failed to comply with any section of this article, a permit or order issued under this article unless such owner first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-339. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the director finds that an owner has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, or a permit or order issued under this article, the director may petition the appropriate court, through the city attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the permit, order or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the owner. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and equitable relief, including a requirement for the owner to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against an owner. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-340. - Additional stay. 
    The appeals board may grant an additional continuance and stay beyond that set out in section 38-343 upon the request of an owner and upon the posting of an appeal bond payable to the city in a sum to be determined by the director as necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 38-341. - Appeal and judicial review. 
    The alleged violator may appeal a decision of the appeals board pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. § 27-8-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 6632, § I, 12-20-2016) 
Secs. 38-342-38-373. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT FUND 

Sec. 38-374. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base rate means the stormwater user's fee for a single-family unit in the city. 
    Construction means the erection, building, acquisition, alteration, reconstruction, improvement or extension of stormwater facilities; preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of stormwater facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures, and other action necessary in the construction of stormwater facilities; and the inspection and supervision of the construction of stormwater facilities. 
    Developed property means real property which has been altered from its natural state by the creation or addition of an impervious surface area, by the addition of any buildings, structures, pavement or other improvements. 
    Dwelling or dwelling unit means a building or a portion thereof occupied for residential purposes. 
    Fee or stormwater user's fee means the charge established by resolution, and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property to fund the costs of stormwater management and of operating, maintaining, and improving the stormwater system in the city. The stormwater user's fees are in addition to any other fee that the city has the right to charge under any other rule or regulation of the city. 
    Fiscal year means July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar year, both inclusive. 
    Impervious surface means an impermeable surface which prevents the percolation of water into the soil including, but not limited to, pavement, parking areas and driveways, packed gravel or soil, or rooftops. 
    Impervious surface area means the number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by buildings, and other impervious surfaces. All building measurements will be made between exterior faces of walls, foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure. 
    Non-single-family residential property means land that is zoned, developed or used solely as residential land, including, but not limited to, duplexes, townhouses, apartments, condominiums, mobile homes, mobile home parks, mixed-use buildings and other multiunit residential developments, or any other lands upon which there are residential structures that contain more than one dwelling unit. 
    Other developed property means developed property other than single-family or non-single-family residential property. Such property includes, but is not limited to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, schools, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices, churches, and mixed-use property. 
    Property means real property. 
    Property owner means the property owner of record as listed in the county's assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver or personal representative. 
    Single-family residential property means a developed property which serves the primary purpose of providing one detached dwelling unit for one family or housekeeping unit. The term "single-family residential property" includes singlewide mobile homes, even if attached to the land or there is only one unit on the property. 
    Single-family unit (SFU) means the average square footage of the impervious surface area for a single-family residential property determined pursuant to this article. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff, street washwaters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage. 
    Stormwater facilities or stormwater flood control facilities means all natural and manmade conveyances and structures for which the partial or full purpose or use is to convey surface water within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. This includes all natural conveyances for which the city has assumed a level of maintenance responsibility, to which the city has made improvements, against the flooding of which the city must make provision to protect public and private property, or for which the city is accountable under federal or state regulations for protecting the water quality within its jurisdictional boundaries. 
    Stormwater management means the planning, acquisition, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, rehabilitation, maintenance, and operation of property, facilities and programs relating to water, floodplains, flood control, grading, erosion, conservation, riparian buffers and sediment control. 
    Stormwater management fund or fund means the fund created by this article to operate, maintain, and improve the city's stormwater system. 
    Surface water includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs. 
    User means, for developed nonexempt property, the person listed as receiving water service, sewer service or combined sewer and water service or, if there is no such service or person listed, the property owner. It may also mean the property owner of property with multiple water service, sewer service or combined sewer and water service accounts on such property. 
(b)  Words not defined in subsection (a) of this section will be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 5663, § I(42-77), 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 6146, § I(42-77), 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-375. - Legislative findings and policy. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen finds, determines and declares that the stormwater system which provides for the collection, treatment, storage and disposal of stormwater provides benefits and services to all property within the incorporated city limits. Such benefits include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater; 
(2)  The reduction of hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff; 
(3)  Improvements in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions; and 
(4)  Improvements to the water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-376. - Creation of utility and management fund. 
    To achieve the purposes of the Federal Clean Water Act and T.C.A. § 68-221-1101 et seq., there is created a stormwater utility and a stormwater enterprise fund known as the "Kingsport Stormwater Management Fund" to fund the stormwater utility in and for the city within the department of public works. The stormwater utility, pursuant to the policy that may be established by the board of mayor and aldermen and under the general supervision and control of the city manager, through the department of public works, with the participation and assistance of other city departments, may: 
(1)  Administer the acquisition of property for and the design, construction, maintenance and operation of the stormwater utility system, including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program; 
(2)  Administer and enforce this article and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance, rehabilitation, operation and alteration of the utility stormwater system, including, but not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby; 
(3)  Advise the board of mayor and aldermen and other city departments on matters relating to the utility; 
(4)  Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for adoption by the board of mayor and aldermen; 
(5)  Review plans and approve or deny, inspect and accept extensions and connections to the system; 
(6)  Enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality and quantity within the system in compliance with water quality standards established by state, regional and/or federal agencies, as now adopted or hereafter amended; or 
(7)  Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-377. - Funding of stormwater utility. 
(a)  Revenue sources for the stormwater utility's activities may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stormwater user's fees. 
(2)  Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from the violation of article III of this chapter. 
(3)  Stormwater permit and inspection fees. 
(4)  Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and private grants, or revolving funds, and from the Local Government Public Obligations Act of 1986, T.C.A. § 9-21-101 et seq. 
(b)  To the extent that the stormwater user's fees collected are insufficient to fund the stormwater management program and its components, the cost of the same may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-378. - Disposition of revenues into fund. 
    All revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater utility will be deposited in the stormwater management fund and used exclusively for the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-379. - Operating budget. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen will adopt an operating budget for the stormwater utility each fiscal year. The operating budget will set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for the management, acquisition, operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service of the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-380. - Stormwater user's fees established. 
    There will be imposed on each and every developed property in the city, except exempt property, stormwater user's fees, which will be set from time to time by resolution. Prior to establishing or amending the fees, the city will advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 30 days in advance of the meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen at which the fees are considered for adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-381. - Single-family unit (SFU). 
(a)  There is established, for purposes of calculating the stormwater user's fees, the single-family unit (SFU). 
(b)  The SFU is the average square footage of the impervious surface area of a single-family residential property. 
(c)  The SFU will be set by the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time by resolution. 
(d)  The board of mayor and aldermen will have the discretion to determine the source of the data from which the SFU is established, taking into consideration the general acceptance and use of such source on the part of other stormwater systems, and the reliability and general accuracy of the source. The board of mayor and aldermen will have the discretion to determine the impervious surface area of other developed property through property tax assessor's rolls or site examination, mapping information, aerial photographs and other reliable information. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-382. - Property classification for stormwater user's fee. 
    For purposes of determining the stormwater user's fee, all property in the city is classified into one of the following classes: 
(1)  Single-family residential property fee. The board of mayor and aldermen finds that the monthly stormwater management fees for single-family residential property will be based on the average amount of impervious surface area on a single-family residential lot in the city, which is known as an SFU. There will be a tier system for single-family residential properties, based on the amount of impervious surface of single-family residential property, as set forth in the in the resolution establishing or adjusting the rates for this classification of property for the utility. 
(2)  Non-single-family residential property fee. For non-single-family residential property, the monthly stormwater management fees will be as set forth in the resolution establishing or adjusting the rates for this classification of property for the utility. 
(3)  Other developed property fee. The fee for developed property that is not single-family residential or non-single-family residential property in the city will be the base rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the property by one SFU. 
(4)  Exempt property. The following property is exempt from the stormwater user's fee: 
a.  Property which stormwater runoff is not discharged into or through the stormwater flood control facilities of the city, or both. 
b.  Owners and/or operators of agricultural property, in the city, upon which the owner and/or operator conducts activities that enable the owner and/or operator to satisfy the requirements of a qualified farmer or nurseryman, as defined in T.C.A. § 67-6-207. 
c.  Undeveloped property that is not altered from its natural state. 
d.  Developed property with less than 500 total square feet of impervious surface area per individual lot. 
e.  Improved public transportation ways, including public streets, roads, sidewalks, mobility paths, greenways and trails, airport runways, and internal roads within public facilities, which have been conveyed to the city and are used by the general public for motor vehicle transportation. 
f.  Railroad tracks; provided, however, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land will not be exempt from stormwater user's fees. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-383. - Base rate. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen will, by resolution, establish the base rate for stormwater user's fees. The base rate will be calculated to ensure adequate revenues to fund the costs of stormwater management and to provide for the acquisition, operation, maintenance, rehabilitation and capital improvements of the stormwater utility in the city. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-384. - Payment of stormwater user's fees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, stormwater user's fees for nonexempt property that receives water service, sewer service or combined water and sewer service will be sent to the person named on the account, who shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. For developed property having no water service, sewer service, or combined water and sewer service, the stormwater user's fee will be sent to the property owner, who shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. Where multiple water service and sewer service or combined water and sewer service accounts exist on a single property, the stormwater user's fees may, for good cause shown at the discretion of the city, be sent to the property owner, who shall be responsible for the payment of such fees. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-385. - Billing procedures, delinquent bills and penalties for late payment. 
(a)  The stormwater user's fee must be set at a rate, and collected on a schedule, established by resolution, which resolution will also specify when the fee will become delinquent and the late fees and other penalties and interest that will be due on delinquent payments. 
(b)  Stormwater user's fees will be paid to the city as directed and will become delinquent as of 20 days following the billing. If such charges are not paid within 20 days from the date of the bill or the delinquent date stamped thereon, an additional charge of ten percent of the bill will become due and payable and will become a part of the bill. 
(c)  Stormwater user's fees will be subject to a late fee established by resolution. Any charge due under this article or resolution setting such charge or fee, which will not be paid, may be recovered at law by the city. The city will be entitled to recover attorney's fees incurred in collecting delinquent stormwater user's fees or charges. 
(d)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1112, each bill for stormwater user's fees will contain the following statement in bold: "This Fee Has Been Mandated by Congress." 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 38-386. - Stormwater fee adjustments and credits. 
(a)  Adjustments may be requested for errors or omissions on the customer's stormwater user's fee. Request for adjustment due to error or oversight of the stormwater user's fee must be submitted to the city in accordance with the policy adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen. Adjustments can also be made by the city recorder should the city identify an error or oversight, provided the city notifies the customer in advance of the adjustment. Adjustments will be determined on the basis of the number of dwelling units or amount of impervious surface area on the property. 
(b)  The city will provide a system of credits to reduce stormwater user's fees for properties on which stormwater control measures substantially mitigates the peak discharge or runoff pollution flowing from such properties or substantially decreases the city's cost of maintaining the stormwater management system. The department of public works will develop written policies to implement the credit system. No credit will be authorized until the board of mayor and aldermen approves such written policies to implement the system of credits; a copy of the approved policies will be on file with the city recorder's office and the department of public works. The policy may allow credits retroactively for no more than one past year. Any reimbursement granted due to a credit will be reimbursed through the utility billing system. Credits cannot exceed the stormwater utility charge for the customer. Nothing herein will prevent the board of mayor and aldermen from modifying the adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of existing credits. 
(Ord. No. 6146, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Chapters 39-41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire protection and alarm systems generally, T.C.A. § 62-32-101 et seq.; fire prevention and investigation generally, T.C.A. § 68-102-101 et seq.; authority of municipal fire investigators to carry weapons, T.C.A. § 68-102-149. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 42-19. - Fire chief. 
    There is established the position of fire chief. 
(Code 1981, § 8-16; Code 1998, § 46-31) 
Sec. 42-20. - Police powers of firefighters. 
    All members of the fire department who are engaged in the performance of their official duties shall have the same powers as members of the city's police department. 
(Code 1981, § 8-17; Code 1998, § 46-32) 
State Law reference- Police powers at fire, T.C.A. § 6-21-703. 
Sec. 42-21. - Operational rules and regulations. 
    The operation of the fire department shall be in accordance with prescribed rules and regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 8-18; Code 1998, § 46-33) 
Secs. 42-22-42-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 42-46. - Code adopted by reference. 
    The provisions of the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though copied verbatim herein. One copy of said code and revisions thereto was on file in the office of the city recorder for a period of 15 days prior to adoption, and that copy of said code and revisions there to shall remain on file in the office of the city recorder for public use, inspection and examination. 
(Code 1981, § 8-31; Code 1998, § 46-61; Ord. No 4441, § 6, 10-7-1997; Ord. No. 4476, § 1, 1-6-1998; Ord. No. 4736, § IV, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 5435, § IV, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6430, § VII, 8-19-2014) 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to adopt technical codes by reference, T.C.A. § 6-54-501 et seq. 
Sec. 42-47. - Municipality defined. 
    Whenever the term "municipality" is used in the fire code adopted in section 42-46, it shall be construed to mean the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-32; Code 1998, § 46-62) 
Sec. 42-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6430, § VIII, adopted Aug. 19, 2014, repealed § 42-48, which pertained to amendments and derived from Code 1981, § 8-33; Code 1998, § 46-63; Ord. No. 4037, § I, adopted May 2, 1995; Ord. No. 4303, § I, adopted Nov. 19, 1996; and Ord. No. 6080, § 1, adopted May 17, 2011. 
Sec. 42-49. - Enforcement. 
    The building official and the chief of the fire department shall severally be responsible for and charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the fire code adopted in section 42-46. 
(Code 1981, § 8-34; Code 1998, § 46-64) 
Sec. 42-50. - Modification of requirements. 
    The building official and the chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire code adopted in section 42-46 upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or by his duly authorized agents, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the fire code; provided, however, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety shall be secured and substantial justice shall be done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the building official or the chief of the fire department, as the case may be, shall be entered upon the records of the building department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 8-35; Code 1998, § 46-65) 
Sec. 42-51. - Appeals from decisions of fire chief, building official. 
    When any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the chief of the fire department or the building official in interpreting and applying the provisions of the fire code adopted in this article or granting or refusing modifications of the fire code in response to application therefor, he may, within 30 days, appeal such decision to the board of adjustments and appeals, this board being authorized by the building code. Such appeal shall be in writing. 
(Code 1981, § 8-36; Code 1998, § 46-66) 
Sec. 42-52. - Effect of conflicting provisions. 
    If a conflict occurs between the provisions of the fire code adopted in this article and any other section of this Code, the provision imposing the more restrictive standards shall prevail. 
(Code 1981, § 8-37; Code 1998, § 46-67) 
Sec. 42-53. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire code adopted in section 42-46 or who shall fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the board of mayor and aldermen or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an offense. The application of a penalty under section 1-14 shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 8-38; Code 1998, § 46-68) 
Secs. 42-54-42-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-80. - Damaging, destroying fire equipment and apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break, injure, destroy or carry away any fire hose, engine, machinery or apparatus of any kind or any part thereof belonging to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1; Code 1998, § 46-1) 
Sec. 42-82. - Interfering with or obstructing hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire department or a person authorized to make repairs, to interfere with fire hydrants in any way whatever. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, around or near any of the fire hydrants in the city any goods or other things in such manner as to conceal the fire hydrants, or in any way to interfere with the fire department in obtaining access to hydrants. 
(Code 1981, § 8-3; Code 1998, § 46-3) 
State Law reference- Vehicle parking in vicinity of fire hydrants, T.C.A. § 55-8-160. 
Sec. 42-83. - False alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make or cause to be made any false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1981, § 8-4; Code 1998, § 46-4) 
State Law reference- Fire alarms, T.C.A. § 68-102-148. 
Secs. 42-84-42-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks generally, T.C.A. § 68-104-101 et seq. 

Sec. 42-110. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means any composition or device designed or intended to produce a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, including those now or hereafter classified as 1.4G Fireworks (formerly Class C, Common Fireworks) and 1.3G Fireworks (formerly Class B, Special Fireworks) by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(a)), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-111. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this division shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a civil penalty of up to $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a civil penalty hereunder shall not prevent the city from taking any other legal action necessary to enforce the provisions of this division, including injunctive relief in the state courts. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(f)), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-112. - Unlawful; exception. 
(a)  For the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city, it is unlawful for any person to manufacture, use, discharge, possess with the intent to discharge, or offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or keep with intent to sell at retail, fireworks in the city, except as authorized in section 42-113. 
(b)  There is a rebuttable presumption that a person possesses fireworks with the intent to discharge such fireworks if possession is: 
(1)  In a public place or outside a fully enclosed residential or commercial building, and fireworks have recently been discharged or reported discharged in the general vicinity of such possession; or 
(2)  In a public park or on public school property. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(b)), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-113. - Issuance of permit at discretion of fire chief and fire marshal. 
    The fire chief, acting in conjunction with the fire marshal, may issue a permit authorizing the manufacturing, transportation, or storage of fireworks in accordance with applicable state laws and fire codes. The fire chief, acting in conjunction with the fire marshal, may issue a permit authorizing the handling, supervised use or display of fireworks in accordance with and as permitted under the conditions approved by the fire marshal and NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, 2000 edition, National Fire Protection Association, or any subsequent edition that has been adopted by the state fire marshal by rule. Every such permitted handling, use or display of fireworks shall be located, discharged, or fired so as not be hazardous to property or endanger any person and shall be handled by a competent operator licensed by the state and approved by the fire chief. Before any permit for handling, use or display of fireworks shall be issued, the person making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person or any agent or employee thereof, in such amount, character and form as the fire chief determines is necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(c)), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-114. - Restrictions. 
    In the interest of public health and safety, the board of mayor and aldermen may further restrict the storage or discharge of fireworks from time to time at its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(d)), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-115. - Applicability. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit any wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling fireworks at wholesale, provided the same are to be shipped directly out of the corporate limits of the city in accordance with the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail and water. 
(Ord. No. 6102, § I(46-5(e)), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-116-42-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SMOKE DETECTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Smoke detectors, T.C.A. §§ 68-102-151, 68-120-111. 

Sec. 42-144. - Enforcement. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this division shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in section 1-14. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 8-58; Code 1998, § 46-96) 
Sec. 42-145. - Responsibility for installation and maintenance. 
(a)  The owner of each single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, apartment, condominium or townhouse shall be responsible for the installation of early fire detection devices. It shall be the responsibility of the occupants, whether owners, residents or tenants, to maintain the smoke detectors. Such maintenance shall include cleaning, replacing batteries or keeping the device connected to the electrical power source. 
(b)  The owner and manager of each hotel, motel, dormitory or boarding house shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of early fire detection devices in the premises. Such maintenance shall include cleaning, replacing batteries or keeping the device connected to the electrical power source. 
(Code 1981, § 8-55; Code 1998, § 46-97) 
Sec. 42-146. - Prohibited sale; notice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away within the city a smoke detector, unless the detector meets the standards set out within this division and the fire code adopted by the city from time to time, without first delivering to the purchaser or donee of such device a conspicuous written notice that such device does not comply with this division. Such notice shall be individually given and shall not be a general notice. Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the selling or giving away of smoke detectors not in compliance with this section or of heat detectors, provided notice as indicated in this section is given to the recipient. 
(Code 1981, § 8-56; Code 1998, § 46-98) 
Sec. 42-147. - Interference with device. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to intentionally interfere with the proper operation of any smoke detector installed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-57; Code 1998, § 46-99) 
Chapters 43-45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Human rights generally, T.C.A. § 4-21-101 et seq.; employment-related discrimination, T.C.A. § 4-21-401 et seq.; discrimination in public accommodations, T.C.A. § 4-21-501 et seq.; discrimination in housing and financing, T.C.A. § 4-21-601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 46-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of any such building. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 17-1; Code 1998, § 50-26) 
Sec. 46-20. - Discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  It is a discriminatory practice and it is prohibited for any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny real property or a housing accommodation to a person; 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of real property or a housing accommodation or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent or lease real property or a housing accommodation from a person; 
(4)  Represent to a person that real property or a housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or refuse to permit a person to inspect real property or a housing accommodation; 
(5)  Make, print, publish, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, printed, published, circulated, posted or mailed, a notice, statement, advertisement or sign or use a form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property or a housing accommodation or make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property or a housing accommodation, which indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or discrimination; 
(6)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property or a housing accommodation for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or 
(7)  Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing services, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation. 
(b)  It is a discriminatory practice and it is prohibited for any person to discriminate: 
(1)  In the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
a.  The buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter; 
(2)  Against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of: 
a.  The person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the person. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "discrimination" includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, no modification need be permitted unless the renter first agrees to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted, unless previously negotiated with the landlord; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual site characteristics; or 
b.  With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route: 
1.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
2.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
3.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(i)  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
(ii)  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
(iii)  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
(iv)  Usable kitchens and bathrooms, such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
(d)  As used in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(e)  Nothing in subsections (b) through (d) of this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(f)  It is a discriminatory practice and it is prohibited for a person in the business of insuring against hazards to refuse to enter into or to discriminate in the terms, conditions or privileges of a contract of insurance against hazards to a housing accommodation or real property because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex or national origin of the person owning or residing in or near the housing accommodations or real property. 
(g)  It is a discriminatory practice and it is prohibited for a person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this article. 
(h)  This section may also be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Code 1981, § 17-2; Code 1998, § 50-27) 
Sec. 46-21. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 46-20 shall apply to: 
(1)  The rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other, if the owner or a member of the owner's family resides in one of the housing accommodations. 
(2)  The rental of one room or one rooming unit in a housing accommodation by an individual, if such individual or a member of such individual's family resides therein, or, as regards to sex, rooms or rental units where the tenants would be required to share a common bath. 
(3)  A religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, which limits the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or which gives preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. 
(4)  As regards to sex, the rental of housing accommodations of single-sex dormitory rental properties, including but not limited to those dormitories operated by higher educational institutions. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall require a real estate operator to negotiate with any individual who has not shown evidence of financial ability to consummate the purchase or rental of a housing accommodation. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(d)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
(e)  No provision in this article regarding familial status applies with respect to dwellings provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program, or to housing for older persons. As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing communities consisting of dwellings intended for, and: 
(1)  At least 80 percent occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit and publishing and adhering to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(2)  Occupied solely by persons 62 years of age or older. 
(f)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC 802), or as defined in the Tennessee Drug Control Act, compiled in T.C.A. §§ 39-17-401-39-17-432. 
(Code 1981, § 17-3; Code 1998, § 50-28) 
Sec. 46-22. - Discrimination by real estate organizations. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1981, § 17-4; Code 1998, § 50-29) 
Sec. 46-23. - Additional remedies. 
    Nothing in this article requires any person claiming to have been injured by an act made unlawful by this article to exhaust the remedies provided in this article or to prevent any such person from seeking relief at any time under the federal civil rights acts or other applicable legal provisions. 
(Code 1981, § 17-7; Code 1998, § 50-32) 
Sec. 46-24. - Interference, coercion or intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 17-8; Code 1998, § 50-33) 
Chapters 47-49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Employment and training of police officers, T.C.A. § 38-8-101 et seq.; minimum statutory standards binding on local government units, T.C.A. § 38-8-105; dismissal for failure to enforce law, T.C.A. § 6-54-402; use of blue flashing emergency lights restricted, T.C.A. § 55-9-414; obstruction of law enforcement, T.C.A. § 39-16-602; authority for arrest, T.C.A. § 40-7-101; resisting arrest, T.C.A. § 40-7-108. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-19. - Chief of police. 
(a)  There is established the position of chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall maintain and preserve the peace, order and cleanliness of the city. He shall aid in the enforcement of special laws relating to the city and the ordinances thereof and shall enforce all orders of the board of mayor and aldermen relating to the business and duties of his department. The chief of police shall have general charge of the city jail and the prisoners therein. 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Prepare and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary and proper to control wrecker services utilized by the police department; provided that such rules and regulations are consistent with the general law of the state, as well as with any applicable provisions of city ordinances. 
(2)  Alter, amend or rescind rules and regulations promulgated under subsection (c)(1) of this section and promulgate such revisions as may from time to time be necessary or desirable. 
(3)  Publish and keep one copy, on file in the office of the city recorder, of all rules, regulations, policies and procedures or any revision thereof, none of which shall become effective until 30 days after publication. 
(Code 1981, § 20-1; Code 1998, § 54-26) 
Sec. 50-20. - Rules and regulations. 
    The police department shall be subject to such rules and regulations as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(Code 1981, § 20-2; Code 1998, § 54-27) 
Sec. 50-21. - Charges against police officers. 
(a)  Charges against a member of the police department, other than those made by the city manager, shall be made to the city manager and verified under oath, except that charges made by any member of the board of mayor and aldermen or the chief of police or city judge need not be in writing or verified. 
(b)  When charges are made, as provided in this section, it shall be the duty of the city manager to file such charges with the recorder, who shall summon such police officer, setting forth in the summons the nature of the charges made, to appear before the city manager and make defense thereto. Three days shall be allowed the accused to prepare his defense. 
(c)  The charges shall be tried and determined by the city manager. If the city manager shall find him guilty, he shall discharge or discipline such officer. 
(d)  The recorder shall issue subpoenas for and the chief of police or some member of the department shall summon such witnesses as may be asked for by either party, and the accused may be represented by counsel. 
(Code 1981, § 20-4; Code 1998, § 54-28) 
Sec. 50-22. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the police to: 
(1)  Prevent crime; 
(2)  Detect and arrest offenders; 
(3)  Suppress riots; 
(4)  Protect the rights of persons and property; 
(5)  Guard the public health; 
(6)  See that nuisances are removed; 
(7)  Restrain disorderly, bawdy and gambling houses; 
(8)  Assist, advise and protect strangers and travelers of the streets or at railroad stations; 
(9)  Enforce all laws and ordinances; 
(10)  Execute all and every manner of process upon persons or property and serve any process issued out of the city court within the city or any and all process issued by any other court; and 
(11)  Do all within their power to enforce the laws and whatever else may be required of them by the board of mayor and aldermen and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1981, § 20-5; Code 1998, § 54-29) 
Sec. 50-23. - License inspection and report. 
    It shall be the duty of each member of the police department, when required by the city recorder, to make a license inspection of the city and report to him all businesses being conducted in the city which are subject to privilege tax. 
(Code 1981, § 20-6; Code 1998, § 54-30) 
Sec. 50-25. - Authority to summon assistance. 
    The chief of police or any member of the police department may call to his assistance as many of the inhabitants of the city as may be necessary to aid him in making an arrest or preventing or quelling any riot, unlawful assembly or breach of the peace, and all persons so called shall be subject to the orders of such police officer while on the duty for which they are called. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey orders of such police officer when so called by him. 
(Code 1981, § 20-8; Code 1998, § 54-32) 
Sec. 50-26. - Resisting, obstructing police officer. 
    No person shall resist or obstruct a police officer, by force or threat, who is engaged in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1981, § 20-9; Code 1998, § 54-33) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of law enforcement, T.C.A. § 39-16-602; resisting arrest, T.C.A. § 40-7-108. 
Sec. 50-27. - Disposition of fees. 
    All fees for official services rendered by any police officer shall be turned into the city treasury. 
(Code 1981, § 20-11; Code 1998, § 54-34) 
Secs. 50-28-50-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 50-58. - Composition; employee status. 
(a)  There is created a reserve police force designated the "Kingsport Reserve Police Force" to be composed of not more than 25 voluntary members. Reserve police officers shall be considered as volunteers and special deputies, as defined in T.C.A. § 38-8-101. 
(b)  Reserve police officers shall be under the control and supervision of the chief of police and shall serve at his pleasure. They shall not: 
(1)  Be included under civil service provisions of the personnel rules and regulations; 
(2)  Participate in the Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System; or 
(3)  Be entitled to hearings or grievance procedures upon termination or disciplinary actions. 
(c)  Reserve police officers may receive medical benefits similar to those in the Tennessee Workers' Compensation Act, T.C.A. § 50-6-101 et seq., for injuries incurred while on authorized duty. 
(Code 1981, § 20-21; Code 1998, § 54-61; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-21), 12-3-1996; Ord. No 5882, § I, 9-1-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar definition, T.C.A. § 38-8-101. 
Sec. 50-59. - Method of appointment and qualifications of membership. 
(a)  No person shall assume duties or hold himself out to be a reserve police officer until after being duly appointed by the city manager and until after taking the oath of office provided for officers of the police department and until the city recorder has been provided with a proper bond as required by law for armed law enforcement officers. 
(b)  Each reserve police officer shall be required to pass the same physical, psychological and battery of general aptitude examinations as a regular line officer of the police department. Each reserve police officer shall be required from time to time to attend such in-service training programs as required and approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 20-22; Code 1998, § 54-62; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-22), 12-3-1996) 
State Law reference- Employment and training of police officers, T.C.A. § 38-1-101 et seq. 
Sec. 50-60. - Parttime assistance of regular police officers. 
    Reserve police officers shall be utilized on a parttime basis for the purpose of assisting regular police officers in civil defense activities or other emergencies, major fires, traffic accidents, traffic control in general, sporting events, parades and such other activities as the chief of police may require in order to support and extend the service capability of regular police officers on routine patrol. 
(Code 1981, § 20-24; Code 1998, § 54-63; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-23), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-61. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The authority of reserve police officers shall be limited solely to those times when authorized to act in such capacity by the chief of police. 
(b)  Firearms; arrests. While serving on official duty as reserve police officers, each such officer shall be authorized to carry firearms in accordance with T.C.A. § 39-17-1315 and as prescribed by rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police and to make arrests in the same manner as regular police officers. 
(c)  Supervision by other personnel. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, reserve police officers shall be subject to the direct supervision and control of a fulltime police officer accompanying him on patrol and shall be subject to the direction, control and supervision of all other police personnel in the chain of command of the police department. A reserve police officer who is a retired fulltime state peace officer standards and training (POST) certified law enforcement officer may, at the discretion of the chief of police, function without a fulltime police officer accompanying such reserve officer; provided such reserve police officer completes in-service training each year, but such reserve officer shall be subject to the direction, control and supervision of all police personnel in the chain of command of the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 20-25; Code 1998, § 54-64; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-24), 12-3-1996; Ord. No. 5669, § I, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 50-62. - Uniforms, badges and insignia. 
    The chief of police shall prescribe by rules and regulations the uniforms, badges and insignia for reserve police officers and the manner in which the uniforms, badges and insignia shall be worn. It shall be a civil offense for any person not a member in good standing of the reserve police force to wear or use the uniforms, badges or insignia so prescribed by the chief of police. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 20-26; Code 1998, § 54-65; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-25), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-64. - False impersonation. 
    It shall be a civil offense for any person to wear, carry or display a reserve police force identification card or otherwise represent himself to be a member of or connected with the reserve police force, unless he is in fact a member thereof in good standing. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 20-28; Code 1998, § 54-67; Ord. No. 4099, § VII, 8-1-1995; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-27), 12-3-1996) 
State Law reference- Criminal impersonation, T.C.A. § 39-16-301. 
Sec. 50-65. - Abuse of authority or indicia of office. 
    Any reserve police officer may be relieved of reserve officer status by the chief of police, if such reserve police officer: 
(1)  Uses his position at any time when not so authorized; 
(2)  Wears or displays a uniform, insignia or identification at any time when not assigned to duty or when traveling to or from such duty station; 
(3)  Violates any rule, regulation or general order of the police department; or 
(4)  Violates any section of this Code or any provision of state law. 
(Code 1998, § 54-68; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-28), 12-3-1996) 
State Law reference- Negligent acts or omission by public officers and employees, T.C.A. § 29-20-205. 
Sec. 50-66. - Diminishing or increasing size of force. 
    The chief of police may, by order and with the approval of the city manager, diminish or expand the membership of the auxiliary police force as circumstances require within the limits established in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 20-29; Code 1998, § 54-69; Ord. No. 4312, § II(20-29), 12-3-1996) 
Secs. 50-67-50-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VOLUNTEER PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 

Sec. 50-91. - Authorized. 
    The chief of police is authorized to appoint qualified persons to serve as volunteer parking enforcement officers who shall serve at the pleasure of the chief of police and who shall be under his control and supervision. 
(Code 1998, § 54-96; Ord. No. 4312, § III(20-40), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-92. - Volunteer status. 
    Any person who is appointed as a volunteer parking enforcement officer shall serve on a voluntary basis, and such appointee shall receive no compensation therefor and shall not be deemed to be a city employee for purposes of workers' compensation insurance, retirement eligibility or any other employee benefit. 
(Code 1998, § 54-97; Ord. No. 4312, § III(20-41), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-93. - Duties and authority. 
    The authority of volunteer parking enforcement officers shall be limited solely to the issuance of citations to the city court for violation of chapter 98, article IV, division 1. Such authority shall be limited to periods of time specifically authorized by the chief of police. Volunteer parking enforcement officers shall not carry firearms while on duty nor shall they have the power of arrest. 
(Code 1998, § 54-98; Ord. No. 4312, § III(20-42), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-94. - Waiver of claims. 
    Prior to being appointed as a volunteer parking enforcement officer, the volunteer shall execute and shall have notarized a waiver of claims in a form approved by the city attorney. The waiver shall be retained by the city recorder. 
(Code 1998, § 54-99; Ord. No. 4312, § III(20-43), 12-3-1996) 
Sec. 50-95. - Abuse of authority or indicia of office. 
(a)  Any volunteer parking enforcement officer may be relieved of such volunteer duties by the chief of police if such officer: 
(1)  Uses his position at any time when not so authorized; 
(2)  Wears or displays a uniform, insignia or identification at any time when not assigned to duty or when traveling to or from such duty station; 
(3)  Violates any rule, regulation or general order of the police department; or 
(4)  Violates any section of this Code or provision of state law. 
(b)  It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate this section. 
(Code 1998, § 54-100; Ord. No. 4312, § III(20-44), 12-3-1996) 
State Law reference- Negligent acts or omission by public officers and employees, T.C.A. § 29-20-205. 
Secs. 50-96-50-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS 

Sec. 50-119. - Appointment; part-time employment. 
    The chief of police is authorized to appoint qualified persons to serve as school crossing guards. Such persons shall be parttime employees of the city and shall work under the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1998, § 54-126; Ord. No. 4302, § I(20-40), 11-19-1996) 
Sec. 50-120. - Qualifications and uniforms. 
    School crossing guards shall wear uniforms as designated by the chief of police. The chief of police shall establish minimum standards for employment and shall establish rules and regulations for the duties as assigned. 
(Code 1998, § 54-127; Ord. No. 4302, § I(20-42), 11-19-1996) 
Sec. 50-121. - Duties. 
    School crossing guards shall be limited to service at designated school crossings as established by the department of education, the chief of police and the transportation department. The authority of school crossing guards shall be limited to monitoring designated school crossings during days when schools are in session and during the hours when school children are going to or returning from public schools. Such hours shall be established by the chief of police and the department of education. 
(Code 1998, § 54-128; Ord. No. 4302, § I(20-41), 11-19-1996) 
Chapters 51-53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State library system, T.C.A. § 10-1-101 et seq.; libraries in counties, cities and towns generally, T.C.A. § 10-3-101 et seq.; library boards, T.C.A. § 10-3-103; preservation of municipal public records, T.C.A. § 10-7-701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Created. 
    There is created a city library. 
(Code 1981, § 21-1; Code 1998, § 58-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Failure to return materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to detain or fail to return to any public library any book, periodical, map, newspaper, plate, engraving, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript, picture, clipping, phonograph record, motion picture film, black and white or color slide film or film strip, tape, cassette or other property belonging to any public library provided for the public education, use and welfare of the citizens in the city and community, after the lapse of 30 days from the date of posting by certified mail, a notice addressed to such person at the last address furnished the public library. 
(b)  Such notice may be given at any time after the date for which such person should have returned the loaned property in accordance with the rules of such public library. However, no penalty shall be imposed when restitution of value shall have been made prior to the expiration of the 30-day period or in any case where the return of any library property enumerated in this section has been rendered impossible by cause beyond the control of the borrower. 
(Code 1981, § 21-2; Code 1998, § 58-2) 
Sec. 54-3. - Using fictitious name or address. 
    It shall be an offense to give a fictitious or incorrect name or address at any public library in order to obtain possession or use of any library property or services. 
(Code 1981, § 21-3; Code 1998, § 58-3) 
Sec. 54-4. - Defacing property. 
    It shall be an offense for any person to cut, write upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy any library property. 
(Code 1981, § 21-4; Code 1998, § 58-4) 
Secs. 54-5-54-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC LIBRARY COMMISSION 

Sec. 54-27. - Created. 
    There is created a public library commission. 
(Code 1981, § 21-16; Code 1998, § 58-31) 
Sec. 54-28. - Composition; filling vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The public library commission shall have the composition required by T.C.A. § 10-3-103. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission occasioned by death, resignation or inability or refusal of a member to serve, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 21-17; Code 1998, § 58-32) 
Sec. 54-29. - Officers. 
    The members of the public library commission shall meet in regular session and organize each year by electing from their number a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each person so elected shall hold office for one year or until his successor is elected by the commission and qualifies. 
(Code 1981, § 21-18; Code 1998, § 58-33) 
Sec. 54-30. - Meetings. 
    The public library commission shall meet in regular session at least once each month, the time and place to be selected by vote of the members. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. Any meeting other than a regular meeting may be called by the chairperson or by any four members. 
(Code 1981, § 21-19; Code 1998, § 58-34) 
Sec. 54-31. - Quorum. 
    Four members of the public library commission present at a meeting shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1981, § 21-20; Code 1998, § 58-35) 
Sec. 54-32. - Record of proceedings. 
    The secretary of the public library commission shall keep a record of all proceedings of the commission. 
(Code 1981, § 21-21; Code 1998, § 58-36) 
Sec. 54-33. - Functions. 
    The public library commission shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct, control, government and operation of the city library. Such rules and regulations shall not be effective until approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 21-22; Code 1998, § 58-37) 
Sec. 54-34. - Budget. 
    The public library commission shall submit to the city manager, in accordance with the budget calendar, a proposed library budget. 
(Code 1981, § 21-23; Code 1998, § 58-38) 
Sec. 54-35. - Grants, gifts, devises and bequests. 
    Any gift, bequest or contribution made for the use of the public library shall be deposited with the city treasurer and held by him in trust, to be kept separate from all other city funds, and shall be disbursed only upon direction of the public library commission, with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 21-24; Code 1998, § 58-39) 
Secs. 54-36-54-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ARCHIVES 

Sec. 54-59. - Established. 
    There is created and established the archives of the city as a division within the department of library and archives. 
(Code 1981, § 21-40; Code 1998, § 58-66) 
Sec. 54-60. - City archivist to be designated by city manager. 
    The archives of the city shall be under the direction and supervision of such person as may be designated from time to time by the city manager, referred to in this article as the city archivist. 
(Code 1981, § 21-41; Code 1998, § 58-67) 
Sec. 54-62. - Establishment of fees. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may from time to time adopt a schedule of fees for: 
(1)  The copying of documents; 
(2)  The reproduction of photographs, maps, etc.; 
(3)  Time spent to search for any other material; or 
(4)  Any other service appropriately rendered through the archives. 
(Code 1981, § 21-43; Code 1998, § 58-69) 
Sec. 54-63. - Placement of city records. 
    The city recorder may, in consultation with the city archivist and records manager, arrange for the transfer of permanent, nonessential city records meeting the criteria of archival material after appraisal by the city archivist. 
(Code 1981, § 21-44; Code 1998, § 58-70) 
Sec. 54-64. - Private contributions. 
    The city may accept donations of historically significant material from private citizens or businesses, consisting of but not limited to diaries, papers, books, pamphlets, letters, photographs, memorabilia, maps, drawings, paintings, historical materials or other documents relating to the political, economic, social or cultural history of the city or its geographic area, if the city archivist deems such material suitable and appropriate pursuant to established policies and procedures approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 21-45; Code 1998, § 58-71) 
Sec. 54-65. - Standards for donations. 
    Donations of materials to the city archives shall only be accepted by the city upon agreement of the donor to the following: 
(1)  The donor shall agree in writing that the city, its officers and employees shall have no liability for improper or illegal use by a third party of any material donated under the agreement or for violation of any copyright or other condition or covenant, notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section. The city shall take reasonable precautions to prevent illegal or improper use of, or violation of any condition or covenant placed on any donated materials, but shall not be responsible for any use by third parties. 
(2)  Every donor shall consent in writing to one of the three following provisions for any donation or gift: 
a.  All material included in the bequest is donated without any restriction or reservation. Absolute control and complete rights are conveyed to the city, and no express or implied rights are retained by the donor. 
b.  All material included in the bequest is donated with the single restriction that no item or group of items may be used in any advertisement for any company, product or service without the express written consent of the donor, his heirs or assigns. With the exception of the foregoing, absolute control and complete rights are conveyed to the city, and no other express or implied rights are retained by the donor. 
c.  All material included in the bequest is donated with the restrictions that no item or group of items may be used in any advertisement for any company, product or service nor may any item or group of items be made available for publication in any form, in any book or periodical, without the express written consent of the donor, his heirs or assigns. Such material shall be held for research or viewing by the public at large, and no copies may be made or disseminated without the express written consent of the donor, his heirs or assigns. With the exception of the foregoing, absolute control and complete rights are conveyed to the city, and no other express or implied rights are retained by the donor. 
(3)  Any person requesting the right to use any material from the archives, subject to any of the restrictions in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, shall be responsible, at his own cost, for obtaining the written consent of the donor, his heirs or assigns. 
(Code 1981, § 21-46; Code 1998, § 58-72) 
Sec. 54-66. - Disposal of material. 
    No material donated to or placed in the city archives shall be disposed of, by gift or sale, except upon approval by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 21-47; Code 1998, § 58-73) 
Chapters 55-57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Manufactured homes generally, T.C.A. § 68-126-101 et seq.; Tennessee Manufactured Home Installation Act, T.C.A. § 68-126-401 et seq.; mobile home transport and permits generally, T.C.A. § 55-4-401 et seq.; transporter's liability for damages to streets and other public structures during transport, T.C.A. § 55-4-413; Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, T.C.A. § 68-126-201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Independent mobile home means a mobile home that has a toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Independent mobile home park means a mobile home park for independent mobile homes. 
    Independent mobile home space means a mobile home space intended to accommodate an independent mobile home. 
    Inspector means the building official or his duly authorized representative. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle or similar portable structure having been constructed with wheels, whether or not such wheels have been removed, or without wheels but designed to be moved on the highway when attached to a suitable wheeled undercarriage, and not meeting the requirements to be classified as a manufactured home, in accordance with T.C.A. § 68-126-202(4). 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground two acres or more in size which has been planned, improved and approved for placement of mobile homes. 
    Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Multiple dwelling means any structure designed and intended to accommodate more than one family and includes but is not limited to duplex buildings, group houses and apartment buildings. 
    Park means a mobile home park. 
    Permittee means any person holding a permit to operate and maintain a mobile home park under this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 13-1; Code 1998, § 62-1) 
State Law reference- Mobile home defined, T.C.A. § 55-4-402; manufactured home defined, T.C.A. § 68-126-202. 
Sec. 58-2. - Mobile homes not located in parks. 
(a)  No person shall park or occupy any mobile home on the premises of any dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved mobile home park, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If a mobile home located upon a lot, otherwise unoccupied by another residence, within the city on or prior to October 14, 1966, or on or prior to its annexation to the city is removed and no mobile home is relocated upon such lot for a period of 90 days after such removal, no mobile home shall thereafter be placed or located on such lot. 
(Code 1981, § 13-3; Code 1998, § 62-2) 
Sec. 58-3. - Parking of mobile homes. 
    Subject to any other limitations and prohibitions provided by chapter 98, pertaining to traffic, no person shall stop, stand or park a mobile home in a street, alley, highway or other public place for longer than one hour. 
(Code 1981, § 13-4; Code 1998, § 62-3) 
Secs. 58-4-58-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-25. - Compliance date for newly annexed areas. 
    Mobile home parks that are located within areas annexed to the city shall comply with this article within two years after the date of such annexation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-16; Code 1998, § 62-31) 
Sec. 58-26. - Location. 
    Mobile home parks shall be located only in R-1MP zoning districts. 
(Code 1981, § 13-17; Code 1998, § 62-32) 
Sec. 58-27. - Inspection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park which has not been inspected for that year by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 13-19; Code 1998, § 62-33) 
Sec. 58-28. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person whose application for a construction permit or for a permit to operate a mobile home park is denied shall be notified in writing, specifying the reasons for such denial. If the person receiving the denial so desires, he may have the denial reviewed on appeal by the board of zoning appeals or other appropriate board by filing with the building official a written request within ten days after notice of such denial. Such written request shall specify with reasonable particularity the grounds on which the applicant relies for a reversal of the denial for the issuance of the construction permit or the permit to operate. This appeal will be heard by the board of zoning appeals in the same manner as appeals are heard under chapter 114. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by an order of the building official granting, denying, renewing or revoking a permit for a mobile home park under this article may file, within ten days after issuance of such order, a written request for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals. The hearing shall be held in accordance with the appeals procedure as set forth in section 114-68. 
(c)  Any decision of the board of zoning appeals granting, denying, renewing or revoking any permit under this article may be reviewed by a common law writ of certiorari by the procedure contained in section 114-71. 
(Code 1981, § 13-20; Code 1998, § 62-34) 
Sec. 58-29. - Screening. 
    Where any boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts on property that is improved with a permanent residential building located within 25 feet of such boundary or directly abuts on unimproved property that may, under existing laws and regulations, be used for permanent residential construction, a screen such as a fence, wall or hedge shall be erected and adequately maintained along such mobile home park boundary to shield such park from the residential property, as may be determined to be adequate by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 13-18; Code 1998, § 62-35) 
Secs. 58-30-58-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATING PERMIT 

Sec. 58-47. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile home park without an operating permit from the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 13-31; Code 1998, § 62-61) 
Sec. 58-48. - Application and fee. 
(a)  The application for the permit required in this division or the renewal of the permit shall be filed with the city recorder and shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the board of mayor and aldermen for each mobile home space in or proposed to be in the park. The application for a permit or a renewal thereof shall be made on printed forms furnished by the city and obtainable from the recorder and shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract; if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain the trailer or tourist park and make the application shall be included. 
(b)  If the original permit is granted on or after July 1 of any year, the permittee shall be required to pay one-half of the annual permit fee for that year. 
(Code 1981, § 13-32; Code 1998, § 62-62) 
Sec. 58-49. - Issuance. 
    Before a permit may be issued pursuant to this division, there must be a favorable recommendation by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 13-33; Code 1998, § 62-63) 
Sec. 58-50. - Transferability. 
    The permit issued pursuant to this division shall not be transferred until the city recorder has in his possession a letter signed by the building official stating that the mobile home park is in compliance with the applicable sections of this chapter. A person desiring a transfer of the permit shall pay a fee as set by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 13-34; Code 1998, § 62-64) 
Sec. 58-51. - Expiration. 
    The permit issued pursuant to this division shall expire on December 31. 
(Code 1981, § 13-35; Code 1998, § 62-65) 
Sec. 58-52. - Revocation. 
    The building official is authorized to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this division if, after due investigation and hearing, he determines that the holder of the permit has violated any section of this chapter or that any mobile home or mobile home park is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 13-36; Code 1998, § 62-66) 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 58-78. - Application for construction permits. 
    Prior to any construction, alteration, enlargement or improvement to a mobile home park, an application for the necessary construction permits shall be filed with the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 13-44; Code 1998, § 62-91) 
Sec. 58-79. - Plot plan. 
    In addition to other matters required to be submitted with an application for the necessary permits for a mobile home park, there shall be submitted with the application a complete plot plan drawn to scale which shall show: 
(1)  The location, area and dimensions of the mobile home park; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces; 
(3)  The location, width and arrangement of roadways and walkways; 
(4)  The location and size of service buildings; 
(5)  Any other proposed structures; and 
(6)  The location of playground areas. 
(Code 1981, § 13-45; Code 1998, § 62-92) 
Sec. 58-80. - Application of technical codes. 
    The provisions of the city building, plumbing, electrical, gas and mechanical codes, including but not limited to their provisions for appeals, shall apply to all work done in a mobile home park. 
(Code 1981, § 13-46; Code 1998, § 62-93) 
Sec. 58-81. - Variance from approved plans and specifications. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any construction, alteration, repair, improvement or enlargement of any mobile home park or any structure therein for which a permit is required that varies in any substantial particular from the approved plans and specifications submitted with the application for a construction permit and that is approved and on which the permit issued is based. 
(Code 1981, § 13-47; Code 1998, § 62-94) 
Sec. 58-82. - Final inspection; certificate of completion; letter required for transfer or renewal of permit. 
    Upon completion of all construction of a mobile home park, the building official shall conduct a final inspection of the premises to determine if all conditions of this chapter have been met, and, if so, a certificate of completion shall be issued. The city recorder shall not issue a permit to operate a mobile home park unless the certificate of completion is presented. Prior to the issuance of a transfer of a permit or a renewal of a permit to operate a mobile home park, the recorder must have a letter from the building official stating that the mobile home park is still in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 13-48; Code 1998, § 62-95) 
Secs. 58-83-58-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SITE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 58-108. - Electrical outlets. 
    The mobile home park plan shall indicate that an electrical outlet of the kind and type required by the electrical code shall be provided for each mobile home space. 
(Code 1981, § 13-66(g); Code 1998, § 62-121) 
Sec. 58-109. - Water supply. 
    An adequate supply of water for domestic purposes shall be supplied to each mobile home space. 
(Code 1981, § 13-58; Code 1998, § 62-122) 
Sec. 58-110. - Waste and garbage disposal. 
(a)  All liquid waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, lavatories, etc., of a mobile home shall discharge into the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Every space designed to serve an independent unit shall be provided with sewer connections which shall comply with the city plumbing code. The sewer connections shall be provided with suitable fittings so that watertight connections can be made. Such connections shall be so constructed as to be closed when not connected and shall be trapped and maintained in an odor-free condition. 
(c)  Sanitary facilities in any unit not connected with a public sewer system by approved pipe connections shall be sealed, and their use is declared unlawful. 
(d)  Each faucet shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water. 
(e)  Each mobile home unit shall be provided with a substantial flytight, watertight, garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed and disposed of at least weekly by the park custodian in a central dumpster unit for collection by the city garbage collection service. Alternatively, each mobile home may have the garbage removed no less than weekly either by a permitted collector of solid waste upon such charges as agreed to by the parties or by the city for a fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1981, § 13-59; Code 1998, § 62-123; Ord. No. 6231, § I, 7-24-2012) 
Sec. 58-111. - Electrical service. 
(a)  A standard electrical service shall be provided for each mobile home space, and the outlets for such service shall be weatherproofed. 
(b)  No electrical power line shall be permitted to lie on the ground. No such power line shall be suspended less than 18 feet above the surface of the ground. 
(c)  All electrical installations and connections shall be in conformance with the requirements of the city electrical code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-60; Code 1998, § 62-124) 
Sec. 58-112. - Fire protection and fire hydrants. 
(a)  Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the fire department. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be installed in such manner that a fire hydrant shall be located within 400 feet of each mobile home space. 
(c)  In every mobile home park suitable telephone facilities shall be installed and maintained in a convenient and readily accessible place, prominently marked and designated and kept available for use in giving fire alarms at all times. 
(d)  No open fires shall be permitted at any place within the bounds of the mobile home park, outdoor cooking units excepted. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to accumulate or store combustible rubbish beneath mobile homes or at any other place within a mobile home park. 
(Code 1981, § 13-61; Code 1998, § 62-125) 
Chapters 59-61 - RESERVED 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Criminal offenses generally, T.C.A. § 39-11-101 et seq.; criminal procedure generally, T.C.A. § 40-1-101 et seq.; abatement of nuisances, T.C.A. § 29-3-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE 

Sec. 62-19. - Unauthorized boarding or riding on train. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than employees or passengers, to board any train engine, car or train of cars attached to an engine or to stand upon the steps or platform of any passenger car of a train or to ride or attempt to ride upon an engine or car from one point to another. 
(Code 1981, § 22-9; Code 1998, § 66-5) 
Sec. 62-20. - Child bicycle safety. 
(a)  With regard to any bicycle used on a city street or city property, it is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person under the age of 16 years to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle unless at all times when so engaged such person wears a protective bicycle helmet of good fit fastened securely upon the head with the straps of a helmet. 
(2)  For any person to be a passenger on a bicycle unless, with respect to any person who weighs fewer than 40 pounds or is less than 40 inches in height, the person can be and is properly seated in and adequately secured to a restraining seat. 
(3)  For any parent or legal guardian of a person below the age of 12 years to knowingly permit such person to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle in violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(4)  To rent or lease any bicycle to or for the use of any person under the age of 12 years unless: 
a.  The person is in possession of a protective bicycle helmet of good fit at the time of such rental or lease; or 
b.  The rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet of good fit, and the person intends to wear the helmet, as required by subsection (a)(1) of this section, at all times while operating or being a passenger on the bicycle. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a penalty of $2.00 per incident, plus court costs. It shall be a defense that a protective bicycle helmet or restraining seat has been purchased or provided and its use will cause the bicyclist or passenger or parent or legal guardian to come into compliance with this section. 
(Code 1981, § 16-30; Code 1998, § 66-26; Ord. No. 4602, § I, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 62-21. - Use of condemned water supply. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use for domestic purposes the water from any creek, spring, well or cistern which has been condemned for such use by the city, county or state health authorities. 
(Code 1981, § 16-26(b); Code 1998, § 66-23) 
Sec. 62-22. - Gambling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit, in any house or tenement in his premises or under his control, any gambling table or gambling device at which any game of chance shall be played for money or property or anything representing such or for any person to bet, win or lose, or play for money or property, either in specie or by means of anything representing such at any such table or device or at any game of chance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in his possession any gambling table or gaming device, slot machine, horse race ticket or machine, tip board, baseball or football ticket used for the purpose of gambling or for the enticement of any person to gamble. 
(c)  The city judge shall order burned or destroyed any gambling devices or paraphernalia found in the city. 
(d)  All persons present who are aiding and abetting or ready and consenting to aid and abet in the commission of a violation of this section shall be principal offenders and punished as such. 
(Code 1981, § 16-10; Code 1998, § 66-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 39-17-502. 
Sec. 62-23. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It is an offense for two or more persons to assemble in the city with the intent of being unlawfully assembled, and who shall mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force and violence against the property of the city, the person or property of another or against the peace, or to the terror of others, and shall make any movement or preparation therefor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 16-5; Code 1998, § 66-6) 
State Law reference- Unlawful assembly, T.C.A. § 38-3-101; rioting, T.C.A. §§ 39-17-302, 39-17-303. 
Sec. 62-24. - Disrupting meeting or procession. 
    A person commits an offense if, with the intent to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, the person substantially obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action or verbal utterance. 
(Code 1981, § 16-6; Code 1998, § 66-7) 
Sec. 62-25. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person, in a public place and with intent to cause public annoyance or alarm: 
(1)  Engages in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior; 
(2)  Refuses to obey an official order to disperse issued to maintain public safety in dangerous proximity to a fire, hazard or other emergency; or 
(3)  Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act that serves no legitimate purpose. 
(b)  A person also violates this section if the person makes unreasonable noise which prevents others from carrying on lawful activities. 
(Code 1981, § 16-7; Code 1998, § 66-8) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, T.C.A. § 39-17-305. 
Sec. 62-26. - Masks and disguises prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or parkways or in or upon any of the buildings or adjacent properties used in connection therewith while wearing a mask, false face or while using any other disguise. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Persons impersonating other characters, real or fictional, for a lawful purpose; 
(2)  Persons employing the use of disguise as a part of a bona fide theatrical performance, exhibition or parade for the purpose of advertisement or profit; or 
(3)  Children under 16 years of age on Halloween while not engaged in an act otherwise unlawful. 
(Code 1981, § 16-14; Code 1998, § 66-13) 
Sec. 62-27. - Strikes by public employees. 
    No public employees of the city shall strike, sit down, slow down or engage in any cessation or any interruption of work or any other organized or concerted interference of any kind. Any public employee of the city in violation of this section shall be subject to discharge forthwith by the city manager or other city official or board charged with the responsibility under the Charter and this Code of discharging city employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the selective discipline of public employees of the city who violate this section. 
(Code 1981, § 16-27; Code 1998, § 66-24) 
State Law reference- Right to work, T.C.A. § 50-1-201 et seq. 
Sec. 62-28. - Camping, sleeping in designated places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, camp out, sleep, lodge or take up residence in any camper, van, bus or other motor vehicle on the public streets or in any park or public place, except locations or sites which are designated for such occupancy and use. 
(Code 1981, § 16-29; Code 1998, § 66-25) 
Sec. 62-29. - Amplified noise from motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on any public street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system including, but not limited to, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, or any other electrical device used for the amplification of sound from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the vehicle. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "plainly audible" means any sound that clearly can be heard, by unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line of sight of 50 feet or more; however, words or phrases need not be discernible and such sound shall include bass reverberation. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to emergency or public safety vehicles, vehicles owned and operated by a municipal or county government or any utility company, for sound emitted unavoidably during a job-related operation, or for school or community sponsored activities, auctioneers or auctioning activities, boats or other watercrafts operated on waters or any motor vehicle used in an authorized public activity for which a permit has been granted by the appropriate agency of a municipal or county government. 
(Code 1998, § 66-27; Ord. No. 5272, § I, 1-18-2005) 
State Law reference- Excessive noise from motor vehicles, T.C.A. § 55-8-193. 
Secs. 62-30-62-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 62-47. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "enter" means intrusion of the entire body. 
(b)  A person commits criminal trespass if the person, knowing he does not have the owner's effective consent to do so, enters or remains on property or a portion thereof. Knowledge that the person did not have the owner's effective consent may be inferred where notice against entering or remaining is given by: 
(1)  Personal communication to the person by the owner or by someone with apparent authority to act for the owner; 
(2)  Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude intruders; or 
(3)  Posting reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The person entered or remained on property that the person reasonably believed to be property for which the owner's consent to enter had been granted; 
(2)  The person's conduct did not substantially interfere with the owner's use of the property; and 
(3)  The person immediately left the property upon request. 
(Code 1981, § 16-16; Code 1998, § 66-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 39-14-405. 
Sec. 62-48. - Damaging trees. 
    No person shall cut, break or injure any trees on the public streets or sidewalks or on the private premises of another. 
(Code 1981, § 16-19; Code 1998, § 66-17) 
State Law reference- Vandalism, T.C.A. § 39-14-408. 
Sec. 62-49. - Obstructing highway or other passageway. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "obstruct" means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or potentially injurious to persons or property. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person, without legal privilege, intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Sits on a window ledge or obstructs a highway, street, sidewalk, railway, waterway, elevator, aisle or hallway to which the public or a substantial portion of the public has access or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from the person's acts alone or from the person's acts and the acts of others; or 
(2)  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person known to be a law enforcement officer, a firefighter or a person with authority to control the use of the premises to: 
a.  Prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway; or 
b.  Maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot or other hazard. 
(c)  This section shall in no way whatsoever is construed to prohibit any lawful assembly of one or more persons for the purpose of lawful demonstration or redress or grievances. 
(Code 1981, § 16-20; Code 1998, § 66-18) 
State Law reference- Obstruction or damage to highways, T.C.A. § 54-10-110. 
Secs. 62-50-62-71. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-72. - Carrying weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in any manner whatever, with intent to go armed, any razor, dirk, Bowie knife or other knife or like form, shape or size or a pocketknife with blade exceeding four inches in length or a switchblade knife of any size or a sword cane, icepick, slingshot, blackjack, knucks, Spanish stiletto or a fountain pen pistol or gun or like instrument containing a firing pin capable of shooting tear gas or pistol cartridges, except authorized military personnel. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed on or about his person any razor, dirk, Bowie knife or other knife of like form, shape or size or a pocketknife with a blade exceeding four inches in length or a switchblade knife of any size or a sword cane, icepick, slingshot, blackjack, brass knucks, Spanish stiletto or a fountain pen pistol or gun or like instrument containing a firing pin capable of shooting tear gas or pistol cartridges, or any other dangerous weapon. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any person employed in the Army, Air Force, Navy or Marine Service of the United States or to any officer or police officer while bona fide engaged in his official duties, in the execution of process or while searching for or engaged in arresting criminals, nor to persons who may have been summoned by such officer or police officer in the discharge of his duties and in arresting criminals and transporting and turning them over to the proper authorities or to those fire officials designated pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-102-149. This section shall not apply to any conductor of any passenger or freight train of any railroad while he is on duty. Persons who may be employed in the army, air force, navy or marine service, as stated in this subsection, shall only carry such pistols as are prescribed by the army, air force and navy regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 16-1; Code 1998, § 66-1; Ord. No. 4501, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
State Law reference- Dangerous weapons, T.C.A. § 39-6-1701 et seq.; unlawful carrying of weapons, T.C.A. § 39-17-1307. 
Sec. 62-73. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except in the performance of some duty required by law, or by members of a military detail in attendance upon an interment, or upon written approval of the chief of police as hereinafter set out, to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in the city, including any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges. 
(b)  For the purposes of educational activities, sporting events, special events, or animal control measures, a person may discharge a gun, pistol or other firearm only upon the review and written approval by the chief of police after the submission, by such person to the chief of police, of a written safety plan and projected schedule of those times and days of the week or dates when the activities or events would take place. The chief of police shall act upon the request within ten working days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police rejects the request, a notice of this action shall be provided to the requesting person stating the reasons for denial of the request. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police under this section shall have the right to appeal the denial of request for an exception to this section to the board of mayor and aldermen. The written notice of appeal shall be delivered to the office of the city manager, prior to 5:00 p.m., within three working days after receipt of notice of rejection from the chief of police. A hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen shall be conducted at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The board of mayor and aldermen shall render its decision no later than three working days after such hearing. 
(d)  To effectuate the purpose of this section, the chief of police is authorized and directed to prepare, promulgate, alter, amend or rescind such rules, policies and procedures as are necessary and proper to control discharge of firearms in the city, provided that such rules, policies and procedures are consistent with the general law of the state, as well as with any applicable provisions of city ordinances. A copy of such shall be sent to the city recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 16-2; Code 1998, § 66-2; Ord. No. 4953, § I, 8-21-2001) 
Sec. 62-74. - Bows, slingshots, airguns and similar devices. 
    No person shall have or use in any street or other public place any bow, crossbow, rubber flippers, slingshot, airgun or other device other than firearms by which shot or other projectiles are cast. No person shall shoot any such device from any premises into the streets. 
(Code 1981, § 16-3; Code 1998, § 66-3) 
Sec. 62-75. - Confiscation and disposal of illegal weapons. 
(a)  Whenever any person arrested by any city officer is found to have on his person or about him in an unlawful manner any prohibited weapon as set forth in T.C.A. § 39-17-1301 et seq., such weapon shall become the property of the city. 
(b)  All weapons so confiscated may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with state and federal law. In no event shall such weapon be returned to the person arrested or to any of his relations or friends. 
(Code 1981, § 16-4; Code 1998, § 66-4) 
Secs. 62-76-62-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- For unsafe and unfit structure nuisances, see chapter 22, article IX. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-125. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means an action of any person in doing an unlawful act or in omitting to perform a duty or in suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream or drainage; 
(3)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(4)  Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
(Code 1981, § 16-60; Code 1998, § 66-56) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 29-3-101. 
Sec. 62-126. - Certain items declared a nuisance, nonconclusive. 
    Placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property any of the following items is declared to be and shall constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, inoperative automobiles, lumber or other things. 
(2)  Creating or maintaining any condition that provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin or that provides breeding places for disease or disease-carrying pests such as flies, mosquitoes, etc. 
(3)  Creating or causing unnecessary or unauthorized noises or annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(4)  Creating or causing disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as causing or maintaining the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(5)  Failing to dispose of the carcasses of animals or fowl within a reasonable time after death. 
(6)  Polluting any public water supply, stream, lake, canal, body of water by placing therein sewage, dead animals, debris, rubbish, trash, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(7)  Creating or causing any accumulation of stagnant water on any lot or piece of ground. 
(8)  Creating or causing dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(Code 1981, § 16-61; Code 1998, § 66-57) 
Sec. 62-127. - Article supplemental to other ordinances. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to all other city ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 16-66; Code 1998, § 66-58) 
Sec. 62-128. - Creating or causing nuisance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 16-62; Code 1998, § 66-59) 
Secs. 62-129-62-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NUDITY OR SEXUAL ACTIVITIES IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 62-155. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public place. 
(1)  The term "public place" means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. The term "public place" includes, but is not limited to: streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social, fraternal or similar organizations. 
(2)  The term "public place" does not include premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature. 
(Code 1998, § 66-70; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-156. - Unlawful conduct in establishments serving food or alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, or upon the premises thereof, where food, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, consumed, possessed or are otherwise present, including the practice commonly known as brown bagging, and: 
(1)  To publicly or openly perform acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any other sexual acts prohibited by law; 
(2)  To publicly or openly engage in the actual or simulated touching with the hand, facial area or mouth, or caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
(3)  To publicly or openly engage in the actual or simulated display to public view of any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the display of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(4)  To publicly or openly wear or use any device or covering, exposed to public view which simulates any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the display of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(5)  To employ, use or allow any person in the sale or service of food, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages while such person is publicly or openly unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the display of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola; or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(6)  To employ, use or allow the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 
(7)  To publicly or openly permit any person to use artificial devices or any inanimate objects to depict any prohibited activities described in subsections (1) through (6) of this section; or 
(8)  For the owner of the property, or the owner of any business operated thereon, or any employee thereof to knowingly allow or permit any person to remain in or upon the premises who is exposing to public view any portion of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the areola, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Code 1998, § 66-71; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
State Law reference- Prohibited sexual conduct and representations in establishments holding alcohol licenses, T.C.A. § 57-4-204. 
Sec. 62-157. - Unlawful displays or acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, or upon the premises thereof, where wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, consumed, possessed or are otherwise present, including the practice commonly known as brown bagging, and to publicly or openly show films, videotapes, laser discs, CD ROMS, electronic reproductions or other visual reproductions that involve movement depicting any of the following: 
(1)  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
(2)  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
(3)  Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, the anus or the genitals; or 
(4)  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
(Code 1998, § 66-72; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
State Law reference- Prohibited sexual conduct and representations in establishments holding alcohol licenses, T.C.A. § 57-4-204; indecent exposure, T.C.A. § 39-13-511. 
Sec. 62-158. - Investigation and enforcement. 
    The police department of the city is hereby empowered to conduct investigations into alleged violations of the provisions of this division, T.C.A. § 57-4-204 and any other applicable law or ordinance; and such department shall report such violations to the appropriate authorities for such action as may be proper. 
(Code 1998, § 66-73; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-159. - Display of televised performances. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to prohibit the broadcast or display of any television program subject to regulation by the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
(Code 1998, § 66-74; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Sec. 62-160. - Acts declared to be a public nuisance. 
    Violation of any provision of this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Imposition of the penalties set out herein shall be in addition to and supplemental of the right to seek injunctive relief to abate the nuisance from an appropriate court. 
(Code 1998, § 66-75; Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 2-4-1997) 
Secs. 62-161-62-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINORS 

Sec. 62-189. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, a child who has not reached the age of 16 years shall not loiter, idle, wander or play in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, schools or public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not apply to a child exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of a child to permit the child to violate this section. 
(c)  Prosecution under this section shall be subject to defenses for a child: 
(1)  Accompanied by a parent or guardian or other adult person who has been delegated care and custody of the child by the parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person who has been delegated care and custody of the child by the parent or guardian; 
(3)  In the process of going to or returning home from lawful employment; 
(4)  Traveling through the city in the course of interstate travel; 
(5)  Attending or returning from a school or social function for which he has written permission in his possession from his parent or guardian. The written permission shall be specific as to the date, time and place for which it is effective; 
(6)  On the sidewalk in front of his residence or the residence of a next-door neighbor, unless there has been a disturbance reported in connection with the minor's presence. 
(Code 1981, § 16-24; Code 1998, § 66-21) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent and regulate all acts, practices, conduct, businesses, occupations, callings, trades, uses of property and all other things whatsoever detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience or welfare of its inhabitants, T.C.A. §§ 6-2-201(22), 6-19-101(22) and (33), 6-33-101; curfews during civil emergencies, T.C.A. § 38-9-103. 
Secs. 62-190-62-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SMOKING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-211. - Smoking on city-owned property. 
(a)  The city manager may promulgate rules governing smoking on city-owned property controlled by the board of mayor and aldermen, subject to the provisions of state law, including the designation of smoking areas outside of city-owned facilities. 
(b)  Any person violating the rules when published by making a copy of such rules available in the office of the city recorder, the office of the city manager and the public library shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is punishable under the city's general penalty clause or other applicable laws. Additionally, an employee failing to follow such rules, whether posted in the locations proscribed in subsection (a) of this section or not, is subject to corrective action, including termination from employment. 
(Ord. No. 5610, § 1(2-616), 10-16-2007) 
Sec. 62-212. - Aquatic center; smoking prohibited. 
    Pursuant to the authority provided in Public Chapter No. 847 of the Public Acts of the 109 th General Assembly, smoking is prohibited anywhere on the grounds of the city's aquatic center, including, but not limited to, inside the building, the outdoor swimming areas, sidewalks, roads and parking areas. 
    Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be penalized $50.00 for each offense. In addition, pursuant to section 30-25 of the Kingsport City Code, court costs shall be imposed. The imposition of a penalty hereunder shall be supplemental to any other action, such as the taking of any remedial or injunctive action, or any other legal or equitable relief or enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 6586, § I, 6-21-2016) 
Secs. 62-213-62-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES 

Sec. 62-233. - Electronic smoking devices; prohibited use on city property. 
(a)  Electronic smoking device, includes, but is not limited to, vaporizers, vape pens, hookah pens, electronic cigarettes, e-pipes, other electronic nicotine delivery systems, electronic smoking devices or other similar devices designed to deliver nicotine, flavored substances or other substances through a vapor exhaled by the user having a smoke-like appearance similar to a cigarette. 
(b)  The board finds based on information from the Federal Drug Administration, the National Institute of Health on Drug Abuse and other studies that electronic smoking devices can be a danger to a person's health. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says research suggests nicotine is as addictive as drugs such as cocaine or heroin. The CDC also says aerosol from these devices is not harmless water vapor and can be potentially harmful to health and that adult nontobacco users should not be exposed to secondhand aerosol from these products. The board further finds that to protect the public health the use of such devices should be limited in city owned, leased or controlled buildings and certain other places. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for any person to use an electronic smoking device in or on: 
(1)  Any building owned, leased or controlled by the city or within twenty-five [feet] of any entrance or exit or a greater distance, if such distance is posted on the entrance or exit door of such building; 
(2)  Any place owned, leased or controlled by the city where smoking tobacco is prohibited by state law; or 
(3)  Any other area, including an outdoor area, owned, leased or controlled by the city when the area is posted with a sign that use of an electronic smoking device is prohibited. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be penalized $50.00 for each offense. In addition, pursuant to section 30-25 of the Kingsport City Code, court costs shall be imposed. The imposition of a penalty hereunder shall be supplemental to any other action, such as the taking of any remedial or injunctive action, or any other legal or equitable relief or enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 6587, § I, 6-21-2016) 
Chapters 63-65 - RESERVED 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for local governments to purchase land areas for park purposes, T.C.A. § 11-3-106; authority of municipality to prohibit carrying of firearms within public parks, T.C.A. § 39-17-1311; conditions for annexation of state park or state natural areas by municipalities, T.C.A. § 6-51-120; municipal authority to make improvements by special assessments, T.C.A. § 7-32-101; municipal recreation systems, T.C.A. § 11-24-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-19. - Authority to establish fees and charges. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall have the authority to establish by resolution fees and charges for the use of city parks, recreational facilities and programs. 
(Code 1998, § 70-26) 
Secs. 66-20-66-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Sec. 66-42. - Position established; duties. 
    There is established the position of parks and recreation director who shall report to the city manager and whose duties shall be to: 
(1)  Plan for the recreational needs of the city and recommend programs, facilities and sites to the parks and recreation advisory committee; 
(2)  Schedule and supervise recreation programs and activities; 
(3)  Supervise maintenance of the facilities and equipment of the parks and recreation department; 
(4)  Supervise employees and volunteers of the department; 
(5)  Provide rules and regulations to control the conduct of patrons and employees while they are upon the park or recreational sites of the city or participating in department programs; 
(6)  Manage department finances in compliance with the Charter, this Code and accounting policies and procedures established by the city recorder; and 
(7)  Perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by ordinance or by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-124; Code 1998, § 70-51) 
Secs. 66-43-66-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 66-73. - Composition; appointment; filling vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The parks and recreation advisory committee shall be composed of nine members. In addition the city manager shall designate ex officio members. 
(b)  The appointive members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of mayor and aldermen and shall serve for three years. If a vacancy occurs among appointive members, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner provided in this section for original appointments. 
(c)  Any appointive member of the committee with unauthorized absences from four consecutive meetings or from six total regular meetings within a 12-month period shall be deemed to have resigned from the committee. A successor shall be appointed to fill the vacancy as provided in this section. 
(d)  Members of the committee and all standing subcommittees shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 18-2; Code 1998, § 70-76; Ord. No. 4775, § I, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 66-74. - Officers. 
    Each year the parks and recreation advisory committee shall select from its appointive members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The chairperson shall serve as the presiding officer and shall assign duties and responsibilities to committee members. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chairperson during absences of the chairperson. The secretary shall maintain a record of the proceedings at meetings of the committee. 
(Code 1981, § 18-3; Code 1998, § 70-77) 
Sec. 66-75. - Quorum 
    A quorum of the parks and recreation advisory committee shall consist of not less than four appointive members. 
(Code 1981, § 18-4; Code 1998, § 70-78) 
Sec. 66-76. - Meetings. 
    The parks and recreation advisory committee shall meet not less than once each month at a time and place approved by the committee. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by a majority of the appointive members of the committee upon 24 hours' notice to all members of the committee. 
(Code 1981, § 18-5; Code 1998, § 70-79) 
Sec. 66-77. - Study and recommendations of recreational needs of city. 
(a)  The parks and recreation advisory committee shall study the parks and recreation needs of the community and recommend to the board of mayor and aldermen recreational programs, facilities and special equipment and sites needed or desirable for use in occupying the leisure time of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The parks and recreation advisory committee shall, as needed, develop special standing subcommittees. Structure, purpose, tenure and functions of each standing subcommittee shall be determined by the parks and recreation advisory committee. Standing subcommittee membership appointments shall be made by the parks and recreation advisory committee and shall be approved by the mayor. Membership of each standing subcommittee shall include at least one parks and recreation advisory committee member. 
(c)  The parks and recreation advisory committee shall, as needed, develop for consideration and approval by the mayor and board of alderman policies, rules and regulations for operation of parks, park facilities and programs. 
(Code 1981, § 18-6; Code 1998, § 70-80) 
Secs. 66-78-66-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK OPERATION 

Sec. 66-98. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp overnight in any public park. However, this section shall not apply to Bays Mountain Park or special programs approved by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 18-7; Code 1998, § 70-106) 
Sec. 66-99. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, all municipal parks within the city shall be closed between dark and dawn each day of the week, including Sunday, except for programs and activities authorized by the parks and recreation department. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in or occupy such public parks between such time. 
(b)  General hours of operation for all other parks and recreation facilities shall be determined by the parks and recreation director and approved by the parks and recreation advisory committee. 
(Code 1981, § 18-8; Code 1998, § 70-107) 
Sec. 66-101. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-powered vehicle, such as but not limited to a motor-driven go-cart, motorcycle, motorbike, motor minibike, motor-powered tricycle and bicycle with attached motor, in or upon any public school grounds, in or upon any public playgrounds or in or upon any public park, either within the city or on property owned by but outside the boundary of the city, except as authorized upon the roadways and parking lots at such public places, designated for vehicular travel or the parking of such vehicle. This prohibition shall not apply to motor-driven or mechanized wheelchairs or mobility devices for disabled individuals. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any single person mobility vehicle wider than 30 inches or three- or four-wheel vehicles longer than 48 inches on any greenbelt or any city trail. All vehicles with a designated capacity of greater than one occupant shall not be allowed on trails, except strollers and bicycles. Motor driven two-wheeled vehicles, are not permitted on any greenbelt or city trail, provided this prohibition shall not apply to electric person-assistive mobility device as defined in T.C.A. § 55-53-101. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to service vehicles operated by the city, emergency vehicles or those vehicles authorized by the parks and recreation director for the purpose of conducting programs, activities or special events, and those vehicles permitted and used in accordance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Code 1981, § 18-10; Code 1998, § 70-109) 
Sec. 66-102. - Projectile weapons or devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or be in possession of any firearm, including shotgun, rifle or pistol, except as otherwise provided in T.C.A. § 39-17-1311, bow and arrow, crossbow, rubber flippers, blowgun, slingshot, airgun or other weapon listed in T.C.A. § 39-17-1302 while in or upon or transversing, using or crossing any public park, greenbelt, playground, nature preserve, civic center or building or facility, area or property owned, used or operated by the city for park or recreational purposes, or nature preserve established, provided or controlled by the city, within or without the corporate limits thereof. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Duly authorized law enforcement officers within the course and scope of their official duties or to employees of Bays Mountain Park when so authorized by the director of Bays Mountain Park. 
(2)  Only to the extent a person strictly conforms the person's behavior to the requirements of one of the following: 
a.  A person authorized to carry a handgun pursuant to T.C.A. § 39-17-1351; 
b.  A person hunting during the lawful hunting season on lands owned by the city and designated as open to hunting by law or by the appropriate official; 
c.  A person possessing unloaded hunting weapons while transversing the grounds of any public recreational building or property for the purpose of gaining access to public or private lands open to hunting with the intent to hunt on the public or private lands unless the public recreational building or property is posted prohibiting entry; 
d.  A person possessing guns or knives when conducting or attending "gun and knife shows" when the program has been approved by the administrator of the recreational building or property; 
e.  A person entering the property for the sole purpose of delivering or picking up passengers and who does not remove any weapon from the vehicle or utilize it in any manner; or 
f.  A person who possesses or carries a firearm for the purpose of sport or target shooting and sport or target shooting is permitted in the park or recreational area. 
(3)  At any time the person's behavior no longer strictly conforms to one of the classifications in subsection (b)(2) of this section, the person shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-11; Code 1998, § 70-110; Ord. No. 6248, § III, 10-16-2012) 
Sec. 66-103. - Hunting of game or wildlife. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hunting. 
(1)  The term "hunting" means chasing, driving, flushing, attracting, pursuing, worrying, following after or on the trail of, searching for, trapping, shooting at, stalking or lying in wait for any wildlife, whether or not such wildlife is then or subsequently captured, killed, taken or wounded, and every act of assistance to any other person. 
(2)  The term "hunting" does not include stalking, attracting, searching for or lying in wait for wildlife by an unarmed person solely for the purpose of watching wildlife or taking photographs thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, kill, wound, destroy or ensnare or to attempt to hunt, kill, wound, destroy or ensnare any wildlife or to have in his possession any form of wildlife or parts thereof in or upon any public park, playground or nature preserve established, provided or controlled by the city, within or without the corporate limits thereof. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to an employee of Bays Mountain Park when so authorized by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 18-12; Code 1998, § 70-111) 
Sec. 66-104. - Wheeled vehicle use. 
(a)  Any person who rides upon or operates any bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, wagon, roller blades or similar devices having wheels, but not including wheelchairs, in any park or recreation area shall at all times yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or any person in a wheelchair. 
(b)  The operator of any wheeled device or equipment shall exercise at all times such reasonable prudence as the occasion and circumstances require. Striking, colliding with or causing injury to another person when failing to exercise such reasonable prudence shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1981, § 18-13; Code 1998, § 70-112) 
Sec. 66-105. - Horses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except in the performance of a duty required by law, to have a horse, pony, mule or donkey in or upon any park or recreation area except upon written authorization by the city manager. Such authorization may only be granted for a period not to exceed ten days when such use is in connection with a recreational activity sponsored by the city and that is open to the general public, such as but not limited to Fun Fest. 
(Code 1981, § 18-14; Code 1998, § 70-113) 
Sec. 66-106. - Commercial uses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any commercial activity in or upon any park or recreation area, except upon written authorization by the city manager. Such authorization may only be granted for a period not to exceed ten days when such use is in connection with a recreational activity sponsored by the city and that is open to the general public, such as but not limited to Fun Fest. 
(Code 1981, § 18-15; Code 1998, § 70-114) 
Sec. 66-107. - Advertising signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any poster, sign or banner or to place or erect any sign or device in or upon any park or recreation area, except upon written authorization by the city manager; provided, however, that such restrictions shall not apply to clothing or other articles of attire. Such authorization may only be granted for a period not to exceed ten days when such use is in connection with a recreational activity sponsored by the city, and that is open to the general public, such as but not limited to Fun Fest, and when such advertising, sign or device is directly related to products, services or activities available at that site during the time of such event. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to fenced, walled or enclosed stadiums or arenas where sports activities are usually held and there is a spectator admission charge, nor shall it apply to emblems, insignia, logos or similar devices placed upon uniforms or equipment worn by or used by sports participants. 
(Code 1981, § 18-16; Code 1998, § 70-115) 
Sec. 66-108. - Noise restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any radio, television, tape player, loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device in or upon any park or recreation area, except upon written authorization by the city manager, in violation of section 62-25. Such authorization may only be granted for a period not to exceed ten days when such use is in connection with a recreational activity sponsored by the city such as but not limited to Fun Fest or when such a public address system or sound amplifying device is used for activities at that site in conjunction with such event. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to fenced, walled or enclosed stadiums or arenas where sports activities are usually held and where there is a spectator admission charge. 
(Code 1981, § 18-17; Code 1998, § 70-116) 
Sec. 66-109. - Destruction of flowers and vegetation. 
    It shall be unlawful to pick, remove, damage or destroy any flower, wildflower, shrub, tree or other vegetation in any park or recreation area. This section shall not apply to city employees or volunteers under direction of city officials in the course of their authorized duties. 
(Code 1981, § 18-18; Code 1998, § 70-117) 
Sec. 66-110. - Feeding waterfowl and shorebirds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or allow to be fed any waterfowl or shorebirds in or upon any park or recreation area, except in areas designated for this purpose. The director of parks and recreation may designate suitable areas for the feeding of waterfowl and shorebirds. 
(Code 1981, § 18-19; Code 1998, § 70-118) 
Sec. 66-111. - Use of sanitary facilities. 
(a)  No person over the age of six years shall use restrooms located within a park or recreation area when the facility is designated for persons of the opposite sex. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a person who is assisting a member of the opposite sex when that person, for reasons of physical or mental incapacity, is unable to effect excretory functions without assistance, provided that the assistant takes reasonable steps to safeguard the privacy of any person of the opposite sex who is in or who might enter such premises. 
(Code 1981, § 18-20; Code 1998, § 70-119) 
Secs. 66-112-66-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BAYS MOUNTAIN PARK AND NATURE PRESERVE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-136-66-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARK COMMISSION 

Sec. 66-154. - Created. 
    There is created a Bays Mountain Park Commission. 
(Code 1981, § 18-40; Code 1998, § 70-171) 
Sec. 66-155. - Composition; appointment; filling vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The Bays Mountain Park Commission shall be composed of seven members, at least five of whom shall be residents of the city. In addition, the Director of Bays Mountain Park and the Bays Mountain Park Association President shall be ex officio members. 
(b)  The original membership of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board for terms of three years. All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualify. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs on the commission, the mayor shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. Such appointment shall be approved by the board. 
(d)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 18-41; Code 1998, § 70-172) 
Sec. 66-156. - Officers. 
    The members of the Bays Mountain Park Commission shall meet in regular session and organize themselves by electing from their number a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each person elected shall hold office for one year or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 1981, § 18-43; Code 1998, § 70-173) 
Sec. 66-157. - Meetings; quorum. 
    The Bays Mountain Park Commission shall meet in regular session at least quarterly, and the time and place shall be decided by vote of the members. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by any four members of the commission. Four members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1981, § 18-44; Code 1998, § 70-174) 
Sec. 66-158. - Functions generally. 
    The Bays Mountain Park Commission, subject to the administrative guidance of the city manager and control of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall be responsible for the operation of Bays Mountain Park within the limits of the Charter and this article and shall prescribe all rules and regulations for the conduct, control, government and operation of the park. 
(Code 1981, § 18-42; Code 1998, § 70-175) 
Sec. 66-159. - Fees and charges connected with operation of park. 
    The Bays Mountain Park Commission shall have the responsibility of determining and proposing to the board of mayor and aldermen for final approval all fees and charges connected with the operation of the park. 
(Code 1981, § 18-45; Code 1998, § 70-176) 
Sec. 66-160. - Gifts; fund. 
    Any monetary gift, bequest or contribution received by the Bays Mountain Park Commission for the use of Bays Mountain Park shall be deposited with the city treasurer and held in trust, to be kept separate from all other funds in a fund identified as the Bays Mountain Park Commission Fund, and such funds shall be disbursed only upon the recommendation of the Bays Mountain Park Commission with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 18-46; Code 1998, § 70-177) 
Secs. 66-161-66-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NATURE PRESERVE PARK 

Sec. 66-189. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nature preserve means an area of land and water being maintained as nearly as is reasonably possible in its natural condition. 
(Code 1981, § 18-58; Code 1998, § 70-206) 
Sec. 66-190. - Created. 
    Bays Mountain Park is created as a nature preserve. The park shall encompass an area located in Sullivan and Hawkins Counties, more particularly described by ordinance on file in the city recorder's office. 
(Code 1981, § 18-60; Code 1998, § 70-207) 
Sec. 66-191. - Uses and purposes. 
    In order to secure the benefits of an enduring educational resource, Bays Mountain Park shall be held in trust for the following uses and purposes: 
(1)  For scientific research in such fields as ecology, taxonomy, genetics, forestry, pharmacology, agriculture, soil science, geology, paleontology, conservation, environmental education and related fields. 
(2)  For the teaching of biology, natural history, ecology, conservation, environmental education and related subjects. 
(3)  As habitats for plants and animals. 
(4)  As a place of natural interest and beauty. 
(5)  As living illustration of our natural heritage wherein one may observe and experience natural biotic and environmental systems of the earth and their processes. 
(6)  To promote understanding and appreciation of the aesthetic, cultural scientific and spiritual values of such an area by the people of the city. 
(7)  For the preservation and protection of a natural preserve against unnecessary modification or encroachment as a result of occupation, development or other use which would destroy the natural or aesthetic conditions of the area. 
(8)  As an illustration of the cultural heritage of the region. 
(Code 1981, § 18-62; Code 1998, § 70-208) 
Sec. 66-192. - Protection. 
    Bays Mountain Park shall be held in trust for the purposes expressed in section 66-191 and managed and developed in a manner consistent with these purposes. The park shall not be taken for any other use except for other public use after a finding by the Bays Mountain Park Commission of the existence of a public necessity for such public use and with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 18-63; Code 1998, § 70-209) 
Chapters 67-69 - RESERVED 
Chapter 70 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Transitory vendors, T.C.A. § 62-30-101 et seq.; Pawnbrokers Act of 1988, T.C.A. §§ 45-6-201 et seq., 45-6-219, authority for municipal regulation, limitations, T.C.A. § 45-6-219; Junkyard Control Act of 1967, T.C.A. § 54-20-101 et seq.; scrap metal dealers, T.C.A. § 62-9-101 et seq.; business taxation of antique malls, flea markets, craft shows, antique shows, gun shows and auto shows, T.C.A. § 67-4-710; tax on rental of space to transient dealer or vendor, T.C.A. § 67-6-213. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Bond for soliciting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting or taking subscriptions or orders for future delivery of periodicals or goods to collect or receive payment in advance of the delivery for such periodicals or merchandise, unless he shall first make a cash or other approved bond in the sum of $100.00 and file the bond with the city recorder and shall obtain a certificate evidencing the approval of such bond. 
(Code 1981, § 111-134; Code 1998, § 74-1) 
Secs. 70-2-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET VENDORS 

Sec. 70-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire district No. 1 means that area so designated in section 22-1. 
    Food or food products means any type of edible substance or beverage. 
    Goods or merchandise means any items that are not a food product. 
    Stand means any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon or any other device or wheeled vehicle which may or may not be moved without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the department of motor vehicles, used for displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
    Vend or vending means to: 
(1)  Sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, solicit offers to purchase; 
(2)  Barter food, goods, merchandise, or services in any public area from a stand, pushcart, motor vehicle, or by a person with or without the use of any other device or other method of transportation; 
(3)  Require someone to pay a fee or to set, negotiate or establish a fee before providing goods or services; 
(4)  Request for donations in exchange for merchandise. 
    Vendor means any person who vends. This includes a vendor who is an employee or agent of another. 
(Code 1998, § 74-27; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a penalty of not less than $25.00 or more than $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 74-37; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-23. - Purpose. 
(a)  The primary purpose of the public streets and sidewalks is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Regulation of street and sidewalk vending is necessary to ensure safe pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic, and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Vending shall be restricted to fire district No. 1 and within this area shall be restricted to specific locations and specific items as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1998, § 74-26; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-24. - Vending generally allowed by permit only in fire district No. 1. 
    Within fire district No. 1 it shall be unlawful to vend or sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, goods or merchandise on any street or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit. Outside of fire district No. 1, except for the exemptions set out in section 70-28 it shall be unlawful to vend or sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, goods or merchandise on any street or sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 74-28; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-25. - Vendor permit and insurance required; application for permit. 
(a)  No person may vend under this article without first obtaining and having in their possession a vendor permit issued by the city manager or designee, and proof of insurance coverage satisfactory to city. 
(b)  The application for a vendor's permit shall include the following: 
(1)  The full name and home and business address of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the vending business along with proof of applicant's identity; 
(2)  A description of the type of food, beverage or goods or merchandise to be sold; 
(3)  The proposed location where the applicant plans to vend; 
(4)  A description and photograph of any stand or any other device to be used in the operation of the business; 
(5)  Three prints of a full-face photograph, taken not more than 30 days prior to the date of the application, of any person who will sell or offer for sale any food, beverage or merchandise on any street or sidewalk within the city; 
(6)  Proof of compliance with state requirements for licensing food vending carts and possession of the required health permits and certifications that he complies with all state and federal laws regarding product vending; 
(7)  Proof of an insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the vendor and the city from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days advance written notice to the city. The policy shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. A certificate of insurance must be included with the application. 
(c)  Not later than 30 days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's permit, the applicant shall be notified by the city manager or designee, of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. 
(d)  A permit issued pursuant to this section is valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
(Code 1998, § 74-29; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-26. - Denial, revocation, suspension of permit. 
    Any application may be denied and, following a hearing before the city manager, or designee, any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the business of vending; 
(3)  Conduct of the permitted business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals; 
(4)  The application does not contain the information required by this article; 
(5)  The applicant or vendor has not satisfied the requirement of this article; 
(6)  The issuance or continuance of the permit could endanger public safety; 
(7)  Conduct which is contrary to the provisions of this article; 
(8)  Abandonment of the location by failure to operate a vending operation during at least one-half of the normal business days available; or 
(9)  The failure to comply with other applicable laws. 
(Code 1998, § 74-30; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-27. - Appeal. 
    Any final decision of the city manager, or designee, may be appealed by an aggrieved party by common law petition for certiorari in the circuit or chancery court of the city, within 60 days after the final decision. 
(Code 1998, § 74-31; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-28. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any approved participant in any farmer's market. 
(2)  Any approved participant in any cultural arts and crafts show, including Fun Fest and Santa Train Christmas parade. 
(3)  Any approved participant in any special event authorized by the city. 
(4)  Any individual vending newspapers, leaflets, pamphlets, bumper stickers or buttons. 
(Code 1998, § 74-32; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-29. - Location restrictions. 
    No person may vend: 
(1)  Within ten feet from the outer edge of any entrance of any business, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Doors; 
b.  Vestibules; 
c.  Driveways; 
d.  Outdoor dining area entries; and emergency exits; 
as measured in each direction parallel to the building line, during the hours that any business on the premises is open to the public or to persons having or conducting lawful business within those premises. 
(2)  Within ten feet of any bus stop. 
(3)  Within ten feet of any street corner or marked pedestrian crosswalk. 
(4)  Within 35 feet of any other vendor. 
(5)  In any manner that blocks or obstructs the free movement of pedestrians. 
(Code 1998, § 74-33; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-30. - Prohibited acts. 
    No vendor shall: 
(1)  Leave any stand unattended; 
(2)  Store, park or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk, or park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place in conformance with city and state parking regulations; 
(3)  Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless he has available for public use a litter receptacle which is available for his patrons' use; 
(4)  Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by them; 
(5)  Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand from which the business is operated; 
(6)  Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his stand where such items have not been described in the application; 
(7)  Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles; 
(8)  Vend anything other than that which he is licensed to vend; 
(9)  Vend without the insurance coverage specified; 
(10)  Vend from a stand on the sidewalk so as to block the sidewalk, or so as to block the entranceway to any building, nor shall a permit be issued for such activity under any circumstances. Also, no vending shall be permitted to block any driveway, crosswalk or bus stop; 
(11)  Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the vending business to lean against or hang from any building or other structure lawfully placed on public property, without the owner's permission; or 
(12)  No vendor shall vend without securing and displaying written permission from the property owner and all business owners in the building, if any, adjoining the area of the vending. 
(Code 1998, § 74-34; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-31. - Cleanup responsibility. 
    A vendor shall keep his stand and vending area litter free. He must remove litter, caused by his products, off of any public or private property. A vendor with a pushcart shall have a trash container in or on the cart. 
(Code 1998, § 74-35; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 70-32. - Standards for stands. 
    A vendor's stand, or other device, shall be kept clean and in a safe condition when used on public property. 
(Code 1998, § 74-36; Ord. No. 5087, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Chapters 71-73 - RESERVED 
Chapter 74 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning generally, T.C.A. tit. 13. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

ARTICLE II. - REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regional planning commission, T.C.A. § 13-3-101 et seq. 

Sec. 74-19. - Created. 
    There is created a regional planning commission. 
(Code 1981, § 19-16; Code 1998, § 78-26) 
State Law reference- Power of city to create planning commission, T.C.A. § 13-4-101. 
Sec. 74-20. - Membership. 
(a)  The regional planning commission shall consist of nine members. One of the nine members shall be a member of the board of mayor and aldermen, but in no event shall the mayor serve as a member of the planning commission. The remaining eight members shall be residents of the planning region of the city. The eight members who are residents of the planning region shall be called appointive members. The term of office of the member selected from the board of mayor and aldermen shall run concurrently with that member's term as alderman on the board of mayor and aldermen. The appointive members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. All appointive members shall be appointed for terms of four years. 
(b)  The mayor may remove a member of the regional planning commission for cause specified in writing, served on the member, and after a hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen. The member against whom the charges are being brought shall be given not less than 15 days' written notice of the hearing. The removal of the member must be approved by a majority of the board of mayor and aldermen. Any vacancy in any appointive membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the appointment of a qualified person by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation as such. 
(Code 1981, § 19-17; Code 1998, § 78-27) 
State Law reference- Composition of planning commission, T.C.A. § 13-4-101. 
Sec. 74-21. - Election, term of chairperson. 
    The regional planning commission shall elect its chairperson from its appointive members. The term of office of the chairperson shall be for one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(Code 1981, § 19-18; Code 1998, § 78-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-4-102. 
Sec. 74-22. - Records of findings and determinations. 
    The regional planning commission shall record its findings and determinations, the record of which shall be public records. 
(Code 1981, § 19-19; Code 1998, § 78-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-4-102. 
Sec. 74-23. - Rules for procedure and business. 
    The regional planning commission shall adopt rules for its procedure and transaction of business. 
(Code 1981, § 19-20; Code 1998, § 78-30) 
Sec. 74-24. - Statutory powers, duties and responsibilities. 
    The regional planning commission shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in T.C.A. §§ 13-3-101-13-3-105, 13-3-201-13-3-203, 13-3-301-13-3-303, 13-3-401-13-3-411, 13-4-101-13-4-105, 13-4-301-13-4-309 and 13-7-201-13-7-210. The commission shall have, upon and after approval by the board of mayor and aldermen, the powers, duties and responsibilities as may be set forth in all acts relative to municipal and regional planning commissions. 
(Code 1981, § 19-21; Code 1998, § 78-31) 
Chapters 75-77 - RESERVED 
Chapter 78 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers Act of 1988, T.C.A. § 45-6-201 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of pawnbrokers, T.C.A. § 45-6-219; Junkyard Control Act of 1967, T.C.A. § 54-20-101 et seq.; power of municipality to regulate junkyards, T.C.A. § 54-20-113; scrap metal dealers, T.C.A. § 62-9-101 et seq.; flea market sales, T.C.A. § 47-25-1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARDS AND GRAVEYARDS 

Sec. 78-19. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which five or more inoperable motor vehicles of any type are stored, placed, dismantled, located or found. 
    Automobile junkyard means any lot or place within the city which is exposed to the weather and where five or more inoperable motor vehicles of any type are stored, placed or located for: 
(1)  The purpose of disassembly; 
(2)  The salvage of parts; 
(3)  Storage until crushed or recycled; or 
(4)  Any other purpose. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, at the time a summons is issued for violation of this article, that: 
(1)  Has major or essential mechanical or body parts missing; 
(2)  Is wrecked, junked or partially disassembled; 
(3)  Is burned throughout; 
(4)  Cannot be started and driven legally upon the public streets or highways; 
(5)  Does not have a current registration plate from the state displayed lawfully on the vehicle; 
(6)  Is economically impractical to restore to operating condition; 
(7)  Meets any two or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Has one or more tires not inflated; 
b.  Has more than one broken window; 
c.  Has any visibly rusted areas; or 
d.  Has not been moved within six months; or 
(8)  Is defined in any code adopted by reference, including the International Property Maintenance Code. 
    Motor vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  The terms "automobile graveyard" and "automobile junkyard" shall be construed to include an establishment having a current business license for that use and facilities for processing ferrous or nonferrous scrap metal and whose principal produce is scrap metal for sale; to any business holding a valid business license for that purpose and primarily devoted to the impoundment, storage, disassembly, salvage or demolition of motor vehicles. A motor vehicle dealer or vehicle repair operation holding a valid business license for that purpose and actively engaged in such business shall not be construed to constitute an automobile junkyard or automobile graveyard. 
(Code 1998, § 82-26; Ord. No. 4224, § II(16-80), (16-82), 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 78-20. - Location. 
    Automobile graveyards and automobile junkyards shall not be located in any zone of the city, except zones approved for industrial or manufacturing use. 
(Code 1998, § 82-27; Ord. No. 4224, § II(16-82), 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 78-21. - Storage of inoperable motor vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow to be maintained, on any lot or parcel, five or more inoperable motor vehicles or parts of automobiles, unless such lot or parcel is the site of a duly licensed business in an industrial or manufacturing zone. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a motor vehicle dealer or repair operation holding a valid business license for that purpose and actively engaged in such business. 
(c)  This section shall not replace or supersede the housing code, as adopted by reference in section 22-96, or any other part of this Code, but shall be supplemental thereto. 
(Code 1998, § 82-28; Ord. No. 4224, § II(16-81), 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 78-22. - Manner of storing vehicles. 
    Every business holding a valid license to keep, store, repair, disassemble or salvage motor vehicles shall store such motor vehicles in such manner that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed or that will constitute a breeding place or habitat for rats, mice or other vermin. 
(Code 1998, § 82-29; Ord. No. 4224, § II(16-83), 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 78-23. - Fencing. 
    Every business licensed as an automobile graveyard or an automobile junkyard shall be enclosed by a closefitting opaque fence or appropriate structure touching the ground at the bottom. The fence or structure shall be not less than six feet in height. A fence is not required when, due to the lay of land, the contents of the yard are not visible from any public highway or street. 
(Code 1998, § 82-30; Ord. No. 4224, § II(16-84), 6-4-1996) 
Chapters 79-81 - RESERVED 
Chapter 82 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Compliance with laws and ordinances required. 
    All signs erected, placed or maintained shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and all ordinances of the city, including but not limited to the building code, the electrical code, the gas code, the mechanical code, the plumbing code and chapter 114. 
(Code 1981, § 23-1; Code 1998, § 86-1) 
Sec. 82-2. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  In order to defray the cost and expense incurred by the city in making inspection of the signs and billboards in this chapter, there is imposed and levied an annual inspection fee as determined by the board of mayor and aldermen. The owner of the sign or billboard shall pay the fee into the office of the city treasurer. 
(b)  The fee shall be due and payable on all such signs on January 1. On all such signs erected, operated or maintained, the inspection fee shall be paid by the owner into the office of the city treasurer at the time of issuance of a permit therefor, and the fee shall again be due and payable on January 1 each year thereafter. 
(Code 1981, § 23-6; Code 1998, § 86-2) 
Sec. 82-3. - Distance from street or intersection. 
    No commercial ground sign or roof sign, signboard or billboard shall, for commercial advertising purposes, be placed, erected, constructed and maintained closer than 20 feet from the nearest street or street intersection. 
(Code 1981, § 23-2; Code 1998, § 86-3) 
Sec. 82-4. - Location in residential districts. 
    All commercial ground signs, roof signs, signboards and billboards erected in an undeveloped residential area zoned for residential purposes, which may be developed by the erection and construction of residence buildings near or in close proximity to such signs, rendering such signs dangerous or causing the sign to obstruct the view of or from the property, or which in any way interferes with the enjoyment of such property shall, upon written request of the city, within 90 days, be torn down and removed, after the passage of a resolution ordering its removal by the board of mayor and aldermen. A written notice of the request served either upon the owner of such sign, the lessee or the owner of the property upon which such sign is located shall be sufficient notice to the owner to make him liable for removal thereof under this section. 
(Code 1981, § 23-5; Code 1998, § 86-4) 
Secs. 82-5-82-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 82-27. - Compliance as prerequisite to issuance. 
    No permit shall be issued pursuant to this article unless the sign or structure for which it is issued is in compliance or will be in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and all ordinances of the city, including but not limited to the building code, the electrical code, the gas code, the mechanical code, the plumbing code and chapter 114. 
(Code 1981, § 23-18; Code 1998, § 86-31) 
Chapters 83-85 - RESERVED 
Chapter 86 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Tennessee Solid Waste Disposal Act, T.C.A. § 68-211-101 et seq.; county garbage and rubbish collection and disposal services, T.C.A. § 5-19-101 et seq.; municipal solid waste collections and disposal centers, T.C.A. § 68-211-851 et seq.; solid waste disposal fees, T.C.A. § 68-211-835; litter, T.C.A. § 39-14-502 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means residue resulting from the combustion of coal, coke or wood in domestic or commercial stoves, furnaces or boilers. 
    Automated residential container means a 38- or 95-gallon universal roll-out cart supplied by and owned by the city and all replacements and weighing not over 250 pounds. 
    Construction refuse means all refuse, rubbish, wood, metal, plaster, rocks, earth, stone, pieces of masonry or concrete, etc., resulting from construction, alteration, demolition or excavation operations. 
    Director means the director of public works of the city or designee. 
    Furniture and appliances includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  White goods (household appliances); 
(2)  Large furniture such as sofas, couches, dressers, bureaus, console televisions, mattresses, bed springs or other items of similar size or weight; or 
(3)  Carpeting of such volume that will not readily go in a compactor truck. 
    Hazardous solid waste includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lead acid storage batteries; 
(2)  Whole unshredded tires; 
(3)  Used oil as defined by T.C.A. § 68-211-1002(8); 
(4)  Radioactive waste; 
(5)  Infectious waste; and 
(6)  Any hazardous waste as defined by T.C.A. § 68-212-104. 
    Industrial waste means waste products of any manufacturing plant or process. 
    Nonautomated residential container means a water tight metal or plastic container with handles, having a tightfitting cover, weighing not over 75 pounds when full, and having a capacity not exceeding 32 gallons. 
    Nonresidential producer means all producers except residential and industrial producers. The term nonresidential producer includes, but is not limited to, any mobile home in a mobile home park as defined in section 62-1 and apartments. 
    Permittee means the holder of a valid solid waste collection permit or any employee or representative thereof. 
    Plastic bag means a bag made of plastic approximately two feet in diameter and four feet in length and of sufficient strength to contain the weight of the contents without breaking open. Plastic bags must be securely tied and shall contain only leaves and yard trimmings, except when used as liners for residential containers. 
    Producer means either the person responsible for the solid waste or the occupant of the place or building where such is produced or in which the person responsible for such has a place of business or residence. 
    Recyclable materials means materials that can be separated from other solid waste and recycled, including but not limited to newsprint, aluminum and other types of cans, glass bottles, used oil and plastic bottles of approved types. 
    Refuse container includes automated residential containers, nonautomated residential containers, special commercial containers, and standard commercial containers. 
    Residence means a room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same building and containing independent cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. 
    Residential producer means any structure containing two or fewer residential living units and occupied by not more than two individual families. The term residential producer does not include any mobile home in a mobile home park as defined in section 62-1. 
    Residential yard waste means vegetative matter such as branches, brush, grass, weeds or other cut foliage, resulting from gardening, general lawn maintenance and beautification of residential property, but excluding trees, large branches or stumps, and waste generated by land clearing operations, mining, agricultural and forestry operations. 
    Solid waste means all kitchen refuse, whether animal or vegetable; organic waste matter; decaying or discarded foodstuffs, both animal and vegetable; metal cans; refuse resulting from transportation, handling or preparation of food; crates; barrels; dead fowl or animals; all other decaying or decomposing substances including animal feces; cans, rags, glass, crockery and all other items which are commonly disposed of in waste receptacles; combustible trash, including but not limited to paper, cartons, boxes, magazines and excelsior; and noncombustible trash, including but not limited to metal, articles of clothing and other vegetable or mineral and similar waste products suitable for deposit in a refuse container as specified in this chapter. Any trash, garbage, refuse, yard waste, including recyclable materials when they become discarded, or sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and any other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1342 et seq.), as amended, or source, special nuclear or byproduct materials as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 USC 2011 et seq.). 
    Solid waste service means the complete removal, transportation and disposal of solid waste from any residence, business or other establishment. 
    Special commercial container means a roll-off or compactor-type container constructed for solid waste which must be transported to a sanitary landfill for service. 
    Standard commercial container means a dumpster-type container having a capacity of two or more cubic yards which is serviced at the location of use and which is constructed so that it can be handled by the equipment used for collection, as well as being watertight, having a tightfitting cover or closure, and that is verminproof. 
    Subscriber means any person, business or industry that elects to contract with a permitted solid waste collection firm for collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste. 
(Code 1998, § 90-1; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-1), 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 5434, § I, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 6231, §§ II, III, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 86-2. - Prohibited practices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an owner or occupant, to: 
(1)  Place or deposit any item or material in any privately owned, operated or placed refuse container or otherwise on the property of any other person without permission. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. 
(2)  Uncover, turn over, move, remove, carry away, deface, mutilate, destroy, damage or interfere with any refuse container or rifle, pilfer, dig into or in any other manner disturb, upset, scatter or tamper with its contents. 
(3)  Appropriate, seize, extract or remove any solid waste from any residential, commercial or industrial container located upon private property or public right-of-way without the express consent of the owner or lessee of the container. 
(Code 1998, § 90-3; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-7), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-3. - Depositing in public places. 
    It shall be a violation for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place including, but not limited to, drive-in eating establishments, mall parking areas or any other business premises, other than in public or private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1998, § 90-8; Ord. No. 4620, § I, 12-15-1998) 
Sec. 86-4. - Placement in receptacles to prevent scattering. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for any person to place litter in refuse containers in such a manner as to allow such material to fall to the ground, or over-flow the container, allowing the litter to be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, other public place, or upon private property. Refuse containers shall be made secure from overturning and scattering of the contents by dogs or other animals. Any waste placed outside the refuse container will not be collected by the city. 
(b)  The owner, lessor or user of refuse containers shall be responsible for maintaining any such receptacle in conformance with this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "litter" means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from transporting, handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material. 
(Code 1998, § 90-9; Ord. No. 4620, § I, 12-15-1998; Ord. No. 5434, § II, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 86-5. - Demolition landfill fees; additional fee for tire disposal. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may, by resolution, establish fees for use of the demolition landfill from time to time. A separate fee for the disposal of tires shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1998, § 90-2; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-2), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-6. - Fees. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may from time to time establish by resolution all garbage, trash services, landfill fees and any permit fees applicable to any activity under the provisions of this chapter of the Code. 
(Ord.No. 6589, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 86-7-86-28. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-29. - By city. 
(a)  Solid waste to be collected by the city shall be placed by the producer in automated residential containers, which shall be covered at all times except when being emptied or filled. Such containers shall be furnished and kept in good repair by the producer. The producer shall have a sufficient number of automated residential containers to hold one week's accumulation of solid waste, but not to exceed four automated residential containers per residence or business. 
(b)  Collection shall be made once each week from the curbside or alley or at such other place as the director may designate, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)  The producer shall place automated residential containers and recycling containers adjacent to the alley or curbside facing the street properly and in the location designated by the director or designee no sooner than 24 hours before scheduled pickup. The producer shall remove all automated residential containers and recycling containers from the alley or curbside within 24 hours after the day of collection. Service will not be provided if the automated residential containers are not placed at the proper location at the time of collection. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, all solid waste, whether household waste, yard waste or other types of waste, shall only be placed for collection at or near a public street or alley that is improved by means of asphalt or concrete paving or by spreading of gravel of sufficient width and depth to provide support for the type of vehicle utilized to make such collections. The sufficiency of such street or alley improvements shall be determined by the director, giving consideration to the weight of the service vehicle, the area needed to maneuver and turn such vehicle and any other matter that would affect safety or efficiency of waste collection operations. 
(e)  The city may provide residential producers with weekly back yard pickup of solid waste, excluding yard waste. Residential producers receiving this service shall comply with any additional regulations issued by the director and shall pay a fee as set by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(f)  Solid waste not placed as provided in this section shall be removed from the premises by the producer at his expense. Noncomplying containers will not be emptied by the city. 
(g)  The city shall not be responsible for damages to containers of insufficient strength or that crack from exposure to freezing temperatures or for damage not caused directly by the city. This subsection shall not constitute a waiver of any immunity for any cause. 
(h)  All solid waste covered by this section shall be placed adjacent to the alley or curbside in such a way as not to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or at such location as the director may designate. Waste not placed in accordance with this section shall be removed from the premises by the producer at his expense. 
(Code 1998, § 90-38; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-12), 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 5318, § I, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 5434, § IV, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 86-30. - Storage of solid waste and authorized containers. 
(a)  All solid waste to be collected by the city shall be placed in automated residential containers supplied by and owned by the city or replacements, except as set out in sections 86-34 through 86-41. One automated residential container will be assigned and delivered to each resident. If a producer wishes to purchase additional residential containers it can be done through the city and will be collected on the normal collection day for that resident. The cost of any additional automated residential container will be determined by the public works director. Automated residential containers, including replacements, assigned to individual residents remain the property of the city. Automated residential containers and all replacements removed from such residents will be considered stolen and appropriately processed through the applicable courts of law. 
(b)  All solid waste and solid waste refuse containers on property used as residential must be stored behind the front building line of the dwelling and shall not be stored in the front yard, as defined in section 114-1, or on front porches where they are clearly visible from any street. 
(c)  No owner or occupant of a property used as residential shall permit or allow solid waste or refuse containers to be stored in violation of this section. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to prevent the property from being utilized in such a manner. Both the owner and occupant of a property used as residential may be found in violation of this section for the failure of the occupant to store solid waste or refuse containers in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1998, § 90-36; Ord. No. 5392, § I, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 5434, § III, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 86-31. - Standard commercial containers. 
    All producers of solid waste using standard commercial containers or special commercial containers shall make arrangements with any permitted collector of solid waste on such terms and conditions as the parties may find mutually agreeable. 
(Code 1998, § 90-42; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-16), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-32. - Nonresidential producers. 
    All nonresidential solid waste producers not utilizing the types of containers set out in section 86-31 shall: 
(1)  Make arrangements with any permitted collector of solid waste on such terms and conditions as the parties may find mutually agreeable; or 
(2)  Pay a monthly fee, as established by the board of mayor and aldermen, for curbside collection of solid waste by the city, using automated residential containers. 
(Code 1998, § 90-43; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-17), 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 5434, § V, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 86-33. - Solid waste brought into city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any solid waste into the city that was generated by any person outside the city and place or deposit such waste for collection by municipal forces. This section shall not be construed to include solid waste that may be generated while traveling outside the city in a private passenger vehicle and carried to a residence and placed for collection. 
(Code 1998, § 90-7; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-8), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-34. - Recyclable waste. 
    Every resident is encouraged to separate recyclable material (newspapers, glass bottles, alumi- num and steel cans, used oil and plastic bottles of approved types) from all other solid waste and place such recyclable materials in approved containers supplied by the city. Recyclable materials shall not be placed in plastic bags. 
(Code 1998, § 90-37; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-11), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-35. - Residential yard waste. 
(a)  Residential yard waste shall be separated from other solid waste. Residential yard waste of suitable size may be placed in containers, as required for other solid waste, or placed in plastic bags or containers without lids or stacked adjacent to the alley or curbside in such a way as not to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or at such location as the director may designate. 
(b)  Residential yard waste will be removed from each residence once every other week by the city. 
(c)  Residential yard waste not placed in accordance with this section shall be removed from the premises by the producer at his expense. 
(Code 1998, § 90-39; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-13), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-36. - Brush, stumps, trees, limbs and leaves. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, tree stumps, trunks, limbs and roots resulting from normal maintenance and care or for the purpose of beautification of residential property by the resident will be removed by the city, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  None of the work of cutting, trimming or removal of the material was performed by a business or contractor; 
(2)  All stumps, trunks, limbs and roots are cut into lengths not longer than six feet; 
(3)  Each piece shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight; and 
(4)  All material is placed on the resident's property adjacent to the alley or curbside, provided that no such material shall block or obstruct a street, alley or sidewalk. 
(b)  Tree stumps, trunks, limbs, roots or other debris resulting from the removal of trees or other vegetation (i.e., landscaping or grading by a contractor, clearing or grubbing prior to construction of residential, commercial or other structures) shall be removed by and at the expense of the contractor, developer or owner to an area designated by the director. It shall be unlawful to place and leave any such material on any sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(c)  The city shall not collect or remove a volume of tree stumps, roots, trees, large limbs or other types of vegetation exceeding two truck loads (approximately 40 cubic yards) in any two-week period. 
(d)  Leaves that are raked into piles or windrows at the curbside will be removed by the city between October 15 and January 15. Prior to and after these dates, leaves will be removed by the city only if placed at curbside in plastic bags or other suitable containers. 
(Code 1998, § 90-40; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-14), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-37. - Furniture, appliances and other household items. 
(a)  Furniture and appliances will be collected and removed from residences by the city on an on-call basis. The producer shall call the public works department to request that such items be picked up. However, the city shall not accept any refrigerator or freezer unless the door has been removed from such appliance. Furniture and appliances shall be placed on the producer's property adjacent to an alley or at the curbside. This section applies only to residences. Nonresidential producers shall be responsible for disposing of such items at their own expense. 
(b)  The board of mayor and aldermen shall establish a fee for the collection of the various items authorized by this section. All applicable fees shall be billed monthly by the city, and the account shall be due and payable within 30 days thereafter. 
(c)  All solid waste covered by this section shall be placed adjacent to the alley or curbside in such a way as not to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or at such location as the director may designate. Waste not placed in accordance with this section shall be removed from the premises by the producer at his expense. 
(Code 1998, § 90-41; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-15), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-38. - Hazardous materials. 
    The city may refuse to collect or transport solid waste containing any hazardous material or substance or any other material or substance that is declared to be prohibited from deposit in a solid waste landfill by any federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(Code 1998, § 90-44; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-6), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-40. - Industrial waste. 
    The removal and disposal of industrial waste shall be the responsibility of the producer. 
(Code 1998, § 90-5; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-4), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-41. - Construction waste. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the contractor or owner to provide receptacles for loose debris, construction refuse, paper, building materials, scrap wood, metal or masonry and any other trash produced at the site. The site shall be kept litter-free, and waste shall be promptly removed by the producer at his expense and taken for disposal to an area designated by the director. 
(b)  The city may collect and remove waste material, as set out in subsection (a) of this section, on an on-call basis upon payment of a fee as may be established from time to time by the board of mayor and aldermen. Any such collection or removal shall be at the sole discretion of the director based upon: 
(1)  Disposition requirements of the waste material; 
(2)  The volume, weight, composition and location of the waste material; and 
(3)  Safety considerations for the employees involved in such collection and disposition. 
(Code 1998, § 90-6; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-5), 3-7-1995) 
Secs. 86-42-86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACT COLLECTORS AND HAULERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-71. - Enforcement. 
    The administration and enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the director. The permittee shall furnish the director with reasonable opportunity to ascertain whether or not service is performed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1998, § 90-71; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-32), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-72. - Permitted activities. 
    A holder of a solid waste collection permit issued pursuant to this article may offer to make available to any nonresidential subscriber within the city a complete solid waste collection and transportation service at rates which shall be competitive with others rendering similar service. The permittee shall not be the exclusive provider of solid waste collection and transportation services in the city, and the city may license others to render such services or carry out such services at its discretion. The permittee shall be authorized to make agreements with and perform additional services for subscribers within the city, such as washing and cleaning containers, repairing containers or renting containers. 
(Code 1998, § 90-73; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-30), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-73. - Rules of operation. 
(a)  A person issued a permit pursuant to division 2 of this article shall provide all labor, equipment, tools, maintenance and all other expenses relative to the operation of the solid waste collection and transportation service. 
(b)  All solid waste, upon being removed from the premises where produced or accumulated, shall become the property of the permittee until disposed of in a lawful manner. 
(c)  All solid waste collected by the permittee shall be disposed of by the permittee. Nonrecyclable solid waste shall be disposed of at an approved solid waste disposal facility which meets all applicable state requirements. Any recyclable materials collected by the permittee shall be transported to a processing center or market at the permittee's sole expense. 
(d)  Solid waste containers shall not be placed in or upon public rights-of-way without the express written consent of the director. 
(e)  Collection and removal of solid waste shall be made without disrupting or halting vehicular traffic. 
(f)  The permittee shall not pick or sort solid waste while in the process of collection. If any spillage occurs during the transfer, the permittee shall clean the area immediately. The permittee shall replace all containers to their proper place prior to departing from the site. 
(g)  Before moving loaded special containers, the permittee shall tightly close and latch lids and doors to eliminate spillage. The loaded units shall be completely emptied of all refuse and returned to the location from which they were removed. 
(h)  All solid waste containers shall be furnished by the producer; however, this shall not prohibit the permittee from reaching a mutually satisfactory agreement with the producer to provide containers of any type. 
(i)  The permittee shall designate in writing the person to serve as agent of the permittee and liaison between the permittee and the city. 
(j)  The permittee shall notify subscribers if for any reason the permittee will not be able to remove and dispose of solid waste on the scheduled collection day. The permittee shall give as much advance notice as possible and shall specify the reason for the nonperformance. The permittee shall confirm the nonperformance and the reason for it in writing within 24 hours after the nonperformance. 
(k)  The permittee shall have established a city business address and shall maintain local or toll free telephone facilities for the receipt of subscribers' complaints Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The permittee shall handle complaints in a courteous manner, and material missed in the regular collection shall be picked up within 24 hours after the complaint is received or after the material is missed. Any complaints made to the city by subscribers shall be forwarded to the permittee. 
(l)  The permittee shall furnish quarterly reports to the director on the collection services performed by the permittee under a permit, showing the total number of cubic yards and tons of waste hauled the preceding three months. 
(m)  A record of all complaints by subscribers shall be maintained by the permittee for a period of two years from the date of the complaint, and such records shall be made available to the director for his inspection upon request during normal business hours. 
(Code 1998, § 90-74; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-31), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-74. - Equipment. 
(a)  All trucks and other mobile equipment used by a person issued a permit under division 2 of this article in the performance of services shall be equipped with all safety equipment required by federal or state laws or regulations and shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The name of the permittee shall be prominently displayed. The permittee shall not use a firm name containing the term "city" or other words implying municipal ownership. 
(b)  Every truck and every other piece of equipment for collecting or hauling solid waste shall have a tightly closed body to keep to a minimum the nuisance of odors and shall be watertight to prevent spillage of wet residue from the truck or other equipment onto the streets, roads or grounds. Only truck bodies specifically constructed by a recognized manufacturer of this type of specialized equipment for handling solid waste is acceptable. Sufficient collection equipment shall be maintained and used by the permittee to provide adequate service to all subscribers of the permittee. 
(c)  The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining equipment in a manner so as to ensure satisfactory performance to all his subscribers. Failure to do so will be sufficient cause for termination of this permit. 
(d)  The permittee shall provide and maintain radio or mobile telephone communication with all vehicles used in the collection and transportation of solid waste. 
(Code 1998, § 90-75; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-26), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-75. - Employees of permittee. 
(a)  Under this article, the permittee's employees shall wear clean, appropriate clothing. Use of loud, abusive, indecent or profane language by employees; traffic violations; failure to clean up spillage; or willful damage to containers by employees may be sufficient cause for termination of a permit. 
(b)  Each of the permittee's employees shall, at all times, have and shall carry a valid state operator's license for the type of vehicle he is operating. 
(Code 1998, § 90-76; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-28), 3-7-1995) 
Secs. 86-76-86-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 86-94. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul or remove solid waste from any place of business or profession or from any residential establishment within the city without a valid solid waste collection permit issued by the city. 
(b)  A permit issued pursuant to this division shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to issue any number of solid waste collection permits to any person, upon meeting the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial facilities that remove and dispose of waste generated by such industry are excluded from this section. 
(d)  The city retains and reserves the right to collect, haul, remove or dispose of solid waste or recyclable material from any place of business or profession or from any residential establishment within the city at any time, without complying with the permit requirements established in this article. 
(e)  The city reserves the exclusive right to provide solid waste collection and transportation to all residential producers. 
(Code 1998, § 90-101; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-20), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-95. - Application; investigation. 
(a)  Every applicant for a solid waste collection permit shall submit the following: 
(1)  The full name, business address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  An affidavit of noncollusion in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(3)  Evidence of the applicant's ability to perform the service, which shall be comprised of the following: proof that the applicant owns, leases or controls vehicles of the type required in this article. If the applicant is not the actual owner or lessee of the equipment, the certificate shall state the source from which the equipment will be obtained and shall be accompanied by a certificate from the owner or person in control of the equipment definitely granting to the applicant the control of the equipment during the term of the permit. 
(4)  Satisfactory evidence that the applicant has available a disposal site meeting the laws of the state and other regulatory authorities. 
(5)  Such other information deemed relevant by the director. 
(b)  The director shall make such investigation as he deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform the service, and the director reserves the right to reject any application if the investigation fails to satisfy him that the applicant is properly qualified to carry out the obligations of the permit. 
(Code 1998, § 90-102; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-22), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-96. - Fee. 
    An annual fee, as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall be paid to the city for each solid waste collection permit. 
(Code 1998, § 90-103; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-24), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-97. - Insurance. 
    A person issued a permit pursuant to division 2 of this article shall maintain workers' compensation general liability, automobile public liability and property damage insurance as provided by law with a company authorized to do business in the state. The director may demand proof that coverage is in effect at any time during the term of a solid waste collection permit. All insurance premiums shall be paid by the permittee. 
(Code 1998, § 90-72; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-27), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-98. - Duration. 
    Solid waste collection permits shall be issued by the director for a period of one year. 
(Code 1998, § 90-104; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-23), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-99. - Limitations. 
(a)  A permit for collection and transportation of solid waste shall not constitute a franchise, nor shall it be deemed or construed as such. 
(b)  The permittee shall, at his own expense, comply with all applicable federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations, including but not limited to those governing the inspection and licensing of equipment used in the performance of services authorized by the permit. 
(c)  The issuance of a solid waste collection permit shall not be construed in any way to restrict or limit the legislative discretion of the city to amend or repeal any applicable sections of this Code or to amend or repeal any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to it or to enact a rate regulation ordinance. 
(d)  The permittee shall not sell, assign, sublet or transfer a permit or any interest thereof, nor shall he subpermit any portion of the service to be performed under a permit. Any attempt to sell, transfer, assign or subpermit shall be void and is sufficient cause to terminate the permit. 
(e)  After adjudication of bankruptcy either by voluntary or involuntary proceedings, the permit shall immediately terminate, and in no event shall the permit be treated as an asset of the permittee. 
(f)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall not be construed as a property right, but shall be deemed a privilege. 
(Code 1998, § 90-105; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-25), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-100. - Renewal. 
(a)  Not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of a permit issued pursuant to this division, a permittee desiring to renew the permit shall make written application to the director. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such request, the director shall cause to be published in the largest newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of the request for renewal. 
(c)  The director shall, for a period of 30 days, receive comments or complaints from any citizen, subscriber or solid waste producer in the city regarding service provided by the applicant. 
(d)  The director shall review all comments and complaints received and the record of service provided by the permittee during the preceding year, giving consideration to the following: 
(1)  The number of substantiated complaints received by the city; 
(2)  How satisfactorily such complaints were resolved; 
(3)  The general performance of the permittee; 
(4)  Whether the permittee is incurring outstanding debts for wages or other obligations to the extent that performance of service is hindered; 
(5)  Violation of city ordinances or state or federal law; 
(6)  Assignment, transferring or subpermitting any interest under a permit; 
(7)  Failure to maintain insurance as prescribed in this article; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be deemed appropriate by the director. 
(e)  If the director finds the permittee's performance unsatisfactory, the permit shall not be renewed. The director shall provide a written report to the board of mayor and aldermen of his findings and shall send a notice of his determination to the permittee by certified mail. Such notice to the permittee shall include a requirement that he cease all operations within the city within 90 days. 
(Code 1998, § 90-106; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-29), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-101. - Revocation. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the director that any person issued a permit pursuant to this division has failed and continues to fail to substantially comply with all applicable terms of this article, he shall notify the permittee by certified mail that a show cause hearing will be held by the director within 20 days after receipt of the notice. 
(b)  The permittee shall have the opportunity at such hearing to show cause why his solid waste permit should not be revoked, may offer evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  Revocation of a solid waste collection permit may be reviewed pursuant to T.C.A. § 27-9-101 et seq. 
(Code 1998, § 90-107; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-33), 3-7-1995) 
Sec. 86-102. - Termination. 
    The city may, at its sole and unfettered discretion, terminate all permitted solid waste collections for any reason, upon the giving of 90 days' advance written notice to all holders of valid permits. 
(Code 1998, § 90-108; Ord. No. 4012, § II(9-21), 3-7-1995) 
Chapters 87-89 - RESERVED 
Chapter 90 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Streets and other public improvements generally, T.C.A. § 7-31-101 et seq.; authority to construct, improve streets, sidewalks, public ways, assess costs therefor, T.C.A. § 7-32-101 et seq.; authorization for sidewalk construction, T.C.A. § 7-31-105; duty of city to install ramps for disabled persons, T.C.A. § 7-31-114; prohibited sidewalk uses, T.C.A. § 7-31-1206; obstruction of roads and highways, T.C.A. § 39-17-307; tampering with construction signs and barricades prohibited, T.C.A. § 39-17-108; parades of state national guard have right-of-way in streets, T.C.A. § 58-1-601. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Coal holes, cellar doors or other holes. 
(a)  No cellar way, coal hole or other hole of like nature opening in or upon a public street or sidewalk shall be allowed to be or remain in a dangerous condition unless guarded by bars or otherwise. All coal holes or other means of access to buildings shall be provided with substantial locks. 
(b)  No person shall leave any coal hole or aperture opened or unfastened except while in use with workmen present or unless guarded by bars or otherwise. 
(c)  Every cellar door opening upon public pavement shall be of iron grating and so constructed that when shut it shall be on a level with the pavement and have its grating running at right angles to the line of the street. No cellar door shall be permitted to extend more than five feet from the wall of the building served by or be so constructed as to open downward. 
(d)  Whenever the owner or occupant of any premises upon which there is a cellar, hole, area or vault opening on the street or sidewalk is notified by the city authorities that the covering of such is insecure and dangerous, it shall be his duty to repair it at once. If he fails to do so after five days' notice, it shall be the duty of the city manager to have the covering repaired or placed in safe condition and collect the cost thereof from the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 24-7; Code 1998, § 94-6) 
Sec. 90-2. - Obstructing flow of water. 
    No person occupying the streets with his work or any appurtenances shall obstruct or impede the flow of water in any street, gutter, alley or drain. 
(Code 1981, § 24-8; Code 1998, § 94-7) 
Sec. 90-3. - Banners and placards. 
    No person shall place in, along or across any public street or other public property any banner or placard and there display the banner unless and until he shall have obtained a permit from the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 24-11; Code 1998, § 94-8) 
Sec. 90-4. - Gates or doors on property line. 
    Every gate or door built or constructed in any fence or wall standing upon the property line, except doors to public buildings which are required to be hung to open outward, shall be hung to open inward. This section shall not apply to screen doors closed by a spring. 
(Code 1981, § 24-13; Code 1998, § 94-10) 
Secs. 90-5-90-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 

Sec. 90-27. - Naming responsibility of department of transportation. 
    The department of transportation shall place the names of the streets at all street intersections. 
(Code 1981, § 24-14; Code 1998, § 94-11) 
Sec. 90-28. - Acceptance required; exceptions; standards; monuments. 
(a)  Improvements. The city shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay or authorize water mains or sewers or connections to be laid in any street within the city, unless such street shall have been accepted or opened as or shall otherwise have received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of such plan or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or with a street plat made and adopted by the planning commission. However, the board of mayor and aldermen may locate and construct or may accept any other street, provided the ordinance or other measure for such location and construction or for such acceptance is first submitted to the planning commission for its approval and, if disapproved by the commission, is passed by a majority of the entire membership of the board of mayor and aldermen. A street, approved by the planning commission upon such submission or constructed or accepted by the majority vote after disapproval by the commission, shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a plat made and adopted by the planning commission. The right-of-way width of any major street so approved shall conform to the width designated on the officially adopted major street plan. The minimum right-of-way width for any minor street so approved shall be 50 feet; provided, however, that the planning commission shall have the authority to approve a right-of-way width of less than 50 feet if, because of topography or other special conditions, an undue hardship would be created by providing a greater width and if, after thorough study, the commission determines that the narrower width will not unduly restrict the flow of traffic or hinder the extension of services to the adjacent property. 
(b)  Standards. If any person shall lay out a new addition to the city or a new street, the addition or street shall be surveyed and opened in such manner as to conform to adjacent streets surveyed. 
(c)  Monuments. Before any addition or street is accepted by the city, the lines of such addition or street shall be clearly defined by substantial monuments constructed according to the following specifications: 
(1)  The top of each and every monument shall be set not more than six inches below the established grade of the curb, such monument to be set in the center of the street and at each angle or change of direction. 
(2)  The monument shall be of stone or concrete, two feet in depth and four inches square on top, the bottom to be larger than the top. 
(3)  The point on top shall be marked by a neat hole, one-fourth inch in diameter and one-half inch deep, or by a copper plug one-eighth inch by one inch, set in. 
(Code 1981, §§ 24-15, 24-16; Code 1998, § 94-12) 
Sec. 90-29. - Removing or damaging monuments, grades or line pegs. 
    No person shall remove, deface or destroy any monuments located as provided in this chapter or any grade or line pegs. 
(Code 1981, § 24-17; Code 1998, § 94-13) 
Secs. 90-30-90-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS AND FOOTWAYS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to construct, improve streets, sidewalks, public ways, assess costs therefor, T.C.A. § 7-32-101 et seq.; authorization for sidewalk construction, T.C.A. § 7-31-105; duty of city to install ramps for disabled persons, T.C.A. § 7-31-114; prohibited sidewalk uses, T.C.A. § 7-31-1206. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-47. - Sweeping sidewalks in front of business establishments. 
    Each person conducting business in a first-floor location having a paved sidewalk in front of his building shall have the sidewalk swept before opening his place of business each morning, except Sunday, and shall have the sidewalk swept at the time of closing his place of business each Saturday night. 
(Code 1981, § 24-1; Code 1998, § 94-1) 
Sec. 90-48. - Heavy substances on sidewalks, curb, gutter. 
    No hard substance of a greater weight than 400 pounds shall be handled upon a sidewalk, curb or gutter. 
(Code 1981, § 24-2; Code 1998, § 94-2) 
Sec. 90-49. - Removal of snow, ice, sleet, mud from sidewalks, footways. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of every house or lot which has a sidewalk or footway of brick, stone, concrete or other permanent material adjoining or touching upon the sidewalk or footway in the front, rear or either side to have all snow removed from such sidewalk or foot pavement within six hours after the snow shall have ceased falling, unless such snow shall have fallen during the night, in which case it shall be removed by 10:00 a.m. the next morning. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice, sleet or mud on the sidewalks or footways, except that when it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk it shall be covered within a like period of time with sawdust, ashes or other material which would render it safe for travel. When there is no tenement on such lot or any occupant of any tenement thereon, it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or tenement to have the snow removed or the ice, sleet or mud removed or covered as required in this section for occupants. 
(Code 1981, § 24-3; Code 1998, § 94-3) 
Sec. 90-50. - Roller skates on sidewalk. 
    No person shall ride on or use roller skates, roller blades, in-line roller skates or similar devices on any sidewalk within fire district No. 1 or upon the sidewalk abutting any four-lane street or highway. 
(Code 1981, § 24-5; Code 1998, § 94-4; Ord. No. 4223, § I, 6-4-1996) 
Secs. 90-51-90-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIDEWALK DINING FACILITIES 
Sec. 90-74. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Downtown business area includes the property inside the area bounded on the south by Main Street, the west by Clinchfield Street, the north by Sullivan Street and the east by the intersection of Sullivan and Main Streets. 
    Sidewalk cafe dining facility means the placing, locating or permitting of the placing or locating of chairs and tables on the public right-of-way or property, such as sidewalks, adjacent to a street level business licensed to operate as an eating establishment where food and/or other refreshments are served. Sidewalk vendors shall not be permitted to establish a sidewalk cafe dining facility. A sidewalk cafe dining facility may provide waiter or waitress services or may be self-service. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(b)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-75. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who maintains or operates any sidewalk cafe dining facility within any public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city shall be deemed guilty of a offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined $50.00 per day, and each day that such violation continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(c)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-76. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the downtown business area for the general benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no rights of individuals or individual businesses are created in this section. No property right is created by this section. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(a)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-77. - Authorized in downtown business area. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafe dining facilities are authorized to be located within the public right-of-way in that area of downtown known as the downtown business area as hereinafter described, subject to the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  The permit holder shall set up the sidewalk cafe dining facility, including, but not limited to, the furniture, canopies, fencing or other accessories used for the sidewalk cafe dining facility, only in the area designated by the city on the permit, specifically excluding roadways. The sidewalk cafe dining facility shall not impede, endanger or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(a), (e)(17)), 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 90-78-90-97. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permits 

Sec. 90-98. - Required. 
(a)  Operation of a sidewalk cafe dining facility shall require a permit from the department of public works. Such permits shall be available only for locations in the downtown business area. 
(b)  Any person desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe dining facility shall file an application for a permit as required by the department of public works, pay to the city a nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen to cover the cost of processing such application. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(d), (e)(1)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-99. - Term and renewal. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be for a period of one year, renewable annually, and must be posted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(2)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-100. - Property owner approval required; responsibility for damage to public right-of-way. 
    If an applicant is not the owner of the property abutting the affected right-of-way, such application must have written approval by the owner of said property. Both the applicant and the owner of the abutting property, if different from the applicant, are responsible for any damage to the public right-of-way arising out of operation of a sidewalk cafe dining facility, and must immediately restore the right-of-way upon request to the specifications of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(2)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-101. - Nonrefundable application fee. 
    Each application must be accompanied by the application fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, which shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(3)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-102. - Time for application for renewal; nonrefundable renewal fee. 
    If a renewal is desired, application for renewal must be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit, and each renewal application must be accompanied by a fee established by the board of mayor and aldermen, which shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(3)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-103. - Plan and area description required. 
(a)  Each application must be accompanied by a plan showing all proposed activities to be conducted upon the public right-of-way and all items proposed to be placed upon said right-of-way. Additionally, a description of the area proposed to be encumbered must accompany each application. 
(b)  The plan presented at the time application is sought must include every activity proposed to be conducted upon the public right-of-way. For example, if food service is planned for the sidewalk area, the application must so state. If any entertainment or music is contemplated, the application must disclose this in detail. Anything not specifically included in an application shall be considered to be excluded. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(4), (6)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-104. - Indemnification of city. 
    The applicant shall hold harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability resulting from personal injury or property damage resulting in any way from the operation of sidewalk cafe facilities, including court costs and attorneys' fees. Proof of insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and in a form acceptable to the city from a company licensed to do business in this state must be furnished with the application. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(11)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-105. - Cancellation or suspension of permit. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be immediately canceled or suspended by the director of public works for any reason and at any time. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(20)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-106. - Permit not transferable. 
    The permit issued shall be personal to the permit holder only and shall not be transferable in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(20)), 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 90-107-90-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Rules and Regulations 

Sec. 90-126. - Fencing or other barrier required. 
    Each valid sidewalk cafe dining facility must be fenced or surrounded on all sides except for designated entrances and exits. The fencing or surrounding barrier must not be permanent or attached to the sidewalk but must consist of a barrier not less than 40 inches high and must be constructed of a substantial material without gaps or spaces that would allow ingress and egress of the premises except through designated entrances and exits. Examples of substantial materials would include but not be limited to securely connected planters, decorative fencing or other decorative architectural or landscaping materials. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(18)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-127. - Minimum sidewalk width, exception; obstruction of access to parked vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  A minimum of six feet in width of sidewalk or the minimum required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, whichever is wider, must be left clear at all times for pedestrian traffic (measured from the edge of the encroachment to the curb or to any other obstruction, such as planters, trees, signposts, etc.) and placement must not obstruct ingress or egress from vehicles parked at the curb. 
(b)  In areas of congested pedestrian activity, the director of public works is authorized to require a wider pedestrian path, as circumstances dictate. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(7)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-128. - Obstruction of sidewalk, crosswalk, bus stops, and building ingress and egress prohibited. 
    The area shall not block ingress or egress to or from any building. A sidewalk cafe dining facility must not obstruct any doorway. Also, no items shall be placed so as to block any driveway, crosswalk, or bus stop. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(7), (9)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-129. - Removal of items by city. 
(a)  The director of public works may require the permit holder, at the permit holder's expense, to temporarily remove items within the encroachment area when street, sidewalk, common area or utility repairs in the opinion of the director of public works necessitate such action. 
(b)  In addition, the city shall have the right, at any time and for any reason, with or without notice, to remove from the public right-of-way any and all items placed thereon pursuant to any permit issued under this section, and to dispose of same in any manner without liability to the permit holder or to any other party; provided, however, that the director of the department of public works shall use his best efforts to provide at least 24 hours' notice to any permit holder whose operations shall be affected by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(14), (20)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-130. - Maintenance and cleanup. 
(a)  The sidewalk cafe dining location and the area surrounding the sidewalk cafe dining location must be kept completely free of debris, trash or litter of any type. Cleanup of all debris, trash or litter must occur on a periodic basis during the day, and again at the close of each business day. Such cleanup and maintenance shall be the joint responsibility of the applicant and the property owner, if different from the applicant. The permit holder shall provide proper containers or some other means for the collection of waste and trash within the sidewalk cafe dining location. All waste and trash shall be properly disposed of by the permit holder. 
(b)  Tables, chairs, umbrellas and any other objects provided shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance and shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times. 
(c)  The permit holder shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and security of the furniture and accessories of the sidewalk cafe dining facility and the city shall not be responsible for the same. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(8), (10), (15)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-131. - Stakes, rods, support poles, holes and permanent fixtures in right-of-way prohibited. 
    No stakes, rods, support poles or holes for whatever purpose are allowed to be drilled in the public right-of-way. No permanent fixtures are permitted in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(4)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-132. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
    The permit holder shall not allow sound or permit sound or the sounding of any device on the public property which produces a loud noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device that causes annoyance to neighboring property. Additionally, the permit holder shall not have on the premises any bell, siren, horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract the attention of possible customers nor shall the permit holder use any such device to attract attention. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(5)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-133. - Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    The sale and consumption of beer or alcoholic beverages are permitted on the public right-of-way only in the sidewalk dining facility, and then only if the requirements of all pertinent laws, rules and regulations have been met, including obtaining the required permits. The business owner must post an informational sign conspicuously posted in the sidewalk cafe dining facility that properly advises patrons that it is illegal to consume beer or alcoholic beverages or have an open container of the same outside the sidewalk cafe dining facility. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(12)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-134. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages by employees prohibited. 
    Employees of the permit holder of the sidewalk cafe dining facility shall not consume alcoholic beverages while working in the sidewalk cafe dining facility. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(19)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-135. - Food preparation on public right-of-way prohibited. 
    Food preparation on the public right-of-way is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(13)), 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-136. - Signs. 
    Other than the informational sign required in section 90-133 signs shall not be attached to the sidewalk cafe dining facility. 
(Ord. No. 5810, § I(94-14(e)(16)), 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 90-137-90-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to construct, improve streets, sidewalks, public ways, assess costs therefor, T.C.A. § 7-32-101 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-156. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curbline means the inside edge of the top of a curb. 
    Principal structure means a structure in which is conducted the principal uses of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential or agricultural district, any dwelling shall be deemed the principal structure on the lot on which the same is situated. Carports and garages, if permanently attached to the principal structure, shall be deemed a part of the principal structure. Awnings, porches, patios, or similar attachments shall be deemed a part of the principal structure. 
    Principal use means the specific primary purpose for which land or a building is used or is intended to be used. 
    Roadway means the actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities, including ditches and curbs and gutters, which is used to transport motor vehicles. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or if there are no curblines, the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Street means any public way or part thereof, including but not limited to a boulevard, avenue, highway, road, lane or alley. 
(b)  For the purpose of this division, when not inconsistent with the context, the term "structure" includes the term "building;" the term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel;" and whenever a provision or section requires the head of a department or some other city official to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-502), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-157. - Purpose 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen finds and declares that the construction of sidewalks improves pedestrian safety; expands opportunities for recreational walking and running activities; provides more cohesive neighborhoods; that the National Cooperative Highway Research program determined that pedestrians are significantly less likely to be struck by car while walking on a sidewalk along a street; and that "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials notes that sidewalks are an essential part of city streets. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to establish the general requirement to construct sidewalks along streets, and to provide a comprehensive system of sidewalks within the city to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-501), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-158. - Single-family houses and duplexes exempt from division 
    Improvement, renovation, or repair of a single-family house or duplex shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-503), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-159. - Sidewalk board created; duties. 
(a)  There is created for the administration of this division the sidewalk board. The sidewalk board shall consist of six members. The city engineer, the director of planning, the director of community services and the director of transportation shall each be an ex officio member of the sidewalk board for whom a designee may act in their absence. The remaining members of the sidewalk board shall be a member of the public at large, appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of mayor and aldermen, who shall be appointed for a term of five years or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  Members appointed to fill vacancies shall have the same general qualifications required for their predecessors. All appointed members shall be persons of good reputation having diverse interests and who have been actively identified with the development and improvement of the city. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the sidewalk board to plan, set priorities and determine areas of city sidewalks that require repair or replacement. The sidewalk board shall determine what areas may have designed sidewalks and what areas may have landscaping, and the sidewalk board shall prepare and keep up to date a citywide sidewalk plan. 
(Code 1981, § 24-71; Code 1998, § 94-156) 
Sec. 90-160. - Permit. 
    No person shall construct a sidewalk without a permit from the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 24-69; Code 1998, § 94-157) 
Sec. 90-161. - Contractor's bond prerequisite to permit. 
    No sidewalk construction permit shall be issued to any contractor who has not previously given bond to the city in an amount as determined by the board of mayor and aldermen, conditioned to indemnify the city against loss or damage for injury to person or property due to the prosecution of work under this division and to bind such contractor to comply with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 24-70; Code 1998, § 94-158) 
Sec. 90-162. - Authority to require construction or repair by abutting owner. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen, whenever it is deemed necessary for the public welfare, may require the owner of any lot or part of lot in the city fronting upon any public street to construct and keep in repair a good and substantial sidewalk or travel way along the whole street frontage of his lot, of a width and materials prescribed by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1981, § 24-65; Code 1998, § 94-159) 
Sec. 90-163. - Notice to owner to construct or repair. 
    When a person is instructed by resolution by the board of mayor and aldermen to construct or repair a sidewalk, the city recorder shall give such person written notice stating the action of the board and specifically setting forth the work to be done and the length of time within which the work shall be done, provided that the time fixed shall not be less than 60 days. 
(Code 1981, § 24-66; Code 1998, § 94-160) 
Sec. 90-164. - Effect of noncompliance with notice. 
    If the owner of a lot shall refuse to build or repair sidewalks or foot pavements within the time required by the notice required in this division and in accordance therewith, the board of mayor and aldermen, through the city manager, may contract for the construction or repair of the sidewalk and shall pay the cost thereof out of the street fund. The cost of such work shall, from the date work is begun, constitute a lien on the property, such lien to be equal in dignity to liens for the city property tax. Such lien may be enforced by attachments at law or in equity or in the manner provided in the Charter. The city attorney shall enforce the lien. 
(Code 1981, § 24-67; Code 1998, § 94-161) 
Sec. 90-165. - Suit for amounts paid as costs. 
    The amount paid by the city as provided in section 90-164 may be recovered against such owner by suit before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1981, § 24-68; Code 1998, § 94-162) 
Secs. 90-166-90-183. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Subdivision Sidewalks 

Sec. 90-184. - General requirements. 
(a)  When sidewalks are not otherwise controlled by the subdivision regulations approved by the city regional planning commission (on file in the city clerk's office), sidewalks shall be constructed along the street frontage, except for limited access highway frontage (Interstate 81, Interstate 26 and John B. Dennis Highway), of all industrial, commercial, office, professional, semipublic and multifamily residential developments whenever a new principal structure is built or erected. 
(b)  The construction of required sidewalks shall be completed, or if applicable, a fee in lieu of construction paid before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-504), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-185. - Fee in lieu of construction. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, when a sidewalk is required to be constructed, the city engineer may waive the requirement and permit the payment of a fee in lieu of construction after considering: 
(1)  Pedestrian safety, school locations, connection to existing sidewalks, and other engineering and community concerns; or 
(2)  When it would be in the best interest of the city that sidewalk construction be postponed due to pending street or utility construction. 
(b)  Applicants must make a written request to the city engineer for a waiver. If a waiver is granted, a fee will be assessed in lieu of constructing the sidewalk. The fee shall be based on the market price of the construction of the sidewalk plus five percent as determined by the city engineer. 
(c)  In the event a fee in lieu of constructing a sidewalk is approved, the property owner shall provide to the city in a form approved by the city attorney a recorded easement for street right-of-way, which may include future development of the sidewalk. 
(d)  Grading shall be done in preparation for future sidewalks or pedestrian pathways. 
(e)  The fee shall be paid in full before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Fees collected will go into a city fund dedicated to sidewalk and pedestrian pathway construction. Disbursal from such fund is not geographically constrained, and may be used to install sidewalks anywhere in the city. 
(f)  Such waiver and payment in lieu of construction is not permitted when one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The location is specified for sidewalks in the city's adopted sidewalk plan; 
(2)  The location is within 1,000 feet (street distance) of an existing sidewalk on the same side of the street; 
(3)  The development is expected to generate significant numbers of pedestrians. Examples include, but are not limited to, schools, day care centers, office buildings, churches, multifamily residential buildings, and other residential facilities such as group homes, nursing homes and residential homes for the aged; 
(4)  The development contains retail uses expected to attract customers from residences, retail area, places of employment, or places of public assembly within 1,500 feet of the development; 
(5)  The development is within 1,500 feet (street distance) of a regular city transit stop; or 
(6)  The new development is within one-half mile (street distance) of an existing or proposed school. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-505), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-186. - Design and construction standards. 
    Design and construction details of required sidewalks shall be included with the development or access site plan. The city engineer shall review and approve the plans prior to the issuance of a building permit by the building official. Except as otherwise provided in section 90-190 sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the general requirements and standards of sidewalk design in the city's design standards. The city engineer shall be responsible for inspection of sidewalks during construction. Completion of sidewalk construction shall be required to the satisfaction of the city engineer before a certificate of occupancy will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-506), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-187. - Insufficient right-of-way. 
    When there is insufficient street right-of-way for the construction of a required sidewalk, the dedication of an additional right-of-way for street use including a sidewalk and drainage easement shall be required of the developer. The width of the easement shall be determined by the city engineer. A deed of easement for the street right-of-way shall be provided by the property owner to the city in a form approved by the city attorney, and shall stipulate guarantee public access in perpetuity and be recorded with the appropriate county register of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-507), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-188. - ADA and transit requirements. 
    All sidewalks built privately or by the city shall conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines in effect at the time of construction. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-508), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-189. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    No building permits shall be issued by the building official until the sidewalk requirements, as set forth herein, have been met and included in the approved development site plan. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued only after all plan requirements have been met and fully completed. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-509), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-190. - Alternative method of pedestrian mobility. 
    In certain circumstances it may be desirable that an alternative method of pedestrian mobility be substituted for standard sidewalk construction. These alternative methods can include the installation of walking paths, greenways, bike paths or trails, or similar modes of nonvehicular mobility. Alternative surfaces may be considered for such alternative methods, subject to approval by the city engineer. The following provisions shall apply for the approval of alternative methods for the provision of pedestrian mobility: 
(1)  The property owner shall submit a written request for provision of alternative method of pedestrian mobility to the city engineer. The request shall specify the method proposed as a substitute for sidewalk installation. A site plan depicting the location and dimensions of the alternative method of pedestrian mobility, and any other information deemed necessary by the city engineer shall be included with the request; and 
(2)  The request for an alternative method shall be consistent with the sidewalk plan and shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval or rejection. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-510), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-191. - Sidewalk reconstruction required. 
    Where a principal structure is constructed or erected along an existing street, sidewalk construction is required along all streets adjacent to that property. If sidewalks exist where development or redevelopment is occurring but their width or condition renders them substandard, in the opinion of the city engineer applying the city's design standards, then the developer of the principal structure shall reconstruct the sidewalk following the guidelines and requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-511), 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-192. - Design deviation. 
(a)  In certain circumstances it may be necessary to adjust the standards for sidewalk construction to conform to the unique characteristics of a site. Economic benefit alone is not sufficient grounds for deviation from the standard for sidewalk construction. Unusual or exceptional topography, physical or natural characteristics must be present at the site to justify a design deviation. Any deviation from established sidewalk design standards must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the criteria, set out hereinafter, are satisfied before a design deviation may be granted. In considering a request for design deviation the city engineer and the planning commission shall apply the following criteria, all of which must be satisfied before a design deviation may be granted: 
(1)  There must be exceptional physical conditions such as rock, extreme slope or other natural or manmade obstacles existing; 
(2)  The condition must cause the installation of a standard sidewalk be extremely difficult or prohibitively expensive considering the present or future need for the sidewalk balanced with the additional cost for installation; 
(3)  The design deviation shall be the minimum adjustment necessary and every attempt shall be made to ensure that the needs of pedestrians are accommodated to the maximum extent possible; and 
(4)  The design deviation must not be injurious to the neighborhood or detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 
(b)  A design deviation does not include the waiver of sidewalk construction, unless a fee in lieu of construction permitted under section 90-185 is approved. 
(Ord. No. 6006, § I(94-512), 9-21-2010) 
Secs. 90-193-90-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSSWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-223. - Inspection of work. 
    Under this article, all work shall be subject to inspection by the public works director during construction and upon completion. The public works director shall be notified by the permittee before concrete is poured or surfacing is applied. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(e); Code 1998, § 94-96) 
Sec. 90-224. - Responsibilities of public works director. 
(a)  The public works director shall formulate design standards, plans and specifications for the construction of driveway approaches, crosswalks and curb cuts. Separate standard plans and specifications may be required for driveway approaches on paved and unpaved streets and arterials and other streets, whether sidewalks and curbs are in place, and for driveway approaches serving different use classifications or properties, such as residential, commercial or industrial. 
(b)  Where a property owner desires a driveway approach differing from the established standards, that property owner may apply to the public works director setting forth the peculiar, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions prompting the application. The public works director may approve or reject the application. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(f); Code 1998, § 94-97) 
Sec. 90-225. - Appeals. 
    An order of the public works director pursuant to this article, including an order revoking a permit or the failure or refusal of the public works director to issue a permit, may be appealed by filing a written notice with the city manager within 15 days after the order is received or refusal communicated. The appellant and the public works director shall be granted a hearing before the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(j); Code 1998, § 94-98) 
Sec. 90-226. - General requirements. 
    Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications formulated by the public works director for driveway approaches, including the city design standards and the following: 
(1)  The location of the driveway must not unduly interfere with safety and operations of the street and sidewalk system. 
(2)  The width and radius of the driveway approach must be designed to minimize the effect on normal vehicle traffic, prevent unsafe turning and allow for pedestrian safety. 
(3)  The number of driveways shall be limited to a reasonable number which is consistent with sound transportation planning principles. 
(4)  The spacing between driveways shall allow for safe entrance and exit. 
(5)  The driveway area shall allow for ready egress and ingress without causing a backlog of traffic on city streets. 
(6)  Visibility at the driveway approach, as determined by the director of transportation, must be adequate for safe entrance and exit. 
(7)  Existing and proposed use of the property to be connected by a driveway must be in conformity with traffic, zoning and building ordinances and consistent with the relevant goals of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(g); Code 1998, § 94-99) 
Secs. 90-227-90-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 90-248. - Required. 
    No person shall construct or improve a driveway approach across a sidewalk, parking strip, curb or in or upon another part of a public street or public right-of-way without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director or the state department of transportation (TDOT). 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(a); Code 1998, § 94-126) 
Sec. 90-249. - Application. 
    The application for a permit required under this division shall be in writing upon a form provided by the city and shall contain information showing the location, size and other information which may be required by the public works director. Such application must have a cash deposit with the city sufficient to cover fees. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(b); Code 1998, § 94-127) 
Sec. 90-250. - Expiration. 
    A permit issued under this division shall expire if work is not started within 60 days or completed within 180 days after issuance of a permit. The public works director may grant up to an additional 180-day extension, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(c); Code 1998, § 94-128) 
Sec. 90-251. - Revocation. 
    Under this article, all work shall conform to the design standards, plans and specifications formulated by the public works director. A permit may be revoked if the public works director determines that the work is not being performed according to the requirements as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(d); Code 1998, § 94-129) 
Sec. 90-252. - Demolition permits. 
    When a demolition permit is issued for the removal of a building, the points of ingress and egress to serve the new use must comply with the standards set forth in this article. Any driveway or part thereof rendered useless by demolition, remodeling or renovation not in compliance must be removed, at the expense of the developer, and the curbing, parkway, sidewalks, etc., replaced to meet existing city specifications. 
(Code 1981, § 24-18(i); Code 1998, § 94-130) 
Secs. 90-253-90-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRADES AND PROFILES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to construct, improve streets, sidewalks, public ways, assess costs therefor, T.C.A. § 7-32-101. 

Sec. 90-283. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Grade means , as applied to any street, the elevation above sea level as indicated in section 90-284 of the sidewalk at the building line or curbline as indicated. 
(Code 1981, § 24-83; Code 1998, § 94-191) 
Sec. 90-284. - Base or datum plane; elevation. 
    The base or datum plane to which all levels taken by the director of public works or by the city engineer shall be referred shall be that plane at or near sea level from which the following local benchmark has elevation as follows: elevation 1,206.93, USGS monument at the southeast corner of the property designated as the city public library at the corner of New and Broad Streets. 
(Code 1981, § 24-82; Code 1998, § 94-192) 
Sec. 90-285. - Fixing grade on presentation of profile. 
    Grades shall be fixed by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen on presentation of a profile showing grades through the street or part of street. 
(Code 1981, § 24-84; Code 1998, § 94-193) 
Sec. 90-286. - Official profiles. 
    Under this article, a profile adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen by resolution upon presentation shall be known as the official profile. Official profiles shall bear endorsements of the mayor, recorder, city manager and the city engineer, showing the facts and dates of their approval by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 24-85; Code 1998, § 94-194) 
Sec. 90-287. - Change of established grade. 
    No grade once established shall be changed except upon resolution by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 24-86; Code 1998, § 94-195) 
Sec. 90-288. - Curb grade higher or lower than centerline of street. 
    On streets or along hillsides where it is necessary for drainage or economy to have the curb grades higher or lower than the centerline of the street, the grades shall be shown on the profile, and the curb grade as well as the street grade shall be established. 
(Code 1981, § 24-87; Code 1998, § 94-196) 
Sec. 90-289. - Conformance to grade when improvements made. 
    No person shall erect any permanent improvement without first obtaining the official grade of the street from the director of public works and adhering to it. 
(Code 1981, § 24-88; Code 1998, § 94-197) 
Secs. 90-290-90-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POLES AND WIRES 

Sec. 90-312. - Applicability to franchises. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect the provisions of any grant of franchise. 
(Code 1981, § 24-100; Code 1998, § 94-226) 
Sec. 90-313. - Permit for location. 
(a)  No person operating a public utility or furnishing public service shall locate any pole, wire, conduit, pipe or other apparatus necessary, without first having obtained a permit from the director of public works in writing. 
(b)  The director of public works shall specify in such permit the: 
(1)  Kind, size and height of poles to be used; 
(2)  Height at which all wires must be placed; and 
(3)  Size, location and depth of all pipes or conduits. 
(c)  All permits provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  A copy of such permit shall be filed with the recorder. 
(Code 1981, § 24-101; Code 1998, § 94-227) 
Sec. 90-314. - Construction to conform to specifications in permit. 
    The construction of lines, pipes and conduits and the erection of poles shall conform in all particulars to the specifications as set forth in the permit required in this article or be forthwith subject to removal. 
(Code 1981, § 24-105; Code 1998, § 94-228) 
Sec. 90-315. - Right of city to use poles. 
    Any permit granted under this article shall be subject to the right of the city, free of charge, to place its fire alarm, telegraph or electric lines upon the poles or through the conduits so permitted to be maintained. 
(Code 1981, § 24-102; Code 1998, § 94-229) 
Sec. 90-316. - Right of city to permit others to use poles or conduits. 
    Any permit granted under this article shall be subject to the right of the city to permit the location of wires or lines by any other person upon such poles or through such conduits, upon the payment or tender to the owner thereof of a reasonable compensation, to be determined by the parties. 
(Code 1981, § 24-103; Code 1998, § 94-230) 
Sec. 90-317. - Erection of poles. 
    On business streets having no parkway and where curbs are set, all poles shall be erected in the sidewalk within or adjoining the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the poles shall be so erected as not to interfere with the gutter or with the curb that may thereafter be set there. No poles shall be set or erected within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1981, § 24-104; Code 1998, § 94-231) 
Sec. 90-318. - Relocation of poles and conduits. 
    Any holder of a permit under this article shall, at his own expense, remove poles or conduits to other suitable locations whenever ordered to do so by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 24-106; Code 1998, § 94-232) 
Sec. 90-319. - Number of poles in block. 
    The number of poles permitted in each block shall be determined by the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 24-107; Code 1998, § 94-233) 
Sec. 90-320. - More than one line of poles on street. 
    The director of public works shall not grant permits for more than one line of poles on any street, unless it is not advisable to use two or more lines of wire on the same poles, and he shall endeavor to locate poles where they will be least objectionable. 
(Code 1981, § 24-108; Code 1998, § 94-234) 
Secs. 90-321-90-343. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-344-90-374. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 90-375. - Required. 
    No person, except in or as incident to the exercise or rights given by franchise, shall obstruct, break or dig up the grounds in any street or other public place without a written permit from the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 24-50; Code 1998, § 94-66) 
Sec. 90-376. - Bond or cash deposit prerequisite. 
    No person shall be issued the permit required in this division unless he executes a good and sufficient bond to the city in the sum of $1,000.00, conditioned to save the city harmless on account of any loss or damages resulting from such obstructions or excavations, or without having first deposited a sufficient amount of cash with the city recorder as will, in the opinion of the director, cover the cost of restoring the street to its condition prior to the excavating. 
(Code 1981, § 24-51; Code 1998, § 94-67) 
Sec. 90-377. - Restrictions and limitations. 
    The director of public works is authorized to impose such restrictions and limitations upon a permit issued pursuant to this division as he sees fit for the safety and convenience of the public, including but not limited to the erection of barriers and lights. 
(Code 1981, § 24-52; Code 1998, § 94-68) 
Sec. 90-378. - Restoration of surface. 
    It shall be a condition of every permit issued under this division that the person doing the excavation shall cause the surface excavated to be refilled and tamped and put in as good condition as it was before being opened. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to restore the surface excavated to a condition as good as it was prior to the excavation. 
(Code 1981, § 24-53; Code 1998, § 94-69) 
Secs. 90-379-90-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PARADES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Parades of state national guard have right-of-way in streets, T.C.A. § 58-1-601. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-400. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any march or procession in ordered and close file wherein a collective body of persons are proceeding on foot or by conveyance of any form whatsoever in or upon and along any street or thoroughfare in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 24-121; Code 1998, § 94-261) 
Sec. 90-401. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any section of this article or a parade permit issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1981, § 24-125; Code 1998, § 94-263) 
Sec. 90-402. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to funeral processions or actions of a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1981, § 24-124; Code 1998, § 94-262) 
Sec. 90-403. - Duties of permittees. 
    A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances of the city, the state and the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 24-122; Code 1998, § 94-264) 
Sec. 90-404. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles along a highway, street or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 24-123; Code 1998, § 94-265) 
Secs. 90-405-90-421. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 90-422. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a permit shall have been obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 24-134; Code 1998, § 94-291) 
Sec. 90-423. - Application. 
(a)  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city manager on forms provided by the city manager. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than 14 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking permission to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the organization's authorized representatives and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its management. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or other public ways proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city manager a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(c)  The city manager, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application which is filed less than 14 days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. Waiver of the filing period stated in subsection (a) of this section shall be granted when time is of the essence in the processing of an application. In circumstances where time is of the essence, the time for filing the application shall be waived. For purposes of this subsection, the term "time of the essence" means that unless prompt action is taken upon the application for a permit that the purpose for conducting the parade as requested shall be substantially impaired or defeated by processing the application in the ordinary way. When time is of the essence, an application for a permit under this section shall be considered and processed by the city manager with all deliberate speed as the facts and circumstances of each individual case require. 
(Code 1981, § 24-135; Code 1998, § 94-292) 
Sec. 90-424. - Standards for issuance. 
    The city manager shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Code 1981, § 24-136; Code 1998, § 94-293) 
Sec. 90-425. - Notice of rejection. 
    The city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five days after the filing thereof or sooner if time is of the essence. If the city manager rejects the application, he shall deliver to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, or sooner if time is of the essence, a notice of his action, stating his reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 24-137; Code 1998, § 94-294) 
Sec. 90-426. - Alternative permit. 
    The city manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the city manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. An applicant whose application for a parade permit has been denied by the city manager is not compelled to accept an alternate parade permit and may appeal as provided in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 24-138; Code 1998, § 94-295) 
Sec. 90-427. - Notice to city officials upon issuance. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the city manager shall send a copy thereof to the following persons: 
(1)  The board of mayor and aldermen. 
(2)  The chief of police. 
(3)  The city attorney. 
(4)  The fire chief. 
(5)  The director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 24-139; Code 1998, § 94-296) 
Sec. 90-428. - Contents. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets or public ways to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the city manager shall deem necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 24-140; Code 1998, § 94-297) 
Sec. 90-429. - Possession. 
    The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1981, § 24-142; Code 1998, § 94-298) 
Sec. 90-430. - Revocation. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 24-143; Code 1998, § 94-299) 
Sec. 90-431. - Appeals. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "time of the essence" means that unless prompt attention is paid to the applicant's appeal the time for conducting the parade originally requested in the application will have passed prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager under this division shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the board of mayor and aldermen. The appeal shall be taken within three days after receipt of notice of rejection from the city manager and shall have a hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen on its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  If notice of rejection by the city manager has been received by the applicant and the notice of rejection is received more than seven days before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen, the aggrieved applicant may, in circumstances where time is of the essence, contact the mayor within three days of receipt of notice of rejection and shall have a hearing before the board of mayor and aldermen at a special called meeting of the board by the mayor to consider the petitioner's appeal. 
(d)  The board of mayor and aldermen shall act upon the appeal no later than three days after its receipt or, when time is of the essence, sooner as the facts and circumstances of the individual case require. 
(Code 1981, § 24-141; Code 1998, § 94-300) 
Chapters 91-93 - RESERVED 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxes and licenses generally, T.C.A. § 67-1-101 et seq.; levy of municipal property taxes, T.C.A. § 67-5-101 et seq.; collection of delinquent taxes, T.C.A. §§ 6-55-201 et seq., 67-5-2005 et seq.; 1963 Local Option Revenue Act, T.C.A. § 67-6-701 et seq.; Retailers' Sales Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-6-101 et seq.; municipal privilege tax authorized, T.C.A. §§ 6-55-102, 67-4-501, 67-4-704; Business Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-4-701 et seq.; local taxation of accommodations for transients and hotel occupancy, T.C.A. § 67-4-1401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Correction of assessment record. 
    The city recorder shall have power to correct a record of a tax assessment provided by the county tax assessor. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1; Code 1998, § 98-1) 
Sec. 94-2. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall, by resolution each year, direct that delinquent taxes are collected by the city attorney or other attorney designated to conduct such collection for advertisement and sale with delinquent state and county taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2; Code 1998, § 98-2) 
State Law reference- Collection of delinquent taxes, T.C.A. §§ 6-55-201 et seq., 67-5-2005 et seq. 
Sec. 94-3. - Due date for public utility ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  For all public utility properties on which the assessment is levied by the state, the ad valorem tax due date shall be the first day of the month next following the billing of such taxes. 
(b)  The due date for all other ad valorem taxes shall be as set out in the Charter. 
(Code 1998, § 98-3; Ord. No. 4185, § I(11-3), 3-5-1996) 
Sec. 94-4. - Penalty date for public utility ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  For all public utility properties on which the assessment is levied by the state, a penalty as provided in the Charter shall be imposed on the first day of the month next following the due date. 
(b)  The penalty date for all other ad valorem taxes shall be as set out in the Charter. 
(Code 1998, § 98-4; Ord. No. 4185, § I(11-4), 3-5-1996) 
Secs. 94-5-94-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local option sales tax, T.C.A. § 67-6-701 et seq. 

Sec. 94-27. - Levied. 
(a)  As authorized by T.C.A. § 67-6-701 et seq., there is levied a tax in the same manner and on the same privileges subject to the Retailers' Sales Tax Act under T.C.A. § 67-6-101 et seq. which is exercised in the city. The tax is levied on all such privileges at the rate of one-quarter of each dollar subject to the maximums prescribed in such act for privileges exercised in the Hawkins County portion of the city, and at the rate of three-quarters of each dollar subject to the maximums prescribed in such act exercised in the Sullivan County portion of the city, so long as the general state rate continues at 4.5 percent. 
(b)  The tax shall be levied at the rate of 1/12 of the rates levied in the Retailers' Sales Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-6-101 et seq., for privileges exercised in the Hawkins County portion of the city, and at 3/12 of the state rates for privileges exercised in the Sullivan County portion of the city, if and when the general state rate is reduced to three percent. 
(c)  With respect to industrial and farm machinery as defined in T.C.A. § 67-6-102(8), (12) and with respect to water sold to or used by manufacturers, the tax thereon is imposed at the rate as provided in T.C.A. § 67-6-702. The tax shall not exceed the maximums prescribed by statute on the sale or use of any single article of personal property (see section 94-28), and there is excepted from the tax levied by this section the sale, purchase, use, consumption or distribution of electric power or energy or natural or artificial gas or coal and fuel oil, so long as such exception is required by state law. 
(d)  Penalties and interest for delinquencies shall be the same as provided in T.C.A. § 67-6-516. 
(Code 1981, § 11-13; Code 1998, § 98-31) 
State Law reference- Authority for local levy, T.C.A. § 67-6-702. 
Sec. 94-28. - Removal of single-item limit; application of sales tax rate to basis. 
(a)  The maximum local option sales tax collectible on the sale or use of a single item of personal property as authorized by section 94-27, which levied the local option sales tax for that portion of the city situated in Hawkins County, is removed. 
(b)  The local sales tax at the rate effective in that portion of the city situated in Hawkins County shall apply to the first $1,100.00 on the sale or use of any single article of personal property as provided in T.C.A. § 67-6-702. 
(c)  Future increases in the base beginning on the dates specified in subsection (b) of this section shall be automatic and shall not require further action of the board of mayor and aldermen of the city. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to increase the local option sales tax rate heretofore in effect in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 11-14; Code 1998, § 98-32) 
Sec. 94-29. - Collection. 
(a)  It having been determined by the state department of revenue that it is feasible for this tax to be collected by that department, the determination being evidenced by a local option sales and use tax rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue, the department shall collect such tax concurrently with the collection of the state tax in the same manner as the state tax is collected in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the department. The mayor is authorized to contract with the department of revenue for the collection of the tax by the department and to provide in the contract that the department may deduct from the tax collected a reasonable amount or percentage to cover the expense of the administration and collection of the tax. 
(b)  If the tax is collected by the department of revenue, suits for recovery of any tax illegally assessed or collected shall be brought against the city recorder-treasurer. 
(Code 1981, § 11-15; Code 1998, § 98-33) 
Secs. 94-30-94-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS OR PRIVILEGE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Business Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-4-701 et seq. 

Sec. 94-47. - Levied. 
    There is levied a business and privilege tax upon merchants and such other vocations, occupations or businesses which are declared by state law to be privileges or taxable by municipalities. Such tax shall be in the maximum amounts authorized by state law. 
(Code 1981, § 11-16; Code 1998, § 98-61) 
State Law reference- Municipal privilege tax authorized, T.C.A. §§ 6-55-102, 67-4-501, 67-4-704. 
Sec. 94-48. - Restriction on issuance of business license. 
    No business license shall be issued if the applicant is delinquent in the payment of real or personal property taxes to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 11-17; Code 1998, § 98-62) 
Secs. 94-49-94-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local taxation of accommodations for transients and hotel occupancy, T.C.A. § 67-4-1401 et seq.; Private Acts of 1981, ch. 46, as amended; Private Acts of 1989, chapter 10; Private Acts of 1995, chapter 132; Private Acts of 2007, chapter 52. 

Sec. 94-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the remuneration charged to a person, whether or not received, for the occupancy of a hotel as valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction whatsoever. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that consideration is to be charged where the space in a hotel to the transient is complimentary and no consideration is charged to or received from any person. 
    Hotel means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist court, tourist camp, tourist cabin, motel or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or similar accommodations are furnished to transients for consideration. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or right to use or possess any room, lodging or similar accommodation in any hotel for a period of less than 30 continuous days. 
    Operator means a person operating the hotel, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, state, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Tourism means the planning and conducting of programs of information and publicity designed to attract to the city and its surrounding area tourists, visitors and other persons from outside the area and to encourage, assist and coordinate the efforts of public and private organizations or groups of citizens to publicize the facilities and attractions of the city and its surrounding area. The term "tourism" also means the acquisition, construction and remodeling of facilities useful to the attracting and promoting of the tourist, convention and recreation business. 
    Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupy any room, lodging or similar accommodation in a hotel for a period of less than 30 continuous days. 
(Code 1981, § 11-85; Code 1998, § 98-91) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 67-4-1401. 
Sec. 94-71. - Administrative and enforcement powers of treasurer. 
    The city treasurer, in administering and enforcing this article, shall have all the powers and duties provided in T.C.A. § 67-1-101 et seq., or as otherwise provided by law for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 11-93; Code 1998, § 98-92) 
Sec. 94-72. - Tax imposed. 
    There is levied, assessed and imposed and shall be paid and collected a privilege tax upon the privilege of occupancy by a transient of space in any hotel, such tax to be paid at the rate of seven percent of the consideration charged by the operator for such occupancy. The tax is to be collected and distributed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 11-86; Code 1998, § 98-93; Res. No. 96-097, 3-19-1996; Ord. No. 5572, § I, 7-3-2007) 
Sec. 94-74. - Method of collection; refund. 
(a)  The tax levied in this article shall be added by each operator to each invoice or bill prepared by the operator for the occupancy of space in a hotel by a transient. Such invoice is to be given directly or transmitted to the transient, and the tax shall be collected by such operator from the transient and remitted to the city treasurer. 
(b)  A person who has maintained occupancy in a space in a hotel for a period in excess of 30 continuous days shall not be deemed a transient and shall receive from the operator a refund or credit for the tax previously collected from or charged to the person, and the operator shall receive credit for the amount of such tax if previously paid or reported to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 11-87; Code 1998, § 98-95) 
Sec. 94-75. - Remittance to treasurer. 
    The tax levied in this article shall be remitted by all operators to the city treasurer no later than the 20th day of each month next following the collection of such tax. Each operator is required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of presentation of the invoice for such occupancy, whether presentation of the invoice is prior to occupancy or after occupancy, as may be the custom of the operator. If a credit is granted by the operator to the transient, the obligation to the city for such tax shall be that of the operator. 
(Code 1981, § 11-88; Code 1998, § 98-96) 
Sec. 94-76. - Reports to treasurer; audit. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be responsible for the collection of the tax levied in this article. A monthly tax return under oath shall be filed with the city treasurer by each operator with such number of copies thereof as the city treasurer may reasonably require for the collection of the tax. The report of the operator shall include such facts and information as may be deemed reasonable for the verification of the tax due. The form of the report shall be developed by the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall audit each operator in the city at least once per year and shall report on the audits made on an annual basis to board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  For the purpose of compensating the operators in accounting for and remitting the tax levied, each operator shall be allowed two percent of the amount of tax collected and remitted to the city treasurer in the form of a deduction in submitting the report and paying the tax; provided, however, the tax amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment by the operator. 
(Code 1981, § 11-89; Code 1998, § 98-97) 
State Law reference- Collection, refunds and credits, T.C.A. § 67-4-1404. 
Sec. 94-77. - Absorption by operator. 
    No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner whatsoever, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax levied by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it is added to the consideration or that, if added, any part of the tax will be refunded. 
(Code 1981, § 11-90; Code 1998, § 98-98) 
Sec. 94-78. - Delinquent taxes. 
    Under this article, taxes collected by an operator which are not remitted to the city treasurer on or before the due date are considered delinquent. Any operator delinquent in the payment of such taxes shall be obligated to pay interest from the due date at the rate of 12 percent per annum, plus a penalty of one-half percent for each month or fraction thereof that such taxes are delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax. Each occurrence of willful refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax or willful refusal of a transient to pay the tax imposed is declared to be unlawful and shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine not in excess of $50.00. Such fine shall be levied for each transaction involving the payment of consideration for occupancy of a space in a hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 11-91; Code 1998, § 98-99) 
State Law reference- Delinquencies, T.C.A. § 67-4-1408. 
Sec. 94-79. - Preservation of records. 
    Every operator of a hotel shall keep and preserve for a period of three years, a record of the occupancy of a hotel in order that the city treasurer may determine the amount of the tax levied under this article. The city treasurer shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1981, § 11-92; Code 1998, § 98-100) 
State Law reference- Records, T.C.A. § 67-4-1409. 
Sec. 94-80. - Illegal, contested assessments. 
    Upon any claim of illegal assessment or collection of the tax levied in this article, an operator of a hotel shall have the remedy provided in T.C.A. § 67-1-911, and the city treasurer shall possess those powers and duties provided in T.C.A. § 67-1-707 with respect to the adjustment and settlement with taxpayers of all errors of taxes collected under this article and to direct the refunding of such taxes. Notice of any tax paid under protest by an operator shall be given to the city treasurer, and suit may be brought for recovery of such tax paid under protest by filing the suit against the city recorder/treasurer. 
(Code 1981, § 11-94; Code 1998, § 98-101) 
Sec. 94-81. - Disposition of collected funds. 
(a)  The proceeds from the tax levied by this article shall be retained by the city and distributed as follows: 
(1)  871/2 percent of the proceeds shall be used for the direct promotion of tourism and tourism-related activities; 
(2)  121/2 percent of the proceeds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(b)  No proceeds from any tax collected from this article may be used to provide a subsidy in any form to any hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 11-95; Code 1998, § 98-102) 
State Law reference- Designation of proceeds, T.C.A. § 67-4-1403. 
Chapters 95-97 - RESERVED 
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, T.C.A. § 55-1-101 et seq.; authority of municipality to regulate traffic, T.C.A. § 55-10-307 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor street or highway, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and not intended for the purpose of serving through vehicular traffic. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means such fire department and fire patrol vehicles, police vehicles or bicycles and such emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of police, and vehicles operated by commissioned members of the state bureau of investigation when on official business. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
    Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property for hire, compensation or profit and registered under T.C.A. § 55-4-113 and, if registered under state law, displaying a commercial vehicle registration certificate. 
    Controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the highway, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within: 
(1)  The connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; or 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curbline reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Curbline means the lateral boundary of that portion of the street designated for the use of vehicles, whether marked by curbstones or not. 
    Department means the employees of the department referred to acting collectively in the fulfillment of assigned responsibilities. The director of the department shall have ultimate authority and responsibility for all actions of the department. 
    Director means the chief administrative official at the department referred to or any employee of the department who may have been designated by the chief administrative official to act on his behalf with respect to certain departmental functions. 
    Double parking means parking of a vehicle parallel to the curbline, in or so as to obstruct the second lane from the curbline. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Driver's license means any license to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of the state. 
    Explosive means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. 
    Flammable liquid means any liquid which has a flash point of 70 degrees Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curbline reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    House trailer means: 
(1)  A trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place, either permanently or temporarily, and which is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways; or 
(2)  A trailer or a semitrailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined in subsection (1) of this definition, but which is instead used permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier. 
    Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    License or license to operate a motor vehicle means any operator's or chauffeur's license or any other license or permit to operate a motor vehicle issued under or granted by the laws of the state, including: 
(1)  Any temporary license or instruction permit. 
(2)  The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or not such person holds a valid license. 
(3)  Any nonresident's operating privilege as defined in this section. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, excluding motorized bicycles, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
    Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five-brake horsepower, or with a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 125 cubic centimeters. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more that three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or motorized bicycle. 
    Motorized bicycle means a vehicle with two or three wheels, an automatic transmission and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters which produces no more that two-brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a maximum design speed of no more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. The operator of a motorized bicycle must be in possession of a valid operator's or chauffeur's license and shall be subject to all applicable and practical rules of the road. A motorized bicycle may not be operated on a highway of the interstate and defense highway system, any similar limited access multilane divided highway or upon sidewalks. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Operator means every person, other than a chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, if a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee or, if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Park or parking means , when prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Passenger car means every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, designed for carrying ten passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curbline reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Pole trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
    Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Racing means the use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, outdistance or prevent another vehicle from passing, to arrive at a given destination ahead of another vehicle, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long distance driving routes. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad grade crossing means the general area where a roadway and a railroad cross at the same level, within which are included the railroad and roadway facilities for traffic traversing that area. 
    Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Recreational vehicle means: 
(1)  A vehicle which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place, either permanently or temporarily, and which is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways; or 
(2)  A vehicle whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a recreational vehicle, as defined in subsection (1) of this definition, but which is instead used permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services. 
    Registration means the registration certificate and registration plates issued under the laws of the state pertaining to the registration of vehicles. 
    Revocation of driver's license means the termination by formal action of the issuing state agency of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Shoulder means that part of the graded width of a highway contiguous with the roadway which has been provided for the accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency vehicles and for the general enhancement of traffic operations and safety. The shoulder may be either paved or unpaved. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Solid tire means every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load. 
    Stop means , when required, complete cessation from movement. 
    Stopping or standing means , when prohibited, any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Suspension of driver's license means the temporary withdrawal by formal action of the issuing state agency of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the public highways. 
    Through highway means every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the highway and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. The department of transportation shall be authorized to designate such through highways. 
    Tourists means all persons passing through or stopping in the city for not more than 60 days, whose original place of residence may be more than 50 miles from the limits of the city. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
    Trailer means every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Vehicle impoundment or impoundment means the removal of a vehicle from a street, alley or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department. 
(b)  Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section but are defined in the state laws which regulate the operation of vehicles, such state law definition shall apply unless the context requires otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 14-1; Code 1998, § 102-1) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, T.C.A. §§ 55-1-102 et seq., 55-8-101. 
Sec. 98-2. - Provisions of chapter refer to vehicles upon highways; exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(2)  Division 4 of article III of this chapter shall apply upon highways and elsewhere throughout the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-2; Code 1998, § 102-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-102. 
Sec. 98-3. - Obedience required. 
    It is unlawful and an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-3; Code 1998, § 102-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-103. 
Sec. 98-4. - Authority of police department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws. 
(b)  Police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, if a fire or other emergency occurs or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Fire officials of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1981, § 14-4; Code 1998, § 102-4) 
Sec. 98-5. - Obedience to police department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any officer of the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 14-5; Code 1998, § 102-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-104. 
Sec. 98-6. - Obedience of public employees. 
    This chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the state or any county, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the state motor vehicle laws. 
(Code 1981, § 14-7; Code 1998, § 102-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-106. 
Sec. 98-7. - Persons working on highways; exceptions. 
    Unless specifically made applicable, the sections of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and equipment while actually engaged in work upon a highway, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1981, § 14-9; Code 1998, § 102-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-107. 
Sec. 98-8. - Putting injurious substances on highway prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any highway any destructive or injurious material or material which may cause a hazardous condition to exist shall immediately remove such or cause it to be removed. If any such material is not expeditiously removed by the responsible person or organization, removal of the material may be ordered and the cost of such operations recovered as provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-401; Code 1998, § 102-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-170. 
Secs. 98-9-98-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-35. - Erection and ratification of traffic control signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  The city manager or designee, is authorized to order the erection or location of such traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings, including parking meters and signs restricting parking as to time and place, as the city manager or designee, deems necessary for traffic regulation and the public good and order. The regulations indicated by such signs, devices, etc., shall be fully enforceable from the time of erection of such signs, devices, etc. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to traffic lights. 
(c)  The location and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings, including parking meters, as of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this section is derived are ratified and shall be deemed to have been approved by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(d)  The city manager or designee, shall erect all traffic control signs, devices and markings, including parking meters and signs restricting parking as to time and place, ordered erected or placed by the board of mayor and aldermen or the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1981, § 14-10; Code 1998, § 102-10; Ord. No. 5057, §§ I, II, 10-15-2002) 
State Law reference- Obedience to traffic control devices generally, T.C.A. § 55-8-109; same regarding traffic control signals, T.C.A. § 55-8-110 et seq. 
Sec. 98-36. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is empowered to promulgate and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the ordinance to make this chapter effective. The manager is authorized to promulgate and enforce temporary regulations of a maximum duration of 90 days to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
(b)  The city manager may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(c)  The department of planning and traffic engineering, in cooperation of the police department, shall have authority, when it is deemed in the interest of public safety or convenience, temporarily to close any street, alley or portion of the street or alley to vehicular or foot traffic or to divert such traffic therefrom. Except during emergencies, similar closures by other persons or agencies shall not be undertaken without prior written approval from the department of planning and traffic engineering. The department of planning and traffic engineering is authorized to develop and implement such policies and procedures as may be necessary to enforce the provisions and intent of this section. 
(d)  It is unlawful to tear down or deface any detour sign or to break down or drive around any barricade erected for the purpose of closing any section of a street to traffic during construction, repair or for any purpose incident to the needs of public safety or convenience or to drive over such section of the street until again thrown open to public traffic; however, such restriction shall not apply to the persons in charge of such construction or repair or project for public safety or convenience. 
(Code 1981, § 14-11; Code 1998, § 102-11) 
Sec. 98-37. - Moving violation penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a moving violation of any traffic ordinance shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $10.00 or more than $50.00. Except where a minimum fine is prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, the city judge may, at his discretion, suspend or reduce any sentence or delay the imposition of sentence upon moving traffic violators. 
(Code 1981, § 14-421; Code 1998, § 102-46; Ord. No. 4099, § VI, 8-1-1995) 
State Law reference- Increased penalties do not apply to ordinances regulations moving traffic, T.C.A. § 6-54-305. 
Sec. 98-38. - Parking violation penalties. 
(a)  Violations of the various parking regulations set out in this chapter shall be punishable by the penalties established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  If any person fails to comply with a parking citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the municipal court or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the clerk of the municipal court shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest. 
(Code 1981, § 14-422; Code 1998, § 102-47) 
Sec. 98-39. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
    All fines and forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund and shall be expendable as provided by the Charter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-423; Code 1998, § 102-48) 
Sec. 98-40. - Citation on illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked, standing or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by city ordinance or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a parking citation for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Code 1981, § 14-424; Code 1998, § 102-49) 
Sec. 98-41. - Liability for parking violations. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, in all prosecutions for alleged violation of any section of this chapter relating to parking, the owner of the vehicle involved shall be prima facie presumed to have been the operator or in control thereof at the time the alleged offense was committed. 
(b)  The responsibility for violation of any section of this chapter relating to parking shall not apply to the registered owner of a rented or leased vehicle parked in violation of law when such owner can furnish sworn evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, leased or rented to another person. 
(c)  In such instances, the owner of the vehicle shall, within 30 days after notification of the parking violation, furnish to the city court clerk the name, address and driver's license number of the person or company who leased or rented the vehicle. If the owner fails to provide such information within the 30-day period, the owner shall become personally liable for the violation. 
(Code 1981, § 14-425; Code 1998, § 102-50) 
Sec. 98-42. - Validity of citations and warrants. 
    No traffic citation or warrant shall be declared void because of the fact that the incorrect ordinance or section number was cited, so long as the complaint or warrant states a cause of action sufficient to place the defendant on notice of the charge he is called upon to defend against. 
(Code 1981, § 14-426; Code 1998, § 102-51) 
Sec. 98-44. - Service of process. 
    If any person fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons attached to a vehicle directing an appearance in the municipal court, the clerk of the municipal court shall serve alias or pluries process via the United States Postal Service by registered mail or certified mail, addressee only, return receipt requested, or by personal service of process. 
(Code 1981, § 14-428; Code 1998, § 102-53) 
Secs. 98-45-98-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-62. - Operators to exercise care, maintain lookout. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in such manner as shall indicate a failure to keep a proper lookout or an absence of due care, having regard to actual and potential hazards, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or because of weather or street conditions, and in any event, speed and operation shall be so controlled as shall be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Code 1998, § 102-198) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-136. 
Sec. 98-63. - Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-101; Code 1998, § 102-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-115. 
Sec. 98-64. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1981, § 14-102; Code 1998, § 102-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-116. 
Sec. 98-65. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
    The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-103; Code 1998, § 102-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-117. 
Sec. 98-66. - Passing on the right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-104; Code 1998, § 102-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-118. 
Sec. 98-67. - Limitations for overtaking on left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any approaching vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-105; Code 1998, § 102-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-119. 
Sec. 98-68. - Further limitations on driving on left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within 300 feet or such distance as to create a hazard if another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The limitations of this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway or under the conditions described in section 98-63 or to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-106; Code 1998, § 102-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-120. 
Sec. 98-69. - No passing zones. 
(a)  The department of planning and traffic engineering is authorized to determine those portions of any highway under its jurisdiction where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(b)  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone, no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length. 
(c)  This section does not apply under the conditions described in section 98-63 or to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-107; Code 1998, § 102-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-121. 
Sec. 98-70. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  Upon a roadway so designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. 
(b)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1981, § 14-108; Code 1998, § 102-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-122. 
Sec. 98-71. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent with this article, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three or five lanes and which provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except in preparation for making a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic control devices, or where such center lane is designated for overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when official traffic control devices authorize such movements and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance. 
(3)  Official traffic control devices may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(4)  Where passing is unsafe because of traffic in the opposite direction or other conditions, a slow-moving vehicle, including a passenger vehicle, behind which five or more vehicles are formed in line, shall turn or pull off the roadway wherever sufficient area exists to do so safely, in order to permit vehicles following it to proceed. As used in this subsection, a slow-moving vehicle is one which is proceeding at a rate of speed which is ten miles per hour or more below the lawful maximum speed for that particular roadway at that time. 
a.  Any person failing to conform with this subsection (4) shall receive a warning citation on first offense and shall be liable for a fine of $20.00 on second offense and $50.00 on third and subsequent offenses. 
b.  Subsection (4)a of this section shall not apply to funeral processions or to school buses. 
(5)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(Code 1981, § 14-109; Code 1998, § 102-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-123. 
Sec. 98-72. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(b)  Unless otherwise directed by a police officer, all motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. 
(Code 1981, § 14-111; Code 1998, § 102-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-124. 
Sec. 98-73. - Driving on divided highways. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority. 
(Code 1981, § 14-110; Code 1998, § 102-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-125. 
Sec. 98-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- § 98-74, which pertained to operators to exercise care, maintain lookout has been removed at the request of the city. A duplicate section may be found in § 98-62. 
Sec. 98-75. - Following fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1981, § 14-120; Code 1998, § 102-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-168. 
Sec. 98-76. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire official in command. 
(Code 1981, § 14-121; Code 1998, § 102-101) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-169. 
Sec. 98-77. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely. This requirement shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train because of its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard. 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1981, § 14-122; Code 1998, § 102-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-145. 
Sec. 98-78. - Overtaking and passing school or church bus. 
(a)  The following shall apply for overtaking and passing a school bus: 
(1)  All motor vehicles used in transporting school children to and from school in the city are required to be distinctly marked "school bus" on the front and rear thereof in letters of not less than six inches in height and so plainly written or printed and so arranged as to be legible to persons approaching such school bus, whether traveling in the same or opposite direction. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "separate roadways" means roadways divided by an intervening space which is not suitable to vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided by state law, the school bus driver is required to stop such school bus on the right-hand side of such road or highway, and the driver shall cause the bus to remain stationary and the visual stop signs on the bus actuated, until all school children who should be discharged from the bus have been so discharged and until all children whose destination causes them to cross the road or highway at that place have negotiated such crossing. 
(b)  The following shall apply for overtaking and passing a church bus: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle on a highway upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any church bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers shall stop the vehicle before reaching such church bus, and the driver shall not proceed until such church bus resumes motion or is signaled by the church bus driver to proceed or the visual signals on the bus are no longer actuated. This subsection shall not apply unless the church bus has the same type of safety equipment indicating the bus has stopped as is required for school buses. 
(2)  All motor vehicles used in transporting passengers to and from churches in the city are required to be distinctly marked "church bus" on the front and rear thereof in letters of not less than six inches in height and so plainly written or printed and so arranged as to be legible to persons approaching such church bus, whether traveling in the same or the opposite direction. 
(3)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a church bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the church bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "separate roadways" means roadways divided by an intervening space which is not suitable to vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided by this subsection (a), the church bus driver is required to stop such church bus on the right-hand side of the road or highway, and the driver shall cause the bus to remain stationary and the visual stop signs on the bus actuated until all passengers who should be discharged from the bus have been so discharged and until all passengers whose destination causes them to cross the road or highway at that place have negotiated such crossing. 
(Code 1981, § 14-123; Code 1998, § 102-103) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-151. 
Sec. 98-79. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-124; Code 1998, § 102-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-162. 
Sec. 98-80. - Limitations on backing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic, and in no event shall the backing movement exceed 50 feet. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back into a street intersection or around a street corner. 
(Code 1981, § 14-125; Code 1998, § 102-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-163. 
Sec. 98-81. - Driving upon sidewalk and operating a bicycle on a sidewalk. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, the riding of bicycles on sidewalks in the city is permitted, except the sidewalks on Broad Street between Main Street and New Street and those sidewalks where signs or other traffic control devices are posted indicating that such is prohibited or the sidewalk is closed. 
(b)  All persons operating a bicycle on a sidewalk shall ride on the right side of the sidewalk except the operator may move to the left side when making a left turn, to avoid a hazardous condition, or to pass a pedestrian, slower moving bicycle or other person using the sidewalk proceeding in the same direction. The operator of the bicycle shall exercise due care when operating a bicycle on a sidewalk and shall give an audible signal when passing a pedestrian, slower bicycle or other person using the sidewalk proceeding in the same direction. All other provisions pertaining to the operation of a bicycle contained in this code shall continue to apply. 
(Code 1981, § 14-126; Code 1998, § 102-106; Ord. No. 6242, § I, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 98-82. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding four, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-127; Code 1998, § 102-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-165. 
Sec. 98-83. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1981, § 14-128; Code 1998, § 102-108) 
Sec. 98-84. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
    No person upon roller skates, roller blades, in-line roller skates or similar devices or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1981, § 14-6; Code 1998, § 102-6; Ord. No. 4223, § II, 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 98-85. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting applicable laws of the state, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle may be equipped with or display a red light only in combination with a blue light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall this section protect the driver from the consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1981, § 14-8; Code 1998, § 102-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-108. 
Sec. 98-86. - Funeral processions. 
    A funeral procession properly identified by a flashing amber light on the lead vehicle or led by a properly identified escort shall have the right-of-way on any street, highway or road through which it may pass, subject to the following: 
(1)  The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic control signals, but when the leading vehicle has progressed across an intersection in accordance with such signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles of such procession may proceed without stopping regardless of the sign or signal when each of such vehicles has its headlights lighted; 
(2)  Vehicles in a funeral procession shall drive on the right-hand side of the roadway and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe; 
(3)  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way to an authorized emergency vehicle giving audible signal by siren and shall yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer; 
(4)  On public highways and interstates, vehicles in a funeral procession shall proceed at a minimum speed of 45 miles per hour and, otherwise, on streets and roads at a speed not to exceed five miles per hour below the posted speed; 
(5)  Oncoming traffic is instructed to proceed as normal when meeting a funeral procession; 
(6)  Vehicles following a funeral procession on a two-lane highway may not attempt to pass such procession; and 
(7)  No operator of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles in a properly identified funeral procession except when directed to do so by a traffic officer. 
(Code 1981, § 14-402; Code 1998, § 102-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-183. 
Sec. 98-87. - Unlawful riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1981, § 14-403; Code 1998, § 102-14) 
State Law reference- Transportation of children in truck beds prohibited, T.C.A. § 55-8-189; proper seating on motorcycles required, T.C.A. § 55-8-164; driver's view and control and seating limitations for those purposes T.C.A. § 55-8-165. 
Sec. 98-88. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1981, § 14-404; Code 1998, § 102-15) 
Secs. 98-89-98-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Speed generally, T.C.A. § 55-8-152 et seq. 

Sec. 98-120. - Reasonable and safe operation of vehicle. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with this, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or because of weather or highway conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 14-61; Code 1998, § 102-136) 
Sec. 98-121. - Maximum limits. 
    Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with section 98-120, the limits specified in this section or unless otherwise posted or established as authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of such maximum limits: 
(1)  15 miles per hour unless otherwise posted when passing a school during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours; 
(2)  15 miles per hour in alleys; 
(3)  30 miles per hour on all streets within the city, except those covered by subsection (4) of this section and otherwise posted; 
(4)  55 miles per hour on all highways of the national system of interstate and defense highways and other highways which incorporate similar design and access control features. 
(Code 1981, § 14-62; Code 1998, § 102-137) 
Sec. 98-122. - Minimum speeds. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law. 
(Code 1981, § 14-63; Code 1998, § 102-138) 
Sec. 98-123. - Special speed limitations. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor-driven cycle at any time mentioned in section 98-393 at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour unless such motor-driven cycle is equipped with a headlamp which is adequate to reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of 300 feet ahead. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with solid rubber or cushion tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1981, § 14-64; Code 1998, § 102-139) 
Sec. 98-124. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
    The department of planning and traffic engineering is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable on a particular street or highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-65; Code 1998, § 102-140) 
Secs. 98-125-98-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INTERSECTION CONTROL AND TURNING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-147. - Authority for stop and yield signs. 
    The city manager is authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs or other official traffic control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junctions at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before entering the intersection or junction as authorized elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-81; Code 1998, § 102-166) 
Sec. 98-148. - Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns. 
    The city manager is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1981, § 14-82; Code 1998, § 102-167) 
Sec. 98-149. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The city manager shall place proper signs at those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-83; Code 1998, § 102-168) 
Sec. 98-150. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection or at any location between intersections. Any violation of this section shall be known as making a U-turn. This section shall not apply to turns in dead-end streets and similar locations where a U-turn is the only practical means of changing directions, or to turns between one-way roadways of a divided highway unless signs specifically prohibiting such turns have been erected along the section of street or highway in question. No U-turn shall be made unless such movement can be completed in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 14-84; Code 1998, § 102-169) 
Sec. 98-151. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different highway. 
(b)  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (a) of this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-112; Code 1998, § 102-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-128. 
Sec. 98-152. - Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by T.C.A. § 55-8-149 at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on the through highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the through highway. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto although not a part of a through highway and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle who is faced with a yield sign at the entrance to a through highway or other public roadway is not necessarily required to stop, but is required to exercise caution in entering the highway or other roadway and to yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the highway or other roadway or which are approaching so closely on the highway or other roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, and the driver having so yielded may proceed when the way is clear. Where there is provided more than one lane for vehicular traffic entering a through highway or other public roadway, if one or more lanes at such entrance is designated a yield lane by an appropriate marker, this subsection shall control the movement of traffic in any lane so marked with a yield sign, even though traffic in other lanes may be controlled by an electrical signal device or other signs, signals, markings or controls. 
(Code 1981, § 14-113; Code 1998, § 102-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-130. 
Sec. 98-153. - Vehicle entering roadway. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway or, if there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
(Code 1981, § 14-114; Code 1998, § 102-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-131. 
Sec. 98-154. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1981, § 14-115; Code 1998, § 102-95) 
Sec. 98-155. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection; 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered; 
(4)  Local instructions. The city may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs; and 
(5)  Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been established: 
a.  A left turn shall not be made from any other lane unless a vehicle cannot safely enter the turn lane; 
b.  A vehicle shall not be driven in the left turn lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway; 
c.  A vehicle shall not use the left turn lane solely for the purpose of passing another vehicle; 
d.  A vehicle shall not enter a left turn lane more than a safe distance from the point of the intended turn; 
e.  When any vehicle enters the turn lane, no other vehicle proceeding in an opposite direction shall enter that turn lane if such entrance would prohibit the vehicle already in the lane from making the intended turn; and 
f.  When vehicles enter the turn lane proceeding in opposite directions, the first vehicle to enter the lane shall have the right-of-way. 
(Code 1981, § 14-116; Code 1998, § 102-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-140. 
Sec. 98-156. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in section 98-155 or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in subsections (c) through (h) of this section and T.C.A. § 55-8-144 if any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(c)  Every driver who intends to start, stop or turn or partly turn from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in safety, and whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement shall give a signal required in this section, plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle of the intention to make such movement. 
(d)  The signal required in this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by some mechanical or electrical device approved by the department of safety, in the manner specified in this section. Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate the intention to start, stop or turn or partly turn by extending the hand and arm from and beyond the left side of the vehicle, in the following manner: 
(1)  For left turn or to pull to the left, the arm shall be extended in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder; 
(2)  For right turn or pull to the right the arm shall be extended upward; and 
(3)  For slowing down or to stop, the arm shall be extended downward. 
(e)  Such signals shall be given continuously for a distance of at least 50 feet before stopping, turning, partly turning or materially altering the course of the vehicle. 
(f)  Drivers having once given a hand, electrical or mechanical device signal must continue the course thus indicated, unless they alter the original signal and take care that drivers of vehicles and pedestrians have seen and are aware of the change. 
(g)  Drivers receiving a signal from another driver shall keep their vehicles under complete control and shall be able to avoid an accident resulting from a misunderstanding of such signal. 
(h)  Drivers of vehicles, standing or stopped at the curb or edge, before moving such vehicles, shall give signals of their intention to move into traffic, as provided in this section, before turning in the direction the vehicle shall proceed from the curb. 
(i)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with and the required signal shall be given by signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 14-117; Code 1998, § 102-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-142. 
Sec. 98-157. - Vehicle turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1981, § 14-118; Code 1998, § 102-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-142. 
Secs. 98-158-98-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 98-184. - Scope. 
    This division shall apply upon streets and highways and elsewhere throughout the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-181; Code 1998, § 102-226) 
Sec. 98-185. - Immediate notice of accident. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority. 
(b)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident as required in subsection (a) of this section and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(Code 1981, § 14-184; Code 1998, § 102-228) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-10-106. 
Sec. 98-186. - False reports. 
    A person shall not give information in oral or written reports as required in this chapter knowing or having reason to believe that such information is false. 
(Code 1981, § 14-185; Code 1998, § 102-229) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-10-110. 
Sec. 98-187. - Reports by garages. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop located within the city to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident, of which written report must be made by the driver thereof as provided by applicable state laws, or which shows evidence of having been struck by any bullet shall report to the police department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received by the garage or repair shop, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-186; Code 1998, § 102-230) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-10-113. 
Sec. 98-188. - Public access to and inspection of reports relating to accidents. 
(a)  All accident reports made by any person or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department and other city departments having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the department may transmit a copy of such report to state agencies having use for the records and may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident, unless forbidden by law. 
(b)  No reports or information set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the department shall furnish, on demand of any party to such trial or upon demand of any court, the certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with the law. 
(c)  A copy of any official police accident report shall be made available upon request of any party involved in or suffering damages as a result of such accident or the company insuring the vehicle or individual in such accident or the legal counsel to any party involved in such accident, upon payment of a charge not to exceed $3.00 per page. 
(Code 1981, § 14-187; Code 1998, § 102-231) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-10-114. 
Secs. 98-189-98-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-215. - Applicability. 
(a)  The sections of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this article or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The sections of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1981, § 14-281; Code 1998, § 102-261; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-216. - General restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
b.  On a sidewalk. 
c.  Within an intersection. 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway or within a highway tunnel unless signs or meters have been installed by the department of planning and engineering to indicate that parking is permitted. 
h.  On any railroad tracks. 
i.  On any controlled-access highway. 
j.  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers. 
k.  On any part of the highway, as defined in section 98-1, where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. 
l.  At any curb of a street that is painted yellow, sometimes referred to in this code as yellow curb markings. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of or within five feet of a public or private driveway. 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance, when properly signposted. 
f.  Upon any paved shoulder which has been separated from a paved roadway by a solid white line marked on the pavement. 
g.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  The restrictions imposed by division 2 of this article shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such position. 
(d)  Except as provided elsewhere in this article whenever parking is prohibited as authorized in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the department of planning and engineering to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless a minimum of two such signs are erected in each block and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(e)  At any location where parking is prohibited as provided elsewhere in this article, the department of public works may use yellow curb markings in lieu of signs which will permit enforcement of such prohibitions, and based on engineering and traffic investigation may use such markings to effect reasonable extensions of the distances over which the specified prohibitions are effective. 
(Code 1981, § 14-282; Code 1998, § 102-262; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-160. 
Sec. 98-217. - Passage and view around stopped, standing or parked vehicles. 
    Upon any street or highway no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-283; Code 1998, § 102-263; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-158. 
Sec. 98-218. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 14-284; Code 1998, § 102-264; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-158. 
Sec. 98-219. - Parking trucks and trailers. 
(a)  No person shall park any truck or motor vehicle of more than 18,000 pounds gross weight or any trailer or semitrailer, whether or not attached to a tractor, on any street from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. This subsection shall not apply to trucks, trailers or semitrailers so parked while actually engaged in loading or unloading or when the driver is in attendance with the truck. 
(b)  No person shall park a truck or motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting any explosive or more than 50 gallons of gasoline, kerosene, benzol, naphtha or other volatile liquids on any street or alley from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., regardless of whether such vehicle is loaded or empty. 
(Code 1981, § 14-285; Code 1998, § 102-265; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-220. - All-night parking on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle overnight within any area where timed parking is established, except as provided in this section, or to park any vehicle on Broad Street and Main Street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without an overnight parking pass. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any physician while on emergency call or to any authorized emergency vehicle on emergency call or to any public utility vehicle when such vehicle is in use on official business. 
(Code 1981, § 14-285.1; Code 1998, § 102-266; Ord. No. 4099, § V, 8-1-1995; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-221. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any part of the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(3)  Displaying advertising or commercial messages; 
(4)  Selling farm produce and other agricultural products; or 
(5)  Storing such vehicle for a continuous period of time longer than 24 hours without a valid city issued overnight parking pass. 
(Code 1981, § 14-286; Code 1998, § 102-267; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-222. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The department of public works is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking or yellow curb markings upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. Yellow curb markings may be used in lieu of signs. 
(Code 1981, § 14-287; Code 1998, § 102-268; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-223. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The department of public works is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected, or yellow curb markings are used, upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1981, § 14-288; Code 1998, § 102-269; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-224. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The department of public works is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 14-289; Code 1998, § 102-270; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-225. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The department of public works authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 150 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1981, § 14-290; Code 1998, § 102-271; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-226. - Manner of parking. 
(a)  Except when angle parking is permitted and designated as authorized in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. 
(b)  Except when angle parking is permitted and designated as authorized in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
(Code 1981, § 14-291; Code 1998, § 102-272; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-227. - Parking at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(a)  The department of public works shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the state department of transportation has determined and confirmed in writing that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(c)  On those streets which have been signed or marked by the department of planning and traffic engineering for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1981, § 14-292; Code 1998, § 102-273; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-228. - Reserved parking for disabled person. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disabled driver means a driver who is disabled by paraplegia; amputation of leg, foot or both hands; or is disabled by loss of use of a leg, foot or both hands; or other condition, certified to by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine, resulting in an equal degree of disability (specifying the particular condition) so as not to be able to get about without great difficulty, including impairments that, regardless of cause or manifestation, confine such person to a wheelchair or cause such person to walk with difficulty or insecurity. The term "disabled driver" includes but is not limited to those persons using braces or crutches, arthritics, spastics and those with pulmonary or cardiac ills who may be semi-ambulatory. For the purposes of this section, the term "disabled driver" also includes the owner of a motor vehicle, which owner has vision of not more than 20/200 with correcting glasses. The term "disabled driver" also includes the owner of a motor vehicle who is experiencing difficulty or insecurity in walking and who is seeking treatment or healing solely by prayer through spiritual means in the practice of religion in accordance with the creeds or tenets of the First Church of Christ, Scientist in Boston, Massachusetts. Such condition shall be certified by a Christian Science practitioner listed in The Christian Science Journal as resulting in a degree of disability so that such person is not able to get about without great difficulty. 
    Vehicle designated for transportation of disabled persons means any vehicle bearing the universal symbol of access (the blue and white wheelchair disabled sign) being used to chauffeur or otherwise transport disabled persons. The disabled persons, for the purposes of this section, are persons who are disabled to the same degree of physical disability or impairment as a disabled driver as defined in this subsection. 
(b)  The department of transportation is authorized to designate, by the installation of appropriate signs, parking spaces for the exclusive use of disabled persons in those areas where a significant demand for parking by such disabled persons may exist upon city-owned property or upon public streets, alleys and travel ways within the city. Any business, firm or other person transacting business with the public from a permanent location may provide specially marked parking spaces upon private property for the exclusive use of persons qualifying for the rights and privileges extended to disabled persons by this section. Each such parking space so designated in accordance with this section, either on public or private property, shall be marked and maintained with the stylized wheelchair symbol designated by T.C.A. § 55-21-104. Such marking may be by a sign on a pole. However, nonconforming markings or signs shall be acceptable during the useful life of such markings or signs, which may not be extended by other than normal maintenance as long as such markings or signs provide reasonable notice of the specially marked parking space. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in any parking space designated with the wheelchair disabled sign, except a disabled driver who meets the requirements for the issuance of a distinguishing placard or license plates, disabled veteran's license plate or distress flag or card as provided in T.C.A. § 55-21-101 et seq., and who displays the distinguishing license plate, placard or card or for any person transporting a disabled person by vehicle designated for the transportation of disabled persons. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle bearing the universal access symbol (the blue and white wheelchair disabled sign) to park in any space designated for disabled drivers and for vehicles designated for the transportation of disabled persons except when actually engaged in the transportation of disabled persons as defined in this section. 
(e)  It is also a violation of this section for any person to park a motor vehicle so that a portion of such vehicle encroaches into a parking space designated for disabled persons in a manner which restricts, or reasonably could restrict, a person confined to a wheelchair from exiting or entering a motor vehicle properly parked within such parking space designated for disabled persons. It is further a violation of this section for any person to park a motor vehicle so that any portion of such vehicle encroaches in any area adjacent to a parking space designated for disabled persons where such area is marked by hatch, cross hatch or diagonal lines or as otherwise designated pursuant to the publications listed in T.C.A. § 55-21-104. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 14-293; Code 1998, § 102-274; Ord. No. 4512, §§ 1, 2, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 5057, § III, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Related provisions, T.C.A. §§ 55-21-102, 55-21-108; similar provision, T.C.A. § 55-8-160(a)(15). 
Sec. 98-229. - Parking signs required. 
    Except as provided elsewhere in this article, including but not limited to section 98-216 and section 98-228, when any parking time limit is established or parking is prohibited or special purpose parking spaces designated as provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the department of public works to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof or use yellow curb markings, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs were erected in each block, or yellow curb markings were used, and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1981, § 14-294; Code 1998, § 102-275; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-230. - Lines, markings designating parking spaces. 
    The city manager or designee may have lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street for the purpose of designating the parking spaces to be used, and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking space shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across such line or marking or to park the vehicle in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1998, § 102-276; Ord. No. 5057, § V, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-231. - Overtime parking prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked for a longer period of time than is established for any parking zone. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense. A person having been found guilty of such offense shall pay a fine of $24.00. 
(Code 1998, § 102-276.5; Ord. No. 5057, § VI, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 6343, § I, 8-20-2013; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-232. - Parking control marks on tires; evading parking time limitation prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who operates any vehicle upon the streets, thoroughfares and public travel ways within the corporate limits of the city and who utilizes a time restricted parking space gives their consent to the placement of nonpermanent parking control marks upon the tires of any vehicle parked in such time restricted parking spaces. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the movement of any vehicle within the same parking space as to cover up or otherwise conceal the nonpermanent parking control marks placed upon vehicle tires by law enforcement officers to compute overtime parking or to in any manner erase, wash, remove, obscure, obliterate or otherwise wipe off the parking control marks placed upon the vehicle's tires while parked in the same parking space. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the movement of a vehicle, with the purpose of evading parking time limitation, to another parking space located within 500 feet from the closest point of the parking space at which such vehicle shall have been first parked. The movement of a vehicle less than 30 minutes before or after the expiration of the parking time limitation from one parking space to such other parking space shall be presumed to have been moved with the purpose of evading the parking time limitation. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 102-277; Ord. No. 5057, § VII, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-233. - Restrictions on parking in city-owned parking facilities. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle not having current state license plates affixed thereto or in such a state of disrepair or damage as to render the vehicle unfit or unsafe, or inoperable under its own power for the use for which it was intended. 
    Automobile means a motor vehicle, excluding motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, designed for carrying 12 passengers or less, and designed for the purpose of transporting people. 
    Automobile parking facility means a designated parking facility or portion thereof marked by signs or symbols restricting parking to automobiles or light trucks. 
    Equipment means an article or set of articles or physical resources serving to equip a person or thing, including but not limited to implements used in an operation or activity such as farm or garden tractors and accessories, motors, air compressors, bucket trucks, boats, boat trailers, campers, motor homes, vehicle components or parts, etc. 
    Light truck means a vehicle, primarily designed for the hauling of cargo, but having in addition an enclosed passenger area for six or less people, and being less than 24 feet in length and having not more than two axles. 
    Material means things relating to the production and distribution of economic goods. 
    Parking facility means any area or structure, owned or controlled by the city, including its department of education, and dedicated to public parking, with or without a fee. 
    Semitrailer means a vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Trailer means a transport vehicle designed to be pulled by another vehicle which does not depend upon the other vehicle for support. 
    Truck means any vehicle primarily designed for the hauling of cargo or as the moving device for permanently mounted equipment and exceeding 24 feet in overall length or having more than two axles. 
(b)  Automobile and light truck restricted parking. 
(1)  The department of public works shall designate those parking facilities or portions thereof that shall be restricted to parking of automobiles and light trucks and shall cause signs or symbols to be installed advising of such restrictions. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any vehicle other than automobiles or light trucks to be parked in or upon any automobile parking facility. 
(c)  General parking restrictions. It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to cause or allow any: 
a.  Abandoned vehicle; 
b.  Vehicle exceeding 24 feet in length, or weighing in excess of three tons; or 
c.  Truck, semitrailer, trailer or any combination thereof to be parked in or upon any parking facility except with display of a valid city issued parking pass. Note that trailer and towing vehicle must display separate passes. 
(2)  For any person to cause, allow or permit the accumulation and storage of equipment or material in or upon any parking facility. 
(3)  For any person to park or cause to be parked any vehicle in or upon any parking facility for a period exceeding 24 hours without a valid city issued overnight parking pass; 
(4)  To park or cause to be parked any vehicle in any parking facility in such manner that any portion of the vehicle extends over or beyond the pavement markings defining the limits of the parking space or in such manner as to impede the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 14-297; Code 1998, § 102-278; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-234. - Extended customer parking passes. 
(a)  In those areas where timed parking is established, the city manager or designee, may upon receipt of a written application, in a form established by the city manager, from any business operator located in such areas, holding, or exempt from holding, a valid city business license, and subject to the other requirements contained herein, issue up to five parking permits, known as extended customer parking passes to such business operator, who may make the permits available solely to said business operator's customers. Such permits displayed in a vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked on such streets without regard to the time limit established by any sign posted by the city, but such permit will not allow overnight parking or violation of any other parking restrictions within this Code. 
(b)  A condition for issuance of such permits is that the business operator applying for extended customer parking passes shall provide in the written application, the name, address, telephone number, contact person of the business along with a list of the names of all employees of said business. 
(c)  As a further condition to issuance of such permits, the business operator shall sign an agreement, in a form established by the city manager, that the permits will be used only for customers of that business, and that if employees of the business or business operator, or persons owning or leasing property on these portions of such streets. Use of the permits for the personal vehicle of such business operator or any other person, other than as set out in this section shall constitute a violation of this section. In addition to any fine that may be imposed the permit holder agrees upon a violation of this section the permit shall be revoked. 
(d)  If in the sole discretion of the city manager the extended customer parking passes become difficult to enforce due to abuse, then the city manager shall have the authority to discontinue the program and shall notify the board of mayor and aldermen of such discontinuance no later than at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 102-279; Ord. No. 5039, § I, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 5057, § VIII, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 6373, § I, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-235. - Extended contractor/construction parking passes. 
(a)  In those areas where timed parking is established, the city manager or designee, may upon receipt of a written application, in a form established by the city manager, for any business operator, property owner or resident located in such areas, holding, or exempt from holding, a valid city business license, valid lease, or paid tax receipt and subject to the other requirements contained herein, issue up to three parking permits, known as extended contractor/construction parking passes to such business operator or property owner, who may make the permits available solely to contractors, utility maintenance workers or other similar construction workers. Such passes, when valid, displayed in a commercial vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked on such streets without regard to the time limit established by any sign posted by the city, but such permit will not allow overnight parking or violation of any other parking restrictions within this Code. 
(b)  A condition for issuance of such permits is that the business operator, property owner or resident applying for extended contractor/construction parking passes shall provide in the written application, the name, address, telephone number, contact person of the business, resident, or property owner along with the dates in which the construction or maintenance is to be taking place. Passes will be valid only on the dates anticipated for construction as listed on the application. 
(c)  As a further condition to issuance of such permits, the business operator, resident or property owner shall sign an agreement, in a form established by the city manager, that the permits will be used only for workers participating in construction or maintenance of that property. Use of the permits for the personal vehicle of such business operator, resident or property owner or any other person, other than as set out in this section shall constitute a violation of this section. In addition to any fine that may be imposed the permit holder agrees upon a violation of this section the permit shall be revoked. 
(d)  If in the sole discretion of the city manager the extended contractor/construction parking passes become difficult to enforce due to abuse, then the city manager shall have the authority to discontinue the program and shall notify the board of mayor and aldermen of such discontinuance no later than at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6373, § II, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-236. - Business overnight parking passes. 
(a)  In those areas where timed parking is established, the city manager or designee, may upon receipt of a written application, in a form established by the city manager, from any business operator located in such areas, holding, or exempt from holding, a valid city business license, and subject to the other requirements contained herein, issue up to two business overnight parking permits, known as business overnight parking passes to such business operator. Such permits shall be displayed in a vehicle or trailer used by the business for commercial purposes, when valid, and shall permit such to remain parked overnight in the following public parking lots or facilities as space is available: 425 Shelby Street Lot, 420 Cherokee Street Lot, 175 Cherokee Street Lot, 201 E. Market Street Lot, 102 Shelby Street Lot, 215 Shelby Street Parking Garage, 101 Clinchfield Street Lot, 201 Clinchfield Street Lot, 218 Clay Street Lot; and along Broad Street from Sullivan to Main Street, and along Main Street from Clay Street to Sullivan Street. Such permit does not allow violation of any other parking restrictions within this code. 
(b)  Business overnight parking passes shall be valid for up to one calendar year and all such passes shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewals may be made as early as one month prior to expiration and a grace period of one week may be allowed following expiration. 
(c)  Business overnight parking passes will be displayed in a manner as set forth by the city manager's office. 
(d)  Business overnight parking passes may be transferable from one vehicle to another based on the commercial use of the vehicle. Use of the permits for the personal vehicle of such business operator or any other person, other than as set out in this section shall constitute a violation of this section. In addition to any fine that may be imposed the permit holder agrees upon a violation of this section the permit shall be revoked. 
(e)  If in the sole discretion of the city manager the business overnight parking passes become difficult to enforce due to abuse, then the city manager shall have the authority to discontinue the program and shall notify the board of mayor and aldermen of such discontinuance no later than at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6373, § III, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-237. - Resident overnight parking passes. 
(a)  In those areas where timed parking is established, the city manager or designee, may upon receipt of a written application, in a form established by the city manager, from any resident located in such areas, holding, registration of a vehicle in the name of the resident living at an address within the timed parking area, and subject to the other requirements contained herein, issue a single overnight parking permit per registration, known as resident overnight parking passes. Such permits, when valid, shall be displayed in a vehicle or trailer used by the resident and shall permit such to remain parked overnight in the following public parking lots or facilities as space is available: 425 Shelby Street Lot, 420 Cherokee Street Lot, 175 Cherokee Street Lot, 201 E. Market Street Lot, 102 Shelby Street Lot, 215 Shelby Street Parking Garage, 101 Clinchfield Street Lot, 201 Clinchfield Street Lot, 218 Clay Street Lot; and along Broad Street from Sullivan to Main Street, and along Main Street from Clay Street to Sullivan Street. Such permit does not allow violation of any other parking restrictions within this code. 
(b)  Resident overnight parking passes shall be valid for up to one calendar year and all passes shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewals may be made as early as one month prior to expiration and a grace period of one week may be allowed following expiration. 
(c)  Resident overnight parking passes will be displayed in a manner as set forth by the city manager's office and are non-transferable between owners or vehicles. 
(d)  Visitor passes for overnight parking will be available to residents who currently hold a resident overnight parking pass. Only two visitor passes will be issued per address or residential unit. Visitor parking passes will be held to the same standards of applicability as the resident overnight parking pass, with the exception that the intended use is temporary and may be transferred to different vehicles during the course of the year. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) per pass will be assessed annually. 
(e)  Abuse of any parking passes for the vehicle of a resident shall constitute a violation of this section and all parking passes issued to such resident shall be immediately revoked. 
(f)  If in the sole discretion of the city manager the resident overnight parking passes and visitor parking passes become difficult to enforce due to abuse, then the city manager shall have the authority to discontinue the program and shall notify the board of mayor and aldermen of such discontinuance no later than at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(g)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6373, § IV, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 98-238-98-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 98-262. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
(a)  The department of planning and traffic engineering is authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which this division is applicable. Freight loading zones will be established only where: 
(1)  The applicant has no available off-street loading and unloading facilities or such facilities as are available are grossly inadequate; 
(2)  Such loading is necessary to the conduct of the business of the applicant; 
(3)  Such loading zone is in the interest of public convenience, welfare and safety; 
(4)  The type of loading and unloading involves freight or merchandise too heavy or bulky to be conveniently carried by hand; and 
(5)  Existing street loading space is too inconvenient or far away for practical and efficient loading or unloading. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any one block be reserved for loading purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 14-341; Code 1998, § 102-306) 
Sec. 98-263. - Standing in passenger loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1981, § 14-342; Code 1998, § 102-307) 
Sec. 98-264. - Standing or parking in loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of property in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of property exceed 30 minutes nor shall any vehicle be left unattended in such a zone for more than ten minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property. 
(Code 1981, § 14-343; Code 1998, § 102-308; Ord. No. 6373, § V, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 98-265. - Unloading vehicles exceeding 80 inches in width. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the width of which motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is in excess of 80 inches (that is, 40 inches on each side of the centerline of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer) on any street within the city for a period longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading and unloading of freight or property, which in no event shall be longer than two hours at any one time. 
(Code 1981, § 14-344; Code 1998, § 102-309) 
Sec. 98-266. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this chapter, except that such restrictions shall not apply to Chartered buses or other buses operating on streets or within areas where all designated areas are too inconvenient or too far away for practical and efficient passenger loading and unloading. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this chapter, except in an emergency or under the conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided in this chapter. This shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1981, § 14-345; Code 1998, § 102-310) 
Sec. 98-267. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1981, § 14-346; Code 1998, § 102-311) 
Sec. 98-268. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever any restriction on stopping for the purposes of loading or unloading of freight or passengers is established as authorized in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the department of planning and traffic engineering to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense clearly indicating the limits of such restricted zone. 
(Code 1981, § 14-347; Code 1998, § 102-312) 
Secs. 98-269-98-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 98-300. - Authority to establish. 
    The fire chief is empowered to establish areas in which vehicles are not permitted to be left standing or parked on public or private property within the corporate limits of the city when he deems that vehicles standing or parked in such areas would hinder the extinguishment of fires or would hinder the exits of persons from structures if a fire occurs. 
(Code 1981, § 8-41; Code 1998, § 102-341) 
Sec. 98-301. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  Before areas stated in section 98-300 are established, the fire chief shall give each of the owners of the property, as well as the tenants located thereon, written notice of his intention to establish fire lanes. The notice may be hand delivered or may be served by certified or registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owners and lessees. 
(b)  The notice shall set forth the area in which the fire lane is to be established, the reasons therefor and shall set a time, date and place in which the property owners and lessees may be afforded a hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days from the date of the mailing of the notice provided in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 8-42; Code 1998, § 102-342) 
Sec. 98-302. - Establishment and marking. 
    After the hearing as provided in section 98-301, if the fire chief determines that the safety of the improvements on the property and the safety of persons using the property require that fire lanes be established, he shall notify each of the owners and lessees in writing. The notice shall be served in the same manner as provided for in section 98-301. If no appeal from this determination is taken as provided in section 98-303 within ten days from the mailing of the notice, the fire chief is empowered to order the property owners to erect signs or some other clear markings, as approved by the fire chief, to vehicles using the area that no standing or parking is permitted, and after erecting the signs or markings, no standing or parking of vehicles in such areas shall be permitted. 
(Code 1981, § 8-43; Code 1998, § 102-343) 
Sec. 98-303. - Appeal of decisions of fire chief. 
    Upon protest by a property owner or lessee of the establishment of a fire lane area by the fire chief, such property owner or lessee may appeal the decision to the board of mayor and aldermen. A hearing of such an appeal shall be held by the board at the first meeting of the board which is held after 30 days of the notice of the decision of the fire chief. 
(Code 1981, § 8-44; Code 1998, § 102-344) 
Sec. 98-304. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person erecting any sign or otherwise designating an area as a fire lane without the express written authorization of the fire chief shall be guilty of a violation of this division and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $50.00. 
(b)  Any person allowing a vehicle to stand or park in a fire lane established under this division shall be guilty of a violation of this division and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $50.00. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description whatever left standing or parked in a fire lane established under this division may be ordered removed immediately and impounded by any police officer or other duly authorized person. The vehicle shall be released only to the duly identified owner thereof. The owner may secure the release of his vehicle by either: 
(1)  Paying the towing and any accumulated storage fees thereon; or 
(2)  If the owner wishes to contest the merits of the violation, he must post with the city court clerk a bond in the amount of the towing and accumulated storage fees. 
The owner will then be issued a bond receipt. The owner of the lot where the vehicle has been impounded shall immediately surrender the vehicle to the owner exhibiting the duly issued bond receipt. At the time the bond receipt is issued, a trial date will be set. If the owner of the vehicle is convicted of the offense, the amount of his bond shall be forwarded to the owner of the lot in which his vehicle was impounded, and the owner will be subject to fines as set out in subsection (b) of this section. If the owner is found to be innocent of the charge, the amount of his bond shall be returned to him. 
(d)  In emergency situations, the fire chief may order the immediate removal and impoundment of vehicles left standing or parked in designated fire lanes. The operator of any vehicle so removed shall be subject to the same fine as in subsection (b) of this section. The procedure for reclaiming any vehicle impounded under this section will be as prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 8-45; Code 1998, § 102-345) 
Secs. 98-305-98-326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 98-327. - Obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulations. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control signals as provided in sections 98-473 and 98-474. 
(c)  At all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-251; Code 1998, § 102-376) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-133(a). 
Sec. 98-328. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 98-329(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-252; Code 1998, § 102-377) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-134. 
Sec. 98-329. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic control devices, and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(e)  Except where indicated by an official traffic control device, every pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the edge of the roadway or by the shortest route to the opposite edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-253; Code 1998, § 102-378) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-135. 
Sec. 98-330. - Obedience to railroad signals. 
    No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1981, § 14-254; Code 1998, § 102-379) 
Sec. 98-331. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1981, § 14-255; Code 1998, § 102-380) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-137. 
Sec. 98-332. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1981, § 14-256; Code 1998, § 102-381) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-138. 
Sec. 98-333. - Soliciting rides or business. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
(b)  No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except as may be otherwise permitted. 
(c)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-257; Code 1998, § 102-382) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-139. 
Sec. 98-334. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1981, § 14-258; Code 1998, § 102-383) 
Sec. 98-335. - Right-of-way on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-259; Code 1998, § 102-384) 
Sec. 98-336. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
    Notwithstanding other sections of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-260; Code 1998, § 102-385) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-136. 
Sec. 98-337. - Under influence of alcohol or drugs. 
    A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree that renders him a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway except on a sidewalk. 
(Code 1981, § 14-262; Code 1998, § 102-387) 
State Law reference- Public intoxication, T.C.A. § 39-17-310. 
Sec. 98-338. - Pedestrians led by guide dog or carrying identifying cane given right-of-way. 
    Whenever any pedestrian guided by a guide dog or dog on a blaze orange leash or carrying in any raised or extended position a cane or similar stick white in color or white tipped with red shall undertake to cross any public street or thoroughfare in the state, the driver of each and every vehicle approaching such pedestrian carrying such cane or stick or conducted by such dog shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop and before proceeding shall take all precautions necessary to avoid injuring such pedestrian. However, nothing in this section shall be construed as making any person totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated guilty of contributory negligence in undertaking to cross any street or thoroughfare without being guided by a trained dog or carrying a cane or stick of the type mentioned in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-263; Code 1998, § 102-388) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-180. 
Sec. 98-339. - Walking through processions. 
    No pedestrian shall walk or proceed in any manner between vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion, provided such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. 
(Code 1981, § 14-264; Code 1998, § 102-389) 
Sec. 98-340. - Walking on freeways. 
    No pedestrian shall enter upon any highway of the national system of interstate and defense highways or any other highway which incorporates similar design and access control features. 
(Code 1981, § 14-265; Code 1998, § 102-390) 
Secs. 98-341-98-368. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOTORCYCLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Motorcycle rider education and safety, T.C.A. § 51-51-101 et seq.; motorcycles, T.C.A. § 55-8-164. 

Sec. 98-369. - Applicability of traffic laws to operators. 
    Every person operating a motorcycle shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those sections of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1981, § 14-141; Code 1998, § 102-421) 
Sec. 98-370. - Manner of riding. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle or other article which prevents him from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
(d)  No operator shall carry any person nor shall any person ride in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Code 1981, § 14-142; Code 1998, § 102-422) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-164. 
Sec. 98-371. - Operating on roadways laned for traffic. 
(a)  Every motorcycle is entitled to full use of a lane, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This subsection shall not apply to motorcycles operated two abreast in a single lane. 
(b)  The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(d)  Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane. 
(e)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1981, § 14-143; Code 1998, § 102-423) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-182. 
Sec. 98-372. - Clinging to other vehicles. 
    No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the motorcycle to any other vehicle or streetcar on a roadway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-144; Code 1998, § 102-424) 
Sec. 98-373. - Footrests and handlebars. 
(a)  Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for such passenger. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars more than 15 inches in height above that portion of the seat occupied by the operator. 
(Code 1981, § 14-145; Code 1998, § 102-425) 
State Law reference- Rearview mirrors, footrests and handlebars, T.C.A. § 55-9-305. 
Sec. 98-374. - Equipment for riders. 
(a)  No person shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless he is wearing protective headgear as may be required by the state motor vehicle laws. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorcycle unless he is wearing an eye-protective device as may be required by the state motor vehicle laws. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab or on a golf cart. 
(Code 1981, § 14-146; Code 1998, § 102-426) 
State Law reference- Motorcycle helmets, T.C.A. § 55-9-302; windshields, safety goggles, face shields or glasses, T.C.A. § 55-9-304. 
Secs. 98-375-98-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-392. - Scope and effect of article. 
(a)  It is an offense for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this article or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this article or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this article. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 1981, § 14-201; Code 1998, § 102-456) 
Sec. 98-393. - Times lighted lamps required. 
    Every vehicle upon a highway at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise, during fog, smoke or rain and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 200 feet ahead shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as respectively required in this article for different types of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles and further that stoplights, turn lights and other signaling devices shall be lighted as prescribed for the use of such devices. 
(Code 1981, § 14-202; Code 1998, § 102-457) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-401(a). 
Sec. 98-394. - Visibility distance and mounted height of lamps. 
(a)  Whenever a requirement of this article is declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, the requirement shall apply during the time stated in section 98-393 in respect under normal atmospheric conditions, unless a different time or condition is expressly stated. 
(b)  Whenever a requirement of this article is declared as to the mounted height of lamps, it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load. 
(Code 1981, § 14-203; Code 1998, § 102-458) 
Sec. 98-395. - Lights on vehicles other than motor vehicles. 
(a)  Every vehicle other than a motor vehicle, when traveling upon a state highway, state aid road or other road, highway or street under the control of the state, the federal government or the city dedicated, appropriated or open to public use or travel shall be equipped with a light attached to and on the upper left side of such vehicle, capable of displaying a light visible 500 feet to the front and 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle under ordinary atmospheric conditions, and such light shall be displayed during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at all other times when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on the road or highway at a distance of 200 feet ahead of such vehicle. 
(b)  Cotton wagons used exclusively to transport cotton shall not be required to display the light described in subsection (a) of this section, but shall display the following: 
(1)  A red tail lamp on the lower left corner of the rear of such wagon; and 
(2)  A triangle-shaped slow-moving vehicle identification emblem meeting standard S276.8 of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. Such emblem shall be placed on the lower left corner of the rear of such wagon. The user of a cotton wagon shall be responsible for the proper function of the symbol or light, except for any malfunction resulting from the act or omission of another person. 
(c)  Horse-drawn vehicles which are used on the highways primarily as means of transportation shall be equipped: 
(1)  On the top with a battery-powered white strobe light of a type approved for rural mail carriers under T.C.A. § 55-9-413 and shall have at least 100 square inches of reflector tape placed on the rear of the vehicle; or 
(2)  With two reflective type lanterns, one to be placed on the left side of the vehicle and one to be placed on the right side of the vehicle, with the lantern on the right side to be placed at least 12 inches higher than the lantern on the left, and shall also have a minimum of 100 square inches of reflector tape placed on the rear of the vehicle, 36 inches of reflector tape placed on each side of the vehicle, and 24 inches of reflector tape placed at the highest point of the left front of the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-204; Code 1998, § 102-459) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-401. 
Sec. 98-396. - Lights required on motor vehicles; exceptions; regulations as to color, type and visibility distance. 
(a)  Headlights shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, road roller, road machinery or farm tractor shall be equipped with at least two and not more than four headlights, with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Auxiliary road lighting lamps may be used, but not more than two of such lamps shall be lighted at any one time in addition to the two required headlights. 
(3)  No spotlight or auxiliary lamp shall be so aimed upon approaching another vehicle that any part of the high intensity portion of the beam therefrom is directed beyond the left side of the motor vehicle upon which the spotlight or auxiliary lamp is mounted or more than 100 feet ahead of such motor vehicle. 
(b)  Tail lamps and stoplights shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with two red tail lamps and two red stoplights on the rear of such vehicle, and one tail lamp and one stoplight shall be on each side, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1939, trucks manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1968, and motorcycles and motor-driven cycles shall have at least one red tail lamp and one red stoplight. 
(2)  The stoplight shall be so arranged as to be actuated by the application of the service or foot brake and shall be capable of being seen and distinguished from a distance of 100 feet to the rear of a motor vehicle in normal daylight, but shall not project a glaring or dazzling light. 
(3)  The stoplight may be incorporated with the tail lamp. 
(c)  Each lamp and stoplight required in this section shall be in good condition and operational. 
(d)  The use of flashing red and blue lights shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No vehicle operated in the city shall be equipped with any flashing red light which displays to the front of such vehicle, except school buses, authorized law enforcement vehicles only when used in combination with a flashing blue light, and emergency vehicles used in firefighting, including ambulances, emergency vehicles used in firefighting which are owned or operated by the division of forestry, firefighting vehicles, rescue vehicles, privately owned vehicles of regular or volunteer firefighters certified in T.C.A. § 55-9-201(c), or other emergency vehicles used in firefighting owned, operated or subsidized by the governing body of any county or municipality. 
(2)  Any emergency rescue vehicle owned, titled and operated by a state Chartered rescue squad, a member of the Tennessee Association of Rescue Squads, privately owned vehicles of regular or volunteer firefighters certified in T.C.A. § 55-9-201(c), and marked with lettering at least three inches in size and displayed on the left and right sides of the vehicle designating it an emergency rescue vehicle, any authorized civil defense emergency vehicle displaying the appropriate civil defense agency markings of at least three inches, and any ambulance or vehicle equipped to provide emergency medical services properly licensed as required in the state and displaying the proper markings shall also be authorized to be lighted in one or more of the following manners: 
a.  A red light visibar type with PA system; 
b.  A red oscillating-type light; and 
c.  Blinking red lights, front and rear. 
(3)  Any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle authorized by this section to display flashing red lights or authorized law enforcement vehicle using red and blue lights in combination, which displays any such lights shall be considered in violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, §§ 14-205-14-207, 14-210; Code 1998, § 102-460) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-402. 
Sec. 98-397. - Color of clearance lamps, identification lamps, side marker lamps, backup lamps and reflectors. 
(a)  Front clearance lamps, identification lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on the front or on the side near the front of a vehicle shall display or reflect an amber color. 
(b)  Rear clearance lamps, identification lamps and those marker lamps and reflectors mounted on the rear or on the sides near the rear of a vehicle shall display or reflect a red color. 
(c)  All lighting devices and reflectors mounted on the rear of any vehicle shall display or reflect a red color, except the light emitted by a backup lamp which shall be white or amber. 
(Code 1981, § 14-208; Code 1998, § 102-461) 
Sec. 98-398. - Use of multiple-beam road lighting equipment. 
    Whenever the road lighting equipment on a motor vehicle is so arranged that the driver may select at will between two or more distributions of light from headlights or lamps or auxiliary road lighting lamps or lights or combinations thereof, directed to different elevations, the following shall apply while driving during the times when lights are required: 
(1)  When there is no oncoming vehicle within 500 feet, the driver shall use an upper distribution of light, provided that a lower distribution of light may be used when fog, dust or other atmospheric conditions make it desirable for reasons of safety and when within the confines of municipalities where there is sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead and when following another vehicle within 500 feet; and 
(2)  When within 500 feet of an oncoming vehicle, a driver shall use a distribution of light so aimed that the glaring rays therefrom are not directed into the eyes of the oncoming driver. 
(Code 1981, § 14-209; Code 1998, § 102-462) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-407. 
Sec. 98-399. - Lamps or flags on projecting load. 
    During the time when lights are required to be displayed, there shall be attached to the rearmost extremity of any load which projects four feet or more beyond the rear of the body of the motor vehicle or at any tailboard or tailgate so projecting or to the rearmost extremity of any load, carried on a pole trailer, at least one red lamp, securely fastened thereto, which shall be visible from a distance of 500 feet to the sides and rear under normal atmospheric conditions. At all other times a red flag of cloth, synthetic or manmade material shall be so displayed. 
(Code 1981, § 14-211; Code 1998, § 102-463) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-405(d). 
Sec. 98-400. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, when operated upon any road, street or highway of the city, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, and it is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this section, for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon a vehicle any siren, exhaust, compression or spark plug whistle or for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except authorized emergency vehicles. 
(c)  It is permissible but not required that any vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
(Code 1981, § 14-212; Code 1998, § 102-464) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-201. 
Sec. 98-401. - Mirrors required. 
    Every motor vehicle, operated singly or when towing any other vehicle, shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such motor vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-214; Code 1998, § 102-465) 
Sec. 98-402. - Windshields. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings or side or rear windows of such vehicle which materially obstructs, obscures or impairs the driver's clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway. 
(b)  Every motor vehicle having a windshield shall be equipped with two windshield wipers for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield in order to provide clear vision for the driver, unless one windshield wiper cleans to within one inch of each side of windshield. 
(c)  Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Code 1981, § 14-215; Code 1998, § 102-466) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-203. 
Sec. 98-403. - Brake equipment required. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(b)  Every motorcycle and bicycle with motor attached, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
(c)  Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and the brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
(d)  Every new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer sold after May 21, 1937, in the state and operated upon the highways shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every such vehicle, except trucks and truck tractors having three or more axles need not have brakes on the front wheels, unless such vehicles are equipped with at least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with brakes, except any motorcycle, and except that any semitrailer of less than 1,500 pounds gross weight need not be equipped with brakes. 
(e)  The requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to trailers which are not required to be registered and licensed and which are used by or on behalf of farmers: 
(1)  Transporting farm products or livestock from farm to market; 
(2)  Transporting products, equipment, materials or supplies used in agricultural pursuits from market to farm or in their transfer from farm to farm or from one part of a farm to another part of the same farm; or 
(3)  Delivering such trailer to any farm. 
(Code 1981, § 14-216; Code 1998, § 102-467) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-204. 
Sec. 98-404. - Mud flaps. 
(a)  No person shall operate upon a public highway or street any motor vehicle, including a separate truck tractor (normally used in a tractor-trailer combination), or combination of vehicles having a carrying capacity in excess of 3,000 pounds, if such motor vehicle or combination of vehicles is not equipped with rear fenders, mud flaps or mudguards of such size as to substantially prevent the projection of rocks, dirt, water or other substances to the rear. Such fenders, flaps or guards shall be of a type approved by the state commissioner of safety. 
(b)  This section shall have no application to farm vehicles or vehicles used by farmers to haul produce from farm to market nor shall it apply to vehicles used exclusively for hauling logs. 
(Code 1981, § 14-217; Code 1998, § 102-468) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-212. 
Sec. 98-405. - Energy absorption system required; alteration of altitude of passenger car; modification of front end; modification of steering mechanism. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any road, street or highway unless the vehicle is equipped with a bumper or other energy absorption system with an analogous function. 
(b)  No person shall operate a passenger vehicle, except a four-wheel drive recreational vehicle, of a type required to be registered under the laws of the state upon a public highway or street modified because of alteration of its altitude from the ground if its bumpers, measured to any point on a load bearing member on the horizontal bumper bar, are more than 22 inches above the ground, except that no vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground or expose the fuel tank to damage from collision or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and that no part of the original suspension system be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension system; provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the installation of heavy-duty equipment to include shock absorbers and overload springs and, provided further, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent a person from operating a motor vehicle on a public highway with normal wear of the suspension system if normal wear does not affect the control of the vehicle. 
(1)  No person shall operate a four-wheel drive recreational vehicle of a type required to be registered under the laws of the state upon a public highway or street modified because of alteration of its altitude from the ground if its bumpers, measured to any point on a load-bearing member on the horizontal bumper bar, are not within the range of 14 inches to 31 inches above the ground, except that no vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with the ground or expose the fuel tank to damage from collision or cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and that no part of the original suspension system be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension system; provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the installation of heavy-duty equipment to include shock absorbers and overload springs and, provided further, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent a person from operating a motor vehicle on a public highway with normal wear of the suspension system if normal wear does not affect the control of the vehicle. For a four-wheel drive vehicle where the 31-inch limitation is exceeded, the vehicle will comply with this section if the vehicle is equipped with a drop bumper. Such a drop bumper must be bolted and welded to the frame of the vehicle and be made of a strength equal to a stock bumper. 
(2)  No person shall modify or cause to be modified by the use of lift blocks the front end suspension of a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Maximum frame heights for motor vehicles shall be as follows: 
a.  Passenger cars, 22 inches. 
b.  Trucks and recreational vehicles: 
4,500 lbs. and under 24 inches 4,501-7,500 lbs. 26 inches 7,501-10,000 lbs. 28 inches  
Frame height measurements shall be taken from the bottom of the frame by measuring the vertical distance between the ground and the lowest point of the frame directly below the point in line with the center of the steering wheel. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle having a distance greater than four inches between the body floor and the top of the frame. 
(5)  No person shall modify or cause to be modified the original manufacturer installed steering mechanism, including welding, nor the front spindle where the brake pads mount, on a passenger vehicle or a truck or recreational vehicle with a weight up to 10,000 pounds. 
(c)  This section does not apply to freight motor vehicles and other vehicles that have designs which would intrinsically preclude conformity with this section. This section also shall not apply to any vehicle that has an unaltered and undamaged stock bumper or energy absorption system as supplied by the manufacturer of the vehicle. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of traffic laws and regulations may stop and inspect motor vehicles which appear to be operated in violation of this section. If, upon inspection, the vehicle is found to be in violation of this section, the operator shall be issued a citation stating the particulars of the violation and, in general, the repairs necessary to bring the vehicle into compliance with this section. The citation shall also state a time and place for appearance in a court of competent traffic jurisdiction, not less than 14 days from the date of the issuance of the citation. 
(e)  If the vehicle is found not to be in compliance with this section, the operator shall be fined not less than $250.00. The vehicle may, however, be operated for the purpose of traveling to and from an establishment or location where repairs are to be performed. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to establish standards higher than those formulated by the United States Department of Transportation for bumpers on passenger motor vehicles sold within the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 14-218; Code 1998, § 102-469) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-215. 
Sec. 98-406. - Use of safety belts in passenger vehicles. 
(a)  As used in this section and in sections 98-407 through 98-409, the term "passenger motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less that is not used as a public or livery conveyance for passengers. The term "passenger motor vehicle" does not apply to motor vehicles which are not required by federal law to be equipped with safety belts. 
(b)  No person shall operate a passenger motor vehicle within the city unless such person and all passengers four years of age or older are restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in forward motion. 
(c)  No person four years of age or older shall be a passenger in a passenger motor vehicle within the city, unless such person is restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in forward motion. 
(d)  This section shall apply only to the operator and all passengers occupying the front seat of a passenger motor vehicle. If the vehicle is equipped with a rear seat which is capable of folding, this section shall only apply to front seat passengers and the operator if the back seat is in the fold-down position. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any vehicle exempted from similar provisions of state law by T.C.A. § 55-9-603(h). 
(Code 1981, § 14-219; Code 1998, § 102-470) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-603. 
Sec. 98-407. - Penalties for violation of use of safety belts. 
(a)  A person convicted of a violation of section 98-406 shall be fined $10.00 for a first violation and $20.00 for each subsequent violation. Notwithstanding any provision of law or ordinance to the contrary, no citation shall be issued for a violation of section 98-406 unless a person is stopped by a law enforcement officer for a separate violation of a law or ordinance and is issued a citation for the separate violation. 
(b)  It shall not be necessary that a conviction be had for the separate violation of a law or ordinance for the person to be found guilty of violating section 98-406. 
(Code 1981, § 14-220; Code 1998, § 102-471) 
Sec. 98-408. - Child passenger restraint systems. 
(a)  Any person transporting a child under four years of age in a passenger motor vehicle within the city shall provide for the protection of the child by properly using a child passenger restraint system meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards. Nothing in this section shall restrict a mother from removing a child from the restraint system and holding the child when the mother is nursing the child or attending to its other physiological needs. 
(b)  Any person transporting a child four years of age and up to and through 12 years of age in a passenger motor vehicle upon a road, street or highway in the city is responsible for the protection of the child and properly using a child or other passenger restraint system, including safety belts, meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards for all children occupying any seat within a passenger motor vehicle. 
(c)  If all seat belts or other passenger restraints in a passenger motor vehicle originally provided by the manufacturer are occupied, no fine shall be imposed on a person pursuant to the provisions of section 98-409 for the failure of a child four years of age through 12 years of age, inclusive, in the back seat to properly use a passenger restraint system. 
(Code 1981, § 14-221; Code 1998, § 102-472; Ord. No. 4598, § II, 10-20-1998) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-602. 
Sec. 98-409. - Penalties for violation of child passenger restraint. 
(a)  A person convicted of a violation of section 98-408 shall be fined $15.00 for a first violation and $25.00 for each subsequent violation. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed under subsection (a) of this section, a person found guilty of a first offense of violating section 98-408 may be required to attend a court approved offender's class designed to educate offenders on the hazards of not properly transporting children in passenger motor vehicles. A fee may be charged for such classes sufficient to defray all costs of providing such classes. 
(Code 1981, § 14-222; Code 1998, § 102-473) 
Sec. 98-410. - Vehicle registration plate visibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle with any cover, lens or tinting material of any type over a registration plate, or to use any substance that has the effect of altering the reflectivity of a registration plate, even if the information upon such license plate is not concealed. Frames without covers or lenses may be used on registration plates only if the frames do not obscure identifying letters or numbers or any renewal or other sticker required by law to be displayed on the plate and the plates can be plainly seen and read at all times. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall pay a penalty of up to $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 102-474; Ord. No. 5404, § I, 5-16-2006) 
Secs. 98-411-98-433. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WIDTH, WEIGHT, AND LOADS 

Sec. 98-434. - Scope and effect of division. 
(a)  It is an offense for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in this division or otherwise in violation of this division. 
(b)  The sections of this division governing size, weight and load shall not apply to fire apparatus, road machinery or to implements of husbandry, including farm tractors, temporarily moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued as provided in this section. 
(c)  This division shall not apply to a vehicle traveling on state-maintained highways when the operator of such vehicle has in his possession a written permit authorizing travel on such state-maintained highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-361; Code 1998, § 102-501) 
Sec. 98-435. - Width of vehicles. 
    The total outside width of any vehicle or the load thereon shall not exceed 96 inches. 
(Code 1981, § 14-362; Code 1998, § 102-502) 
Sec. 98-436. - Projecting loads on passenger vehicles. 
    No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any highway with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle or extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 14-363; Code 1998, § 102-503) 
Sec. 98-437. - Height and length of vehicles and loads. 
(a)  No vehicle, including any load thereon, shall exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. 
(b)  No motor vehicle, including any load thereon and bumpers, shall exceed a length of 40 feet extreme overall dimension. 
(c)  No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two units, and no such combination of vehicles including any load thereon shall have an overall length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 65 feet, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1981, § 14-364; Code 1998, § 102-504) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-7-201. 
Sec. 98-438. - Special load limits. 
(a)  Subject to sections 98-435 through 98-437 limiting the length of vehicles and loads, the load upon any vehicle operated alone or the load upon the front vehicle of a combination of vehicles shall not extend more than three feet beyond the foremost part of the vehicle, and the load upon any vehicle operated alone or the load upon the rear vehicle of a combination of vehicles shall not extend more than six feet beyond the rear of the bed or body of such vehicle. 
(b)  The limitations as to length of vehicles and loads stated in section 98-437(a) shall not apply to any load upon a pole trailer when transporting poles or pipes or structural material which cannot be dismembered, providing that no pole or pipe or other material exceeding 75 feet in length shall be so transported unless a permit has first been obtained from the appropriate state or city authority. 
(Code 1981, § 14-365; Code 1998, § 102-505) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-7-201. 
Sec. 98-439. - Loads on vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. 
(Code 1981, § 14-366; Code 1998, § 102-506) 
Sec. 98-440. - Maximum weight of vehicles. 
(a)  The total gross weight imposed on the street or highway by any axle or group of axles shall not exceed the limitations established by the applicable laws of the state. 
(b)  Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful is authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by means of either portable or stationary scales and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales if such scales are within two miles. 
(c)  Whenever an officer upon weighing a vehicle and load, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of such vehicle to such limit as permitted under this division. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. 
(d)  Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the vehicle and load to a weighing or who fails or refuses when directed by an officer upon a weighing of the vehicle to stop the vehicle and otherwise comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  The department of public service, in cooperation with the department of planning and traffic engineering, may prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles or may impose limitations as to the weight or size thereof on specific streets where, based on traffic and engineering studies, it is determined that such action is necessary to ensure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures. Such prohibitions and limitations shall only be effective when designated by appropriate traffic control devices placed on such streets. 
(Code 1981, § 14-367; Code 1998, § 102-507) 
Sec. 98-441. - Liability for damage to highway or structure. 
(a)  Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any highway or highway structure shall be liable for all damage which the highway or structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, driving or moving of such vehicle, object or contrivance, as provided elsewhere in this division. 
(b)  Whenever such driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object or contrivance, but is so operating, driving or moving the vehicle, object or contrivance with the express or implied permission of the owner, the owner and driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage. 
(c)  Such damage may be recovered in a civil action brought by the authorities in control of such highways or highway structure. 
(Code 1981, § 14-368; Code 1998, § 102-508) 
Sec. 98-442. - Restrictions on the movement of house trailers. 
    No house trailer exceeding a length of 40 feet extreme overall dimension or a width of 96 inches extreme overall dimension shall be towed or otherwise moved upon or across any street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. or during any period of darkness, if both the origin and destination of such movement lie within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-369; Code 1998, § 102-509) 
Secs. 98-443-98-467. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-468. - Authority. 
(a)  All traffic signs, signals, devices and markings which regulate the stopping, standing, parking or movement of traffic, including but not limited to parking meters, parking signs, speed limit signs, yield signs, stop signs and load limit signs, which are in existence on the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived are ratified and confirmed by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to order the erection or location of signs, signals, devices or markings regulating traffic in cases of emergency or immediate need. Such signs, signals, devices and markings shall be valid only for a period of 90 days. 
(c)  The planning and traffic engineering department shall erect and maintain all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings ordered erected or placed by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 14-36; Code 1998, § 102-541) 
Sec. 98-469. - Manual and specifications for traffic control devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1981, § 14-37; Code 1998, § 102-542) 
Sec. 98-470. - Obedience. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to leave the roadway and travel across private property or public property devoted to other than highway use to avoid compliance with an official traffic signal or an official traffic sign or for the purpose of avoiding obedience to directions given by a police officer or any traffic regulation or ordinance. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall subject the responsible person or entity to a penalty of not less than $50.00 and court costs for each violation. Such penalty and court costs shall not be suspended, reduced, or altered for a violation of this section. Such penalty and court costs shall be imposed even if the responsible person is granted defensive driving school, driver education or improvement course or any diversion by the court. Such penalty and court costs shall be in addition to any cost required for the school. The imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or immediate remedial action as called for or permitted under the provisions of this Code or other applicable law. 
(Code 1981, § 14-38; Code 1998, § 102-543; Ord. No. 5528, § I, 4-17-2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-109. 
Sec. 98-471. - Required for enforcement purposes. 
    No section of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Code 1981, § 14-39; Code 1998, § 102-544) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-109(b). 
Sec. 98-472. - Presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position substantially conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1981, § 14-40; Code 1998, § 102-545) 
Sec. 98-473. - Traffic control signal legend. 
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the word "Go," "Caution" or "Stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers or vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "Go": 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; and 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
(2)  Yellow alone or "Caution," when shown following the green or "Go" signal: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or cross the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles; 
(3)  Red alone or "Stop": 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. A right turn on a red signal shall be permitted at all intersections within the city, provided that the prospective turning car shall come to a full and complete stop before turning and that the turning car shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and cross traffic traveling in accordance with their traffic signal. However, such turn will not endanger other traffic lawfully using the intersection. A right turn on red shall be permitted at all intersections, except those clearly marked by a sign stating "No Turn on Red," which may be erected by the city government at intersections which it decides require no right turns on red in the interest of traffic safety; 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless such entry can be made safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic; and 
c.  A left turn on red or stop signal shall be permitted at all intersections within the city where a one-way street intersects with another one-way street moving in the same direction into which the left turn would be made from the original one-way street. Before making such a turn, the prospective turning car shall come to a full and complete stop and shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians and cross traffic traveling in accordance with the traffic signal so as not to endanger traffic lawfully using the intersection. A left turn on red shall be permitted at any applicable intersection except that clearly marked by a sign stating "No Turn On Red," which may be erected by the city government at intersections which it decides require no left turns on red in the interest of traffic safety; 
(4)  Red with green arrow: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless such entry can be made safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic; 
(5)  If an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal; 
(6)  All electric highway, street and road vehicular traffic control signals in the city shall have a uniform arrangement of the colored lenses in the various signal faces of such signals, as follows: In each signal face, all red lenses in vertical signals shall be located above all yellow and green lenses, and in horizontal signals, to the left of all yellow and green lenses. Yellow lenses shall be located between any red lens and all other lenses; and 
(7)  Whenever in the city three-light traffic control signals are used displaying successively green, yellow, and red lights for the direction of motorists and pedestrians, the minimum time exposure of the yellow light shall be three seconds. 
(Code 1981, § 14-41; Code 1998, § 102-546) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-110. 
Sec. 98-474. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1981, § 14-42; Code 1998, § 102-547) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-111. 
Sec. 98-475. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic compliance required. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes and the light is clearly visible for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such stopping, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  Railroad crossings excepted. This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in section 98-77. 
(Code 1981, § 14-43; Code 1998, § 102-548) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-112. 
Sec. 98-476. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings-Generally. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered to remove the sign, signal or marking or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1981, § 14-44; Code 1998, § 102-549) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-113. 
Sec. 98-477. - Same-On public right-of-way. 
(a)  The department of traffic engineering under the direction of the traffic coordinator is charged with the responsibility of implementing this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen and as may be covered by liability insurance to protect the city, there shall be no sign placed on any public right-of-way, either state or local, within the city that is not placed for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic by the authority of a public body or an official having jurisdiction. No sign or its support shall bear any message that is not essential to traffic control. 
(c)  Signs in conformance with previous regulations, but not presently in conformance, shall remain erected only so long as the then-existing use remains. A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged, reconstructed or changed in any manner nor shall the wording or graphics be changed to identify or advertise any use other than that in effect at the time it became a nonconforming sign. 
(d)  The removal of signs and supports may be required, if they present an immediate threat to public safety or have not been kept in good repair or condition or have become insecure or unsafe or have been unlawfully installed or maintained or have for one year identified or advertised an activity no longer conducted or for other lawful reasons. Immediate removal shall be required if a public safety threat is imminent; 15 days shall be permitted in other situations. Failure to comply shall result in removal of the sign at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1981, § 14-44.1; Code 1998, § 102-550) 
Sec. 98-478. - Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia or any other part of such device, sign or signal. 
(Code 1981, § 14-45; Code 1998, § 102-551) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 55-8-114. 
Sec. 98-479. - Possession of highway signs. 
    The department of planning and traffic engineering is authorized to indicate the ownership of traffic signs, signals or markers on such devices in letters not less than one-fourth inch in height or use of a metal stamp, etching or other permanent means. Except for employees of the department, police officers, contractors and their employees engaged in a highway construction contract or work on the highway approved by the department or local authority, it is an offense for any person to possess such sign, signal or marker so identified. 
(Code 1981, § 14-46; Code 1998, § 102-552) 
Secs. 98-480-98-496. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-497. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citations, which include documents entitled "notice of violation," may include: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  The registration plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location of the violation; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded image; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid; 
(8)  A personal or electronically signed statement by a P.O.S.T. certified member of the police department that, based on inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of this division; 
(9)  Information advising the person alleged to be liable under this division of the manner and time in which liability alleged in the citation occurred and that the citation may be contested in the city court and that failure to contest in the manner and time provided shall be deemed an admission of liability and that a default judgment may be entered thereon; and 
(10)  Other information required by T.C.A. § 55-8-198. 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    Owner or vehicle owner means the person identified as the registered owner of the vehicle. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic enforcement camera system on a photograph, microphotograph, electronic image, videotape or any other medium or means including digital or digitally stored and a least one image, identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
    System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Traffic enforcement camera system includes an unmanned traffic enforcement camera and is an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control sign, signal or device to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control sign, signal or device. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(a); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-498. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this division shall subject the responsible person or entity to a penalty of $50.00, and as may be permitted by T.C.A. § 55-8-198, court costs, for each violation. Such penalty and court costs shall not be suspended, reduced, or altered for a violation of this division. Such penalty and court costs shall be imposed even if the responsible person is granted defensive driving school, driver education or improvement course or any diversion by the court. Such penalty and court costs shall be in addition to any cost required for the school. The imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of this division shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or immediate remedial action as called for or permitted under the provisions of this Code or other applicable law. 
(b)  If the person or entity receiving the summons or citation is in violation of this division solely upon evidence obtained from an unmanned traffic enforcement camera that has been installed to enforce or monitor traffic violations, the violation shall be considered a nonmoving traffic violation. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(d); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-499. - Procedure. 
(a)  The city police department or an agent of the police department shall administer the traffic enforcement camera systems and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic enforcement camera systems are installed. 
(b)  A citation alleging that the violation of this division occurred, sworn to and by statement signed personally or electronically by a P.O.S.T. certified member of the police department, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic enforcement camera system, shall be issued in accordance with T.C.A. § 55-8-198 and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation under this division. The citation shall be forwarded by first-class mail to the owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration. Personal service of process on the owner shall not be required. 
(c)  Signs to indicate the use of traffic enforcement camera systems shall be posted as set out in T.C.A. § 55-8-198. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(b); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-500. - Offenses. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver shall stop when facing a red signal light at the stop line, or if none before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection and it shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location when facing a red signal light or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation specified in this chapter. No citation shall be issued based solely upon evidence obtained from a traffic enforcement camera that has been installed to enforce or monitor traffic violations of T.C.A. § 55-8-110(a)(3), unless the evidence collected shows the target vehicle with its front tire or tires before the stop line when the signal is red and subsequently shows the same vehicle with its rear tire or tires past the stop line while the signal is red. A traffic enforcement camera system may be used to issue a traffic citation for an unlawful right turn on a red signal at an intersection that is clearly marked by a "No Turn On Red" sign erected by the city. Any other traffic citation for failure to make a complete stop at a red signal before making a permitted right turn based solely upon evidence obtained from an unmanned traffic enforcement camera shall be deemed invalid. A traffic citation based solely upon evidence obtained from an unmanned traffic enforcement camera shall be deemed invalid if the registration information of the motor vehicle for which such citation is issued is not consistent with the evidence recorded by such traffic enforcement camera. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall be construed, interpreted and shall be conformed so as to comply with the requirements of T.C.A. § 55-8-198. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(c)(1); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-501. - Uncontested payment or court contest. 
    A person who receives a citation under this division may pay the civil penalty, in accordance with instructions on the citation, directly to the city court, or contracted collection agent or system vendor or contest the matter in city court. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(c)(2); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-502. - Owner of vehicle presumed liable; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible by strict liability for a violation under this division and shall be responsible for payment of any citation issued as the result of the traffic control monitoring system. 
(b)  An owner of a vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, on or before the designated court date, the owner furnishes the court an affidavit stating the name and address of the person or entity that leased, rented or otherwise had care, custody or control of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(c)  If a motor vehicle or its plates were stolen at the time of the alleged violation, the registered owner must provide an affidavit denying the owner was an operator and provide a certified copy of the police report reflecting such theft. 
(d)  An affidavit alleging theft of a motor vehicle or its plates must be provided by the registered owner of a vehicle receiving a notice of violation within 30 days of the mailing date of the notice of violation. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(c)(3); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-503. - Affirmative defenses. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to the liability under this division, proven by a preponderance of the sworn evidence that: 
(1)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with a lawful order of a police officer; 
(2)  The operator of a motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; or 
(3)  The person who received the citation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, provided such person supplies proof of the transfer of ownership, and the person provides the name and address of the purchaser or transferee. 
(Code 1998, § 102-553(c)(4); Ord. No. 5404, § II, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 5527, §§ I, II, 4-17-2007) 
Sec. 98-504. - Vehicles exempt from receiving a citation. 
    The following vehicles are exempt from receiving a citation for a violation of this division: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles with active emergency lights; 
(2)  Vehicles moving through the intersection to avoid or clear the way for a marked emergency vehicle; 
(3)  Vehicles under police escort; and 
(4)  Vehicles in a funeral procession. 
Secs. 98-505-98-529. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-530. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Is over four years old and is left unattended on public property for more than ten days; 
(2)  Is in an obvious state of disrepair and is left unattended on public property for more than three days; 
(3)  Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; 
(4)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours; or 
(5)  Has been stored, parked or left in a garage, trailer park, or any type of storage or parking lot for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Impoundment means the immobilization in place by the use of a device or mechanism or the removal of a vehicle to a storage facility by an officer or authorized agent of the police department or by a contractor for towing and storage in response to a request from an officer or authorized agent of the police department. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means any self-propelled motor-driven vehicle of the type and kind required to be registered and titled in accordance with T.C.A. § 55-1-101 et seq., or part of a motor vehicle, any house trailer, trailer, semitrailer, or combination or part thereof, any mobile home, as defined in T.C.A. § 55-1-105, or part thereof, and any manufactured home, recreational vehicle, camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer or truck camper, as defined in T.C.A. § 68-126-202, or part thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 14-386; Code 1998, § 102-581; Ord. No. 5075, § I, 12-3-2002) 
Sec. 98-531. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
    The chief of police is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this article and the Charter to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any contract awarded pursuant to section 98-597. 
(Code 1981, § 14-400.2; Code 1998, § 102-597) 
Sec. 98-532. - Impoundment without prior notice. 
(a)  Members of the police department shall have authority to impound any vehicle with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner as required in section 98-533 only when: 
(1)  The vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any alley, street or highway; 
(2)  The vehicle is illegally parked in a truck, bus, loading, taxi or other similar zone where, by order of the city manager or designee, chief of police or fire chief, parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles or is prohibited and where such vehicle is interfering with the proper and intended use of such zones; 
(3)  The vehicle poses an immediate danger to public safety; 
(4)  A police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is stolen; or 
(5)  A police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment is reasonably necessary in such instance to obtain or preserve such evidence. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a vehicle without a warrant where a warrant would otherwise be required. 
(Code 1981, § 14-387; Code 1998, § 102-582) 
State Law reference- Impounding, T.C.A. § 55-5-129. 
Sec. 98-533. - Cause for impoundment after notice. 
    A vehicle not subject to impoundment under section 98-532 may be impounded after notice of such proposed impoundment has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of 24 hours prior to such impoundment, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Any unattended motor vehicle found parked at any time upon a public street, highway or thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city against which there are two or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices shall, either by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to and impounded in any place officially designated as an impound lot or immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation by utilization of the Denver boot or similar device. However, no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by a Denver boot or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. 
(2)  When such vehicle is abandoned as that term is defined in section 98-531. 
(Code 1981, § 14-388; Code 1998, § 102-583) 
Sec. 98-534. - Persons authorized to impound. 
    When impoundment is authorized by this article, a vehicle may be impounded either by an officer or authorized agent of the police department or a contractor for towing or storage acting at the request of an officer or authorized agent of the police department. However, if such violation falls within the code of property maintenance or section 98-221, the authority of the aforementioned agents will be passed to the special code enforcement officer for the development services department to rectify the situation. 
(Code 1981, § 14-389; Code 1998, § 102-584; Ord. No. 6526, § III, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 98-535-98-561. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 98-562. - Pretowing investigation and notification. 
(a)  The police department may conduct a pretowing investigation and provide notice as required in this section to the owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record that the vehicle has been found to be abandoned, immobile, or unattended. 
(b)  The pretowing notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner of record and to all lienholders of record. 
(c)  The pretowing notice shall be written in plain language and shall contain the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the motor vehicle, if ascertainable, the location of the motor vehicle, and a statement advising the owner that the owner has ten days to appeal the determination by the police department that the vehicle is abandoned, immobile, or unattended or to remove the vehicle from the property, or the police department shall take the abandoned, immobile, or unattended vehicle into custody. 
(d)  The pretowing notice shall further inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle after it is taken into custody but before it is sold or demolished, upon payment of all towing, preservation, storage or any other charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody, and state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and consent to the demolition of the vehicle or its sale at a public auction. 
(e)  If the owner or lienholder cannot be located through the exercise of due diligence, notice by publication shall be given as provided in this division. 
(f)  If the owner or lienholder of an abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle fails to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, immobile, or unattended or fails to remove the motor vehicle within the time allowed for an appeal, the police department may take the vehicle into custody. If an appeal is made, the motor vehicle shall not be taken into custody while the appeal is pending. Failure to appeal within the specific time period shall, without exception, constitute waiver of the right of appeal. 
(g)  If pretowing notice is provided as set forth in this section, no additional notice to owner after impoundment shall be required. 
(Code 1981, § 14-391; Code 1998, § 102-586) 
Sec. 98-563. - Verification of ownership; notice of impoundment. 
(a)  The police department, or the towing service contracted by the city, shall, within three business days after taking a motor vehicle into custody, verify ownership of the vehicle in the manner provided in this division. 
(b)  The police department or the towing service contracted by the city, shall, within three business days after receiving verification of ownership, notify by registered mail, return receipt requested, the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record that the vehicle has been taken into custody. 
(c)  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle; set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held; inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle within ten days after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody; and state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and consent to the sale of the abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(d)  In the event there is no response to the notice by registered mail provided for in this section, then there shall be notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall be in a small display ad format, but one advertisement may contain multiple listings of abandoned, immobile, or unattended vehicles. 
(e)  The consequences and effect of failure to reclaim an abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a valid notice given pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-392; Code 1998, § 102-587) 
Sec. 98-564. - Sale of unclaimed vehicles; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  If an abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided for the notice to owners and lienholders, the police department shall sell the abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(b)  The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and, upon presentation of the sales receipt, the department of revenue shall issue a certificate of title to the purchaser. 
(c)  The proceeds of the sale of an abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle shall be used for payment of the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving and storing the abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicle, and all notice and publication costs. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 45 days, and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing other abandoned, immobile, or unattended vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of other abandoned, immobile, or unattended motor vehicles are insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. 
(d)  If the city finds that the special fund contains more funds than are likely to be needed for the purposes thereof, it may transfer the excess to the general fund, but in that event, claims against the special fund, if the special fund is temporarily exhausted, shall be met from the general fund to the limit of any transfers previously made thereto pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-393; Code 1998, § 102-588) 
Sec. 98-565. - Responsibility for fees for standby time, stolen vehicles or vehicles held for investigatory purposes. 
(a)  No fee shall be assessed against the owner of a vehicle for time elapsed after the towing equipment has arrived at the location of the vehicle to be towed and prior to the operation of the towing equipment or performance of the impound service. 
(b)  No impoundment fee or towing or storage charges shall be assessed against the owner of a stolen vehicle, verified as stolen by the police department, which has been recovered by the police and which is redeemed by the owner on or before the fifth day after impoundment, provided that such owner or other person authorized to obtain possession of such impounded vehicle shall pay storage charges commencing on the sixth day after impoundment for such purpose. 
(c)  No impoundment fee or towing fee or storage charges shall be assessed against the owner of a vehicle that is being held for investigatory purposes and that is redeemed within 96 hours after the police department shall have notified the owner of the release of such vehicle in writing in the manner provided in section 98-563, provided that such owner or person authorized to obtain possession of such impounded vehicle shall pay any charges assessed for storage after such 96-hour period. 
(Code 1981, § 14-395; Code 1998, § 102-590) 
Sec. 98-566. - Record of impounded vehicles. 
(a)  The police department shall keep and make available for public inspection a record of all vehicles impounded under this article. The record shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  Manufacturer's trade name or make; 
(2)  Vehicle license number and state of registration; 
(3)  Vehicle identification number; 
(4)  Such other descriptive information as the chief of police deems useful for the purposes of vehicle identification; 
(5)  The basis for impoundment, including reference to the appropriate section of this article; and 
(6)  Disposition of the vehicle and date of disposition. 
(b)  The police department shall furnish to the towing contractor, upon request, the name of the registered owner of any vehicle impounded by such contractor pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 14-400.1; Code 1998, § 102-596) 
Secs. 98-567-98-595. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOWING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 98-596. - Authorization to contract for towing services and storage. 
(a)  The city may contract the services of one or more competent towing service firms for the removal and storage of motor vehicles taken into custody of the city for any reason. Any contract for towing services and storage of motor vehicles pursuant to this section shall be awarded on the basis of the city's competitive bidding procedure and awarded to the lowest compliant bidder, in the best interest and advantage to the city. 
(b)  A towing service company who, at the request of the city, takes a vehicle into custody shall be compensated for the just and reasonable towing and storage charges in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 14-390; Code 1998, § 102-585) 
Sec. 98-597. - Award of contract for towing and storage. 
(a)  The city purchasing agent is authorized and directed to prepare specifications for towing and storage of vehicles, including instruction to bidders, containing such revisions as the purchasing agent shall deem advisable and not in conflict with this chapter. 
(b)  A call for bids responsive to such specifications shall then be made, and the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder whose proposal is deemed by the board of mayor and aldermen to be most advantageous to the public and the city. If all bids are deemed by the board of mayor and aldermen to be too high or irregular, the board of mayor and aldermen may reject all such bids and make another call for bids or proceed alternately pursuant to the ordinance passed for such purpose. The board of mayor and aldermen shall consider, among other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Integrity, skill, and business judgment of the bidder; 
(2)  General experience in providing towing and storage services; 
(3)  Conduct and performance under previous city towing impound; conduct demonstrating honesty, promptness, skill, efficiency and satisfactory relationship with vehicle owners; 
(4)  Existing availability of equipment facilities and personnel; and 
(5)  The bidder's financial ability and willingness to expand or improve available equipment facilities and services. 
(c)  The contract shall be in accordance with the specifications for towing and storage service necessary for carrying out this article. 
(d)  Subsequent to the award of the contract, the purchasing agent shall file a written statement with the city recorder/treasurer giving the name and address of the contractor for towing and storage of vehicles and, if more than one place of storage has been provided, the name and address or location of each storage place. The purchasing agent and the chief of police shall administer and enforce contracts made pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-397; Code 1998, § 102-592) 
Sec. 98-598. - Financial responsibility of contractor for towing and storage. 
    Any contract for towing and storage made under this article shall require the contractor to demonstrate proof of financial responsibility for any liability which the city may have as a result of any negligence, willful conduct or breach of contract by the contractor for any damages which the owner of an impounded vehicle may sustain as a result of damage to or loss of the vehicle or the contents of a vehicle in the custody of the contractor. Proof of financial responsibility shall be furnished either by proof of insurance, by filing a surety bond or by depositing cash in such amounts as the board of mayor and aldermen shall determine necessary by formal resolution. 
(Code 1981, § 14-398; Code 1998, § 102-593) 
Sec. 98-599. - Notice to owners of vehicles at site of pound. 
    Any contract for towing and storage made under this article shall require the contractor, at any location where vehicles are impounded, to post conspicuous notice of the rights of the owners of such vehicles under sections 98-564 and 98-565. 
(Code 1981, § 14-399; Code 1998, § 102-594) 
Sec. 98-600. - Contractor's monthly claim for services. 
    The person issued a contract under this article shall, on or before the tenth day of each month, file his claim with the police department for towing or storage charges accruing to him upon vehicles redeemed as provided in this article during the preceding month, in accordance with this article and with the specifications for the contract authorized in section 98-597, and such claim shall be sworn to by him under oath. The city recorder/treasurer shall audit such claim and any payment thereof at least once annually. A warrant for payment of such claims shall be drawn and delivered by the city recorder/treasurer and paid by the city recorder/treasurer from such expenditure allowances as may be provided therefor in the annual budget or from such moneys as may otherwise be appropriated for such purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 14-400; Code 1998, § 102-595) 
Secs. 98-601-98-618. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Excessive noise from motor vehicles, T.C.A. § 55-8-193. 

Sec. 98-619. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted level (dBA) means the total broad-band sound level of the noise spectrum as measured using the A-weighted network of a sound level meter. The unit of measurement is the dBA. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and other emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as designated or authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
    Certified officer means every police officer, as defined in this section, who is certified by the city manager or his designee, pursuant to regulations enacted by such manager as provided in this article, as competent to operate a sound level meter, as defined in this section, and to issue summonses as provided in this article. 
    City street or highway means every way set apart for public travel, except footpaths. 
    Decibel (dB) means a division of a logarithmic scale used to express the ratio of two like quantities proportional to power or energy. The ratio is expressed in decibels by multiplying its common logarithm by ten. 
    Department means the police department. 
    Gross combination weight rating (GCWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination vehicle. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle, as defined in this section, which is self-propelled. 
    Motorboat means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Noise means one or a group of loud, harsh, nonharmonious sounds or vibrations that are unpleasant and irritating to the ear. 
    Noise level means the sound pressure level as measured in dBA, unless otherwise specified. 
    Operate means to be in actual physical control of a vehicle or motorboat. 
    Operator means any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle or motorboat. 
    Police officer means every officer of the police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private parking area means any space or area owned and operated by any person other than the city for use by or open to the general public, for the purpose of parking motor vehicles. 
    Public parking area means any space or area owned or operated by the city for the purpose of the public parking of vehicles. 
    Public waterway means any waters within the boundaries of the city except privately owned ponds or lakes not used for commercial purposes. 
    Sanctioned function means any function, including by way of example and not by way of limitation, a parade, the conduct of which is authorized or permitted within the boundaries of the city pursuant to written authorization or permission obtained from the appropriate officials of the city. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument to measure the sound pressure level of relatively continuous and broad band noises. The sound level meter used to determine compliance with this article shall meet or exceed the requirements for type 2 sound level meters in accordance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard S1.4. 
    Sound pressure level means the squared ration, expressed in decibels, of the sound pressure under consideration to the standard reference pressure of 0.0002 dyne/cm 2 . The ratio is squared because pressure squared, and not pressure, is proportional to energy. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Vessel means watercraft of every description, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Code 1981, § 14-433; Code 1998, § 102-631) 
Sec. 98-620. - Findings and declaration of necessity. 
    It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises by motor vehicles within the limits of the city is a condition that has existed for some time and the level and intensity of such noises are increasing. 
(2)  The making and creation of such excessive noises are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, welfare and repose of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1981, § 14-432; Code 1998, § 102-633) 
Sec. 98-621. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any certified officer of the city who has determined, by use of a sound meter test as provided in this article, that the prohibitions of this article have been violated shall issue a summons to the operator of the vehicle or motorboat in question, requiring him to appear before the city judge, as in the case of other offenses against the city, at a date and time certain to answer the charge. However, the officer in each case shall inform the operator to be charged with the offense that: 
(1)  The operator has the option of first appearing at a place and time designated by the officer prior to the date the operator is to appear in court for a second noise meter test of the vehicle or motorboat in question; and 
(2)  If the operator elects to schedule a second test, but fails to appear, with the vehicle or motorboat, at the scheduled time and place, he will be conclusively presumed to have committed the violation alleged in the summons. 
The fact that the operator has been so informed as specified in this subsection, together with his acceptance or rejection of the second test option, shall appear upon the face of all copies of the summons, together with the date, time and place the second test, if any, is scheduled. No test shall be scheduled to take place less than 72 hours following the date and time of the issuance of the summons. If the operator fails to appear for the scheduled test, the testing officer shall note the failure to appear on the reverse side of the original summons and transmit the summons to the court. Such failure to appear shall create a conclusive presumption that the operator was in violation of this article at the date and time the summons was originally issued, and all copies of the summons shall contain, at the time of issuance, a written statement, on the face thereof or appended thereto, setting forth the presumption. If the operator appears with the vehicle or motorboat for the second test as set forth in this subsection, the testing officer shall conduct a sound level meter test of the vehicle as provided in this article and shall note the results of the test, together with any other comments the officer may have, on the reverse side of the original summons. Such comments may include, if appropriate, a recommendation that bond be reduced. The summons shall then be transmitted to the court as in other cases, and the results of the second test, together with the officer's comments, shall be evidence at the hearing. 
(b)  Any certified officer having probable cause to believe that a violation of this article has been committed in his presence, regardless of whether a sound meter test was used to determine such violation, shall likewise issue a summons to the operator of the vehicle or motorboat in question, requiring such operator to appear and answer the charge. However, when the summons is issued without a sound meter test as provided in this article, the officer shall require the operator to first appear at a designated time and place not less than 72 hours following the date and time of the issuance of the summons for a sound meter test of the vehicle or motorboat in question. Such cases shall otherwise proceed in the same manner as cases under subsection (a) of this section wherein the summons is first issued pursuant to sound meter tests, and the presumption of violation arising from failure to appear for the designated test shall likewise apply. 
(c)  The authority to issue summonses for violations of section 98-623(a)(1) and (3) pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles without a muffling device and the sounding of any horn or signaling device except as a danger warning shall not be confined to certified officers as defined in this article, but any police officer is empowered to issue summonses for violations of the subsections. 
(Code 1981, § 14-439; Code 1998, § 102-634) 
Sec. 98-622. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted in this article, for any person to operate a motor vehicle so as to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound upon any street, highway or public parking area or upon any private parking area within the boundaries of the city, which noise or sound exceeds the limits set forth in this article. It shall further be unlawful, except as expressly permitted in this article, to operate any motorboat so as to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound upon any public waterway within the boundaries of the city, which noise or sound exceeds the limits set forth in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 14-434; Code 1998, § 102-635) 
Sec. 98-623. - Noises specifically prohibited. 
(a)  Vehicle noise. Under this article, vehicle noise is prohibited as follows: 
(1)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated a motor vehicle without a muffling device at least as effective as that installed as original equipment by the manufacturer. 
(2)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated a vehicle at any time under any condition of roadway grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to generate a sound level in excess of the following limits, when measured at a distance of at least 25 feet from a noise source located within the applicable street, highway or parking area: 
a.  For any motor vehicle with a GVWR or GCWR of 10,000 pounds or more to be subject to the standards authorized by 42 USC 4917 and specified in 40 CFR 202.10 et seq., the limits specified in the regulation, as amended from time to time by the Federal Highway Administration. 
b.  For any motorcycle as defined in this article, 85 dBA. 
c.  For any other motor vehicle not included in subsection (a)(2)a of this section, 80 dBA. 
(3)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a danger warning, is prohibited. 
(b)  Motorboat noise. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any motorboat in or upon any public waterways within the boundaries of the city in such a matter as to exceed 86 dBA, measured at a distance of 50 feet from the motorboat. 
(Code 1981, § 14-435; Code 1998, § 102-636) 
Sec. 98-624. - Exceptions and exclusions. 
    The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The operation of warning or emergency signal devices such as horns, sirens and bells when utilized for their intended purpose. 
(2)  The operation of any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in this article. 
(3)  The operation of any motor vehicle or motorboat within the course and scope of any sanctioned function as defined in this article; provided, however, a permit for the operation of such motor vehicle or motorboat during the course of such sanctioned function is first obtained from the police department for the operation of such motorboat or motor vehicle, as a part of such sanctioned function. The permits contemplated by this subsection may be issued in such form as the city manager or his designee may from time to time prescribe, but such form shall in any event specify the following: 
a.  The sanctioned function pursuant to which the permit is issued; 
b.  The name of the person to whom the permit is issued; 
c.  A description of the motor vehicle or motorboat to be exempted from this article during the course of the function; 
d.  The name of the operator thereof; 
e.  The date of the function; and 
f.  The duration, expressed in hours, of the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 14-436; Code 1998, § 102-637) 
Sec. 98-625. - Measurement of noise. 
(a)  Vehicles. The measurement of sound or noise for a vehicle shall be made with a sound level meter. Such meter shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded on such meter shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used at all times. Sound level meter settings shall be for fast response. 
(b)  Motorboats. Testing procedures employed to determine the measurement of sound or noise emitted from any motorboat shall be in accordance with the exterior sound level measurement procedure for pleasure motorboats recommended by the Society of Automotive Engineers in its recommended practice designated SAE J34, or by such procedures as the state wildlife resources agency may by regulation designate from time to time when such agency deems it necessary to adjust to advances in technology. 
(Code 1981, § 14-437; Code 1998, § 102-638) 
Sec. 98-626. - Certification standards and procedures for officers to operate sound meters. 
    The city manager or his designee or the chief of police is authorized and directed to enact standards and procedures by which police officers may be certified to operate the sound level meters and to measure vehicle and motorboat noise as provided in this article and to so certify such officers who may from time to time qualify under such standards as competent to undertake the enforcement of this article. The director may amend such testing procedures from time to time when deemed necessary to adjust to advances in technology and may enact separate procedures for certification as to vehicular noise and as to motorboat noise. A true and exact copy of such procedures certified as such by the director, together with a complete list of all certified officers, also certified, shall be maintained at all times in the office of the city recorder for inspection and copying by members of the general public. 
(Code 1981, § 14-438; Code 1998, § 102-639) 
Sec. 98-627. - Amplified noise from motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on any public street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system including, but not limited to, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker, or any other electrical device used for the amplification of sound from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle. For the purpose of this section, the term "plainly audible" means any sound that clearly can be heard, by unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line of sight of 50 feet or more; however, words or phrases need not be discernible and such sound shall include bass reverberation. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to emergency or public safety vehicles, vehicles owned and operated by a municipal or county government or any utility company, for sound emitted unavoidably during a job-related operation, or for school or community sponsored activities, auctioneers or auctioning activities, boats or other watercrafts operated on waters or any motor vehicle used in an authorized public activity for which a permit has been granted by the appropriate agency of a municipal or county government. 
(Code 1998, § 102-640; Ord. No. 5272, § I, 1-18-2005) 
Chapters 99-101 - RESERVED 
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Water and sewage generally, T.C.A. § 68-221-101 et seq.; Tennessee Safe Drinking Water Act of 1983, T.C.A. § 68-221-701 et seq.; prohibited practices, T.C.A. § 68-221-711; rates for water, services to be fixed by ordinance, T.C.A. § 7-35-414; establishment of rates for services from public works, T.C.A. § 7-34-114; authority to operate sewage facilities, T.C.A. § 7-34-104; Water Quality Control Act of 1977, T.C.A. § 69-3-123 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1-102-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-19. - Continuity of water service. 
(a)  The utilities department shall endeavor to furnish continuous water service, but shall not guarantee to the customer any fixed pressure or continuous service whatsoever. 
(b)  In connection with the operation, maintenance, repair and extension of the city's water system, the water supply may be shut off without notice, when necessary or desirable, and each customer must be prepared for such emergencies. The city shall not be held liable for any damages for such interruptions. 
(Code 1981, § 26-16; Code 1998, § 106-26) 
Sec. 102-20. - Inspection of system. 
    The utilities department shall have the right, but not the duty, to inspect any installation or plumbing system before water service is furnished or at any later time and shall have the right to refuse or discontinue service to any plumbing or other installation not in accordance with the standards fixed by the city ordinances regulating plumbing. Any failure to inspect or reject a customer's or consumer's installation or plumbing system shall not render the utilities department liable or responsible for any loss or damages which might have been avoided had such inspection or rejection been made. 
(Code 1981, § 26-17; Code 1998, § 106-27) 
Sec. 102-21. - Tampering with equipment. 
    No person shall turn on or off any of the utilities department's stopcocks, hydrants, spigots, fireplugs or valves without permission or authority from the director of utilities. 
(Code 1981, § 26-18; Code 1998, § 106-28) 
Sec. 102-22. - Sale, gift of metered water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any private consumer of water to sell, offer for sale or give away water received by and metered through the general water distribution system of the city to any other private consumer. 
(b)  The director of utilities shall have power to disconnect any meters or water supply of any property owner or occupant thereof, when it comes to his attention that other parties are being allowed, either for a consideration or otherwise, to obtain and consume water through a meter not registered in the name of such consumer. 
(Code 1981, § 26-19; Code 1998, § 106-29) 
Sec. 102-23. - Fluoridation of water supply. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized and instructed to have prepared and made plans for the fluoridation of the water supply of the city and to submit such plans to the state department of health for its approval. Upon the approval of the plans by the department the city manager is authorized to provide the means and to proceed with the fluoridation of the water supply to such a content as to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoridation concentration of approximately one part per million and not to exceed a fluoride content of 11/2 parts per million. 
(b)  The officials in charge of the city utilities department shall keep an accurate record of the amount of fluorine-bearing chemical applied and the quantities of water treated and shall cause such analytical tests to be made for fluorides, in terms of the element fluorine (F), in the untreated and treated water as they shall be directed to do by the state department of public health and other agencies. A copy of any such record shall be furnished to the city health officer. 
(c)  The cost of fluoridation shall be borne by the revenues of the city utilities department. 
(Code 1981, § 26-20; Code 1998, § 106-30) 
Sec. 102-24. - Water meter location and fire lines. 
(a)  All water meters installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be located at the property line adjoining a public right-of-way. This subsection is not retroactive, and existing water meters are not required to be relocated. 
(b)  Installation and maintenance of any water pipeline shall be the responsibility of the customer from the street right-of-way to the structure being served. 
(Code 1998, § 106-31; Ord. No. 4296, § I (26-15), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-25. - Obstruction of water meters or valves. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any vehicle, equipment, machinery or material on or over any water meter or valve in a manner that will interfere with access to the meter or valve for the purpose of reading, inspecting, repairing, modifying, removing, shutting off or disconnecting the meter or valve by authorized city personnel. 
(b)  If a water meter, valve or other appurtenance is found to be obstructed in a manner that prevents the reading of the meter or inspection or repair of valves, pipes or other appurtenances and if informal requests to remove the obstruction are ignored, the city treasurer shall cause to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written notice to the violator that the obstruction shall be removed within five days or such written notice may be served on the violator, in person, by a police officer demanding removal of the obstruction within 24 hours. 
(c)  In an emergency or if, after formal notice, the obstruction that prevents the reading of a meter is not removed or if any obstruction prevents the disconnection or removal of a meter for nonpayment, the chief of police is authorized and directed to have such obstruction removed. 
(d)  If it is necessary to remove an obstruction as set out in subsection (c) of this section to provide access for disconnection of a service for nonpayment, the meter shall be subject to immediate removal, and the customer's account shall be charged a meter removal fee and a fee for removing the obstruction. The fees shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. The customer shall pay all delinquent water bills, reconnect fees, meter removal fees and obstruction removal fees prior to restoration of service. 
(Code 1981, § 26-21; Code 1998, § 106-32) 
Secs. 102-26-102-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 102-54. - Deposit fees. 
(a)  A deposit fee shall be paid by any new customer for water service if such new customer does not have an existing water service from the city, billed under the name of the applicant; or, has not had such service in the past five years. 
(b)  Any existing customer, or former customer with a record of more than one payment having been made after the penalty date, or, who has any outstanding water bills at any location, shall also be subject to the requirement for a deposit fee. 
(c)  The amount of said deposit fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(d)  Said deposit fee shall be refunded to the customer after the elapse of 12 consecutive months of payment of billed amounts prior to the penalty date. Simple interest at an annual rate of three percent shall be paid on said deposit fee. 
(e)  Customers who have paid a deposit fee and elect to terminate said water service prior to the time for making a refund as set out in subsection (d) of this section, shall have the refundable amount, including interest, applied to the final bill. Any remaining credit shall be refunded to the customer. 
(f)  Customers who change locations prior to the time for making a refund as set out in subsection (d) of this section, shall have the deposit fee transferred to the new location. Upon transfer of the deposit fee, the initial service application date shall be used to determine when the 12 month period shall end. 
(Code 1998, § 106-105; Ord. No. 4619, § I, 12-15-1998) 
Sec. 102-55. - Water connection. 
(a)  A service fee shall be required for connections of water service, and the fee shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  The service fee shall be required on all new accounts and all transfers of existing accounts and shall be paid prior to the beginning of service. 
(Code 1981, § 26-41; Code 1998, § 106-106) 
State Law reference- Rates for water, services to be fixed by ordinance, T.C.A. § 7-35-414; establishment of rates for services from public works, T.C.A. § 7-34-114. 
Sec. 102-56. - Usage rates and charges. 
(a)  The city utilities department shall charge customers and consumers of city water such usage rates and charges as are established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  If such rates and charges are not paid within 20 days from the date of the bill or the delinquent date stamped thereon, an additional charge of ten percent of the bill shall become due and payable and shall become a part of the water bill. 
(Code 1981, § 26-42; Code 1998, § 106-107) 
Sec. 102-57. - Advance payments credited to future bills. 
(a)  Water customers or consumers may, if they desire, make advance payments which will be credited to future bills. 
(b)  Payments made equal to the charges for the last six months or for the previous year will be credited with interest at the rate of approximately six percent per annum, determined in the following manner: 
(1)  Payments for six months' estimated bills shall receive credit for 11/2 percent of such payment in excess of the amount paid. 
(2)  Payments for 12 months' estimated bills will receive credit of three percent of such payment in excess of the amount paid. 
(c)  Statements showing the use and charges month by month will be mailed each customer when his credit has been exhausted. Payments in excess of the previous year's bills are not to be accepted from established customers. A new customer's prepayment may not exceed the minimum bill for one year. 
(Code 1981, § 26-43; Code 1998, § 106-108) 
Sec. 102-58. - Monthly billing. 
    Each water customer or consumer shall be billed monthly for water used in accordance with the established schedule, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1981, § 26-44; Code 1998, § 106-109) 
Sec. 102-59. - Disconnection, reconnection of service. 
(a)  Water services may be disconnected for customers or consumers who do not pay their monthly bills within 40 days from the billing date. All delinquent bills must be paid prior to restoring services so disconnected along with a reconnect fee as established by the board of mayor and alderman. 
(b)  The reconnect fee shall be due and payable upon issuance of the work order without regard to whether or not service was disconnected. 
(c)  In addition, if the delinquent bill is not paid within five days after the order is issued for disconnection of the service for nonpayment, the meter shall be removed or locked from service, and the customer shall be required to pay all delinquent bills, reconnection charges and a fee for removing the meter or lock prior to restoring the customer's water service. Such fee shall be as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-45; Code 1998, § 106-110; Ord. No. 4618, § I, 12-15-1998) 
Sec. 102-61. - Sprinkler systems and fire hydrants located outside corporate limits; installation fee. 
(a)  For all private fire service connections for sprinkler systems installed at all manufacturing plants or where water is being used from fire service lines for other purposes, a meter approved for dual function, potable water and firefighting purposes shall be installed, and the charge shall be determined by the amount of water used or consumed through the meter in accordance with the rates established in this division. 
(b)  Fire hydrants may be installed on city water service lines no smaller than six inches in diameter on all such lines owned by the city outside the corporate limits, provided that the installation of the hydrant shall permit the water service line to have a capability after installation of permitting water flow at a minimum rate of 500 gallons per minute while maintaining a residual pressure of at least 25 pounds per square inch. The charge for installation of fire hydrants outside the corporate limits upon the public right-of-way shall be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-46.1; Code 1998, § 106-112) 
Sec. 102-62. - Yearly charges for metered and unmetered fire service connections. 
(a)  The schedule of yearly charges for metered fire service connections shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen both as to rates for service within and outside the corporate limits. 
(b)  The schedule of yearly charges for unmetered private service connections shall be as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-47; Code 1998, § 106-113) 
Sec. 102-63. - Charge for water service calls. 
    Those customers requesting special water service calls will be charged such rates as are established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. If such rates and charges are not paid within 20 days from the date of the bill or the delinquent date stamped thereon, an additional charge of ten percent of the bill shall become due and payable and shall become a part of the water bill. 
(Code 1981, § 26-48; Code 1998, § 106-114) 
Sec. 102-64. - Allocation of water department revenue. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen shall fix, by resolution duly adopted, the amount of revenue derived from the city's water system that shall be allocated for collection and treatment of sanitary sewage, together with other capital expenditures, such as, but not limited to, retirement of bonded debts with interest and expansion of sanitary sewer facilities. 
(Code 1981, § 26-49; Code 1998, § 106-115) 
Sec. 102-65. - Special meter arrangements. 
(a)  Every meter connected to the water system shall be read, billed and a separate charge made for the amount of water used or consumed through each meter separately, and the rate of charge shall be determined by the number of gallons used or consumed through each meter in accordance with the rates established by the board of mayor and aldermen, except as otherwise provided for in this section. The city water department may in its own discretion install a series or a battery of meters at any single point of delivery where it may deem advisable and charge for water metered through these meters as if it had metered through one meter rather than by the method previously set out. 
(b)  Special short-term water service requiring temporary connections, such as circuses, contractors, etc., shall be provided under rules promulgated by the water department not inconsistent with this division and approved by the city manager, the director of utilities and the city recorder. Such charges shall be based on water used at current rates and the labor and materials required to furnish such services. 
(Code 1981, § 26-50; Code 1998, § 106-116) 
Sec. 102-66. - Tapping fee. 
(a)  A tapping fee shall be required for the installation of a new water service when no existing tap is present and suitable for use. The fee shall be based upon the size of the meter or fire service connection used in accordance with a fee schedule as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  All water service connections installed in any area subject to the terms of a developer's contract shall also be subject to a tapping fee, whether the tap is installed by the developer under terms of the developer's contract or by the city utilities department. 
(Code 1981, § 26-51; Code 1998, § 106-117) 
Sec. 102-67. - Relocating meters. 
(a)  A meter relocation fee shall be required for the relocation of any existing meter when performed at the request of the user. 
(b)  The meter relocation fee shall be based upon the size of the meter used in accordance with a fee schedule as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-52; Code 1998, § 106-118) 
Sec. 102-68. - Fire service relocation fee. 
(a)  A fee shall be required for relocating any existing private fire service connection when performed at the request of the user. 
(b)  The fire service connection relocation fee shall be based upon the size of the fire service connection as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-53; Code 1998, § 106-119) 
Sec. 102-69. - Fire hydrant relocation fee. 
(a)  A fee shall be required for relocating any existing fire hydrant when performed by request of any interested party. 
(b)  The hydrant relocation fee shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, § 26-54; Code 1998, § 106-120) 
Secs. 102-70-102-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL 

Sec. 102-98. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap means a physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply line and an open or nonpressurized receiving vessel. An approved air gap shall be a distance at least double the diameter of the supply pipe when measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch. 
    Approved means the device or method is accepted by the state department of environment and conservation and the director as meeting specifications suitable for the intended purpose. 
    Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from any source other than from the public water system. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than water supplied by the public water system. 
    Backflow means the reversal of the intended direction of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means a device or means designed to prevent backflow. 
    Backpressure means a pressure higher than the supply pressure caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or any other means. 
    Backsiphonage means backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping. 
    Bypass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby water may be diverted around a backflow prevention assembly, meter or any other city-controlled device. 
    Contamination means the introduction or admission of any foreign substance that degrades the quality of a potable water supply or creates a health hazard. 
    Cross connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, either inside or outside of a building, with any other water supply, whether public or private, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, liquid, gas or solid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of contaminating the public water supply as a result of backflow caused by the manipulation of valves, because of ineffective check valves or backpressure valves or because of any other arrangement. 
    Customer means any natural or artificial person, business, industry or governmental entity that obtains water, by purchase or without charge, from the city water department. 
    Department means the water system operated by the city, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
    Director means the director of public works or his designee. 
    Double check detector assembly means a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly, with a bypass containing a water meter and approved double check valve assembly specifically designed for such application. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to protect against nonhealth hazards and is designed primarily for use on fire sprinkler systems. 
    Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two internally loaded check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This type of device shall only be used to protect against nonhealth hazard pollutants. 
    Fire protection system classifications means the classes of fire protection systems, as designated by the American Water Works Association Manual M14 for cross connection control purposes based on water supply source and the arrangement of supplies, as follows: 
(1)  Class 1. Direct connections to the public water mains only; no pumps, tanks or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to the atmosphere, dry wells or other safe outlets. 
(2)  Class 2. Same as class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in connections from the street mains. 
(3)  Class 3. Direct connection to public water supply mains in addition to any one or more of the following: 
a.  Elevated storage tanks; 
b.  Fire pumps taking suction from aboveground covered reservoirs or tanks; and 
c.  Pressure tanks. 
(4)  Class 4. Directly supplied from public water supply mains, similar to class 1 and class 2, with an auxiliary water supply dedicated to fire department use and available to the premises, such as an auxiliary supply located within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection. 
(5)  Class 5. Directly supplied from public water supply mains and interconnected with auxiliary supplies such as pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to contamination, or from rivers, ponds, wells or industrial water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. 
(6)  Class 6. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks. 
    Hazard, degree of, is a term derived from evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public water system. 
    Hazard, health, means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that could, if introduced in the public water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
    Hazard, nonhealth, means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the public water supply. 
    Hazard, plumbing, means a cross connection in a customer's potable water system plumbing that is not properly protected by an approved air gap or backflow prevention assembly. 
    Industrial fluid means any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration that could constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into the public water supply. The term "industrial fluid" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated water; 
(2)  All types of process water or used water originating from the public water system and that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(3)  Chemicals; 
(4)  Plating acids and alkalis; 
(5)  Circulating cooling water connected to an open cooling tower; 
(6)  Cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; 
(7)  Contaminated natural water systems; 
(8)  Oil, gases, glycerin, paraffin, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquids or gases used in industrial processes or other purposes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Interconnection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit or other device which does or may carry sewage or other liquid or waste which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
    Pollution means the presence of a foreign substance in water that degrades its quality so as to constitute a health or nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of water. 
    Potable water means water that is safe for human consumption as prescribed by the state department of environment and conservation. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means an assembly consisting of one or two independently operating spring loaded check valves and an independently operating spring loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve, with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for testing the check valves. 
    Public water system means a water system furnishing water to the public for general use which is recognized as a public water supply by the state. 
    Reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly means an assembly consisting of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units shall be located between two tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
    Reduced pressure principle detector assembly means a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a bypass containing a water meter and approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly specifically designed for such application. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow up to three gallons per minute and shall show registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to protect against nonhealth hazard or a health hazard. The RPDA is designed primarily for use on fire sprinkler systems. 
    Service connection means the point of delivery to the customer's water system; the terminal end of a service connection from the public water system where the water department loses jurisdiction and control over the water. The term "service connection" includes connections to fire hydrants and all other temporary or emergency water service connections made to the public water system. 
    State means this state or the state department of environment and conservation, bureau of environment, division of water supply. 
(Code 1998, § 106-61; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-22), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-99. - Penalties. 
    Any person responsible for a violation of this division shall, upon conviction in the city court, be subject to a civil penalty of up to $50.00. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 106-64; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-39), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-100. - Applicability. 
    The requirements contained in this division shall apply to all customers of the department, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, and are made a part of the conditions required to be met before water service is provided to any customer. This division shall be strictly enforced since it is essential for the protection of the public water supply against contamination. 
(Code 1998, § 106-62; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-25), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-101. - Water system operation. 
(a)  The city water system shall be operated at all times in compliance with T.C.A. § 68-221-101 et seq., and Regulations for Public Water Systems and Drinking Water Quality, published by the state department of environment and conservation, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Prior to executing any work order for a new customer or for any change in service to an existing customer, notification shall be given to the inspectors of backflow prevention devices. The inspectors shall make an immediate determination of the need for backflow prevention devices and, if such devices are necessary, shall issue a permit therefor. Water service shall not be established or maintained until any necessary backflow devices are installed. 
(Code 1998, § 106-65; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-23), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-102. - Responsibility for water system. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of the plumbing code adopted by reference in section 22-411 or the building code adopted by reference in section 22-96, the director shall be responsible for protecting the public water supply within and without the city from contamination or pollution due to backflow through service connections and is granted authority for implementation and enforcement of this division. Such authority shall extend beyond the service connection to whatever extent is necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(b)  The authority to terminate water service for violation of any section of this division shall rest solely with the director of public works or the city manager, and such authority shall not be delegated to any other person. In the absence or incapacity of the director and the city manager, the city recorder shall have authority to take action to protect the public health and safety. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prevent other city officers or employees from terminating water service for failure to pay for water service or for violating any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1998, § 106-66; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-24), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-103. - Backflow prevention and cross connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection to be made or to allow one to exist for any purpose unless the construction and operation of such has been approved by the director and the state, and the operation of such cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection is at all times under the direction of the director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install or allow any unprotected takeoffs from the water service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the service connection to a customer's water system. 
(c)  Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued if an approved backflow prevention assembly required by this division is not installed, tested and maintained or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, altered or not kept in proper working condition or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Disconnection of water service may be in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties imposed by law or this division. 
(d)  If, in the judgment of the director, a backflow prevention assembly is required at a customer's service connection or within the customer's water system, for the safety of the public water supply, the director shall give notice in writing to the customer to install a backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on his premises. 
(e)  For installations in existence on November 5, 1996, the director shall cause water service to be discontinued until such time as the customer complies with all requirements of state law and this division. 
(f)  For new installations, the director shall inspect the site and review plans in order to determine the type of backflow prevention device, if any that shall be required, and shall notify the owners in writing of the type of required device. All required devices shall be installed and operable prior to initiation of water service. Such devices shall be tested immediately upon connection to the public water system. 
(g)  The customer shall immediately install an approved assembly at his own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain such an assembly shall be cause for discontinuance of or refusal of water service to the premises until such requirements are satisfactorily met. 
(h)  For all existing customers, the director shall perform evaluations and inspections and shall require correction of violations in accordance with this division. 
(i)  No installation, alteration or change shall be made to any backflow prevention device connected to the public water supply without first securing a permit from the director. A copy of such permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the job site at all times from the date of issuance until the final inspection. 
(Code 1998, § 106-67; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-26), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-104. - Inspection, testing and repair of customer's system. 
(a)  The director shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by the public water system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system therein for cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections or for the testing of backflow prevention devices. Upon request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. Refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(b)  When cross connections, other structural or sanitary hazards or any violation of this division becomes known, the director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with this division. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed on internal pipelines carrying potable water, wastewater, process water or any other liquid, gas or undesirable substance to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. When the director deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. 
(d)  All inspections, tests and repairs shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by the backflow prevention device manufacturer or a person certified by the state or the state association of utility districts. It shall be the duty of the director to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer shall notify the director in advance when tests are to be performed so the director may witness the tests if so desired. Assemblies found to be defective shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer. Copies of all records of tests, repairs and overhaul shall be supplied to the director for permanent retention. 
(e)  Failure to maintain a backflow prevention device in proper working order shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service. The removal, bypassing or altering of a protective device or the installation thereof so as to render a device ineffective shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of water service. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects to the satisfaction of the director. 
(Code 1998, § 106-68; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-27), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-105. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  Any customer having cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections in violation of this division shall, after a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required, complete the work within the time designated by the director, but in no case shall the time for correction exceed 60 days. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any order of the director within the time set out therein shall result in the termination of water service. 
(c)  Where cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections are found to constitute an extreme hazard of immediate concern of contaminating the public water system, the director shall require immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat. Expeditious steps shall be taken to disconnect the public water system from the customer's piping systems unless the extreme hazard is corrected immediately. 
(d)  Upon written request by the customer, the director shall provide a hearing regarding any order of termination or refusal of water service; provided, however, that when an order is issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, such hearing may be held after such termination or refusal, but not later than five working days after receipt of the request. Any customer aggrieved by such an order may appear in person or by legal counsel and show cause why an order to terminate water service or to refuse water service should be rescinded. 
(e)  Failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public water system as prohibited by this division or by T.C.A. § 68-221-711 within the time limits set by the director shall be cause for denial or termination of water service. If proper protection is not provided after a reasonable time, the director shall give the customer written notification that water service is to be discontinued and thereafter physically separate the public water system from the customer's system in such manner that the two systems cannot again be connected by an unauthorized person. 
(Code 1998, § 106-69; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-28), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-106. - Statement of nonexistence of unapproved connections. 
    Any customer of the department who has on the same premises a well or other auxiliary water supply or who stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the stored water is circulated through a piping system shall file with the director a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises until the construction and operation of such has been approved by the state and operation and maintenance of such has been placed under direct supervision of the director. 
(Code 1998, § 106-70; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-29), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-107. - Determination of need for backflow prevention. 
    An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's premises at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line, if it is impractical to provide effective air gap separation, when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Premises where industrial fluids or any other nonpotable substances are handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system; 
(2)  Premises having internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist; 
(3)  Premises having an auxiliary water supply, including but not limited to a well, cistern, spring or pond, that is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the director; 
(4)  The plumbing from a private well or other water supply enters the building served by the public water supply or is connected, directly or indirectly, to the public water supply; 
(5)  The owner or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the director that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to pose no threat to the safety or potability of the water; 
(6)  The nature and mode of operation within the premises is such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; 
(7)  The nature of the premises is that the use of the structure may change to a use wherein backflow prevention is required; 
(8)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected; 
(9)  Any premises having service and fire flow connections, most commercial and educational buildings, construction sites, all industrial, institutional and medical facilities, lawn irrigation systems, public or private swimming pools, private fire hydrant connections used by any fire department in combating fires, irrigation systems, photographic laboratories, standing ponds or other bodies of water, or auxiliary water supplies; 
(10)  Any premises having fountains, water softeners or other point-of-use treatment systems, hot tubs or spas, standing ponds or other bodies of water connected to the public water supply; or 
(11)  Premises otherwise determined by the director to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply. 
(Code 1998, § 106-71; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-30), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-108. - Approved backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  All backflow prevention devices shall be fully approved by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research and listed as acceptable by the state and the director as to manufacture, model, size and application. The method of installation of backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the director prior to installation and shall comply with installation criteria set forth in section 102-109. Installation shall be at the sole expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(b)  The type of protective assembly required by section 102-107 shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows: 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each fire service line at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line, wherever any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  Class 1 and class 2 fire protection systems generally shall require a double check detector assembly; provided, however, that a reduced pressure principle detector assembly shall be required where: 
1.  Underground fire sprinkler pipelines are parallel to and within ten feet horizontally of pipelines carrying wastewater or significantly toxic wastes; 
2.  Premises have unusually complex piping systems; 
3.  Pumpers connecting to the system have corrosion inhibitors or other chemicals added to the tanks of the fire trucks; 
4.  The piping system has corrosion inhibitors or other chemicals added to prevent freezing; or 
5.  An auxiliary water supply exists within 1,700 feet of any likely pumper connection. 
b.  Class 3, class 4, class 5 and class 6 fire protection systems shall require an air gap or a reduced pressure principle detector assembly, as determined by the director. 
c.  Where a fire sprinkler system is installed on the premises, a double check detector assembly shall be required. 
d.  Where a fire sprinkler system uses chemicals, such as liquid foam, to enhance fire suppression, a reduced pressure principle detector assembly shall be required. 
e.  The director may require internal or additional backflow prevention devices where it is deemed necessary to protect potable water supplies within the premises. 
(2)  For any premises with an auxiliary water supply as set forth in section 102-107(3) and not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  For any premises where there is water or any substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by a double check valve assembly. 
(4)  For any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion as may create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Premises where such conditions may exist include but are not limited to sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(5)  For any premises where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
(6)  For any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service line to the premises. 
(7)  For any premises where toxic substances are present that could pose an undue health hazard, the director may require an air gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. In making this determination, the director shall consider the degree of hazard. 
(Code 1998, § 106-72; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-31), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-109. - Installation requirements. 
    Minimum acceptable criteria for installation of backflow prevention assemblies or other devices requiring regular inspection and testing by this division shall include the following: 
(1)  All backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a horizontal run of pipe. No vertical installation of backflow prevention devices shall be allowed unless such device is approved for such installation by the manufacturer and the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
(2)  Installation of backflow prevention devices shall be performed only by persons certified by the state or the state association of utility districts. Evidence of current certification at the time of installation is required. 
(3)  All devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions unless such instructions are in conflict with this division, in which case this division shall control, and shall possess all test cocks and fittings required for testing the device. All fittings shall permit direct connection to test devices used by the department. 
(4)  The entire assembly, including test cocks and valves, shall be easily accessible for testing and repair and shall meet all confined space requirements of OSHA/TOSHA. 
(5)  Reduced pressure backflow prevention devices shall be located so that the relief valve discharge port is a minimum of 12 inches, plus the nominal diameter of the supply line, above the ground floor surface. Maximum height above the floor surface shall not exceed 48 inches. 
(6)  Clearance of devices from wall surfaces or other obstructions shall be a minimum of six inches, or, if a person must enter the enclosure for repair or testing, the minimum distance shall be 24 inches. 
(7)  Devices shall be protected from freezing, vandalism, mechanical abuse and from any corrosive, sticky, greasy, abrasive or other damaging substance. 
(8)  Devices shall be positioned where discharge from a relief port will not create undesirable conditions. An approved air gap shall separate the relief port from any drainage system. Such air gap shall not be altered without the specific approval of the department. 
(9)  Devices shall be located in an area free from submergence or flood potential. 
(10)  An approved strainer, fitted with a test cock, shall be installed immediately upstream of all backflow devices or shutoff valves except on fire lines, using only noncorrosive fittings (e.g., brass or bronze) in the device assembly. 
(11)  Gravity drainage is required on all installations. Belowground installations shall not be permitted. 
(12)  Fire hydrant drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer, and fire hydrants shall not be installed in such manner that backsiphonage or backflow through the drain may occur. 
(13)  Where jockey (low volume-high pressure) pumps are utilized to maintain elevated pressure, as in a fire protection system, the discharge of the pump shall be on the downstream side of any check valve or backflow prevention device. Where the supply for the jockey pump is taken from the upstream supply side of the check valve or backflow prevention device, an assembly of the same type as required on the main line shall be installed on the supply line. 
(14)  Fixed position, high volume fire pumps shall be equipped with a suction limiting control to modulate the pump if the residual line pressure reaches 20 psi. Such pumps should draw from an on-site reservoir fed by several supply lines. If any of the supply lines have a source other than the public water supply, all supply lines must have air gap discharges into the reservoir. 
(Code 1998, § 106-73; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-32), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-110. - Inspection and testing of devices. 
(a)  Backflow prevention devices located at the service connection shall be tested at least annually by an employee of the department possessing valid certification from the state for the testing of such devices. Records of all tests shall be maintained by the director. 
(b)  The director shall have the right to inspect and test the devices whenever he deems necessary. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1998, § 106-74; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-33), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-111. - Safety standards; duplicate equipment in parallel required. 
    Where the use of water is critical to the continuation of normal operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair a backflow prevention device. Until such time as a parallel unit has been installed where the continuance of service is critical, the director shall notify the occupant of the premises, in writing, of plans to interrupt water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test or repair the device. 
(Code 1998, § 106-75; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-34), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-112. - Existing protection devices. 
(a)  All installed backflow prevention assemblies which were in existence on November 5, 1996, which were previously acceptable by the state that comply with the installation, testing and maintenance requirements of this division and, in the sole discretion of the director, adequately protect the public water system from backflow and that were approved assemblies for the purpose described in this division at the time of installation may be retained in service. 
(b)  Location or space requirements shall not be cause for relocation or replacement unless such location or space limitations constitute a safety hazard, in the opinion of the director but not his designee, to inspectors or testers. 
(c)  Any backflow prevention device that was installed as of November 5, 1996, in a vertical run of pipe shall be replaced or reinstalled in an approved manner in a horizontal run of pipe. 
(d)  On the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, wherever an assembly is moved from the present location or when the director finds that the condition of the assembly constitutes a health hazard, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 106-76; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-35), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-113. - Inspection and testing fees. 
(a)  Fees for initial or annual tests of a backflow prevention device shall be established by the board of mayor and aldermen based on recommendations of the director to reflect the cost of conducting such tests. 
(b)  If a backflow prevention device fails the initial or annual test or there are deficiencies in the installation either from failure to conform to the installation criteria specified in this division or from deterioration, the director shall issue a written notice of failure or deficiency. There shall be no fee for reinspection by the city, provided the failure or deficiency is corrected within 30 days of the written notice. 
(c)  Whenever a failure or deficiency mentioned in subsection (b) of this section is not corrected within 30 days of written notification, a fee shall be charged for retesting. 
(d)  The fee shall be assessed each time a device is retested by the city subsequent to failure or deficiency after the initial 30-day period set out in subsection (b) of this section. Where repeated reinspection or retesting is required to correct violations or deficiencies, the fee shall be assessed each time the inspection or test is repeated. 
(Code 1998, § 106-77; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-36), 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 102-114. - Nonpotable supplies. 
(a)  Any water outlet connected to auxiliary water sources, industrial fluid systems or other piping containing nonpotable liquids or gases and which could be used for potable or domestic purposes shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: "Water Unsafe for Drinking." 
(b)  The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters at least one inch high on a red background. 
(c)  Color coding of pipelines in accordance with Occupational Safety and Health Act guidelines may be required in locations where, in the judgment of the director, such color coding is necessary to identify and protect the potable water supply. 
(Code 1998, § 106-78; Ord. No. 4296, § III(26-37), 11-5-1996) 
Secs. 102-115-102-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate sewage facilities, T.C.A. § 7-34-104. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the administrator of the EPA. 
    Approval authority means the regional administrator of the EPA or the Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control Director or his/her representative(s). 
    Authorized representative of a user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, chief executive officer, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director or highest official, elected or appointed, designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is submitted to the director in writing, and the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the director. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 106-240 and Tennessee Rule 0400-40-14-.05(1)(a) and (2), as amended from time to time. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical Pretreatment Standards and effluent limits. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually specified as a concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Categorical industrial user (CIU) means an Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard or categorical Standard. 
    Categorical standard or categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of Users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    City means City of Kingsport. 
    Collector line means a line that receives wastewater from individual residences, businesses or corporations via lateral sewers. 
    Compliance order means an order signed by the director that identifies a series of events the user must take, along with a prescribed timetable, to achieve compliance with the requirements of this article, any permit requirement or any other valid order. 
    Control authority means the director of public works of the city, or authorized representative. 
    Conventional pollutant, as defined by federal law, includes BOD, TSS, fecal coliform bacteria, oil, grease and pH. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant (except pH) collected during a calendar day. 
    Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the director of public works of the city or authorized representative; the control authority as specified by 40 CFR 403.12. 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater that is generated by a single-family residence, apartment or residential unit. Specifically excluded from this definition is any categorical or significant industrial facility. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a new source. A source that the construction or operation of which commenced prior to publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as but not limited to vessels, chemical toilets, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source, including holding tank waste, regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act. 
    Industrial user means a nondomestic source of wastewater entering the POTW. 
    Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or the collection system; or is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit; or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer means the pipe running from the property line where it is connected to the building sewer from the individual residence or business, to the POTW collector line. 
    Local limit means specific discharge limits, including Best Management Practices, developed and enforced by the Director upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in Tennessee Rule 0400-40-14-.05(1)(a) and (2), as amended from time to time. 
    Mass-based standards or limits means the actual mass of pollutants in a wastewater stream per unit of time or production. 
    Medical waste means isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological waste, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical waste, potentially contaminated laboratory waste and dialysis waste. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source, as defined, has commenced if the owner or operator, has: 
a.  Begun or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program, any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate products, waste products or finished products. 
    Nonconventional pollutant means all pollutants which are not included in the list of conventional or toxic pollutants in 40 CFR 401. 
    Nondomestic source means any source of discharge of wastewater from any facility other than a residential unit meeting the requirements of a domestic wastewater producer. 
    Notice of violation (NOV) means a written notice signed by the director that notifies a user that a violation of any permit requirement, any section of this article or any other valid order has occurred and describes the facts of the violation. 
    NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under sections 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the Clean Water Act (CWA). 
    Pass through means a discharge that exits the POTW into the waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This shall include all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of the hydrogen ions measured in grams per liter of solution and expressed in standard units (SU). 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water, or wastewater having been changed in pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means except by diluting the concentration of pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
    Private waste disposal system means a septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended for the disposal of wastewater. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as set out in section 106-240. 
    Public sewer means a sewer controlled or maintained by the city. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 USC 1292 and owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic or industrial waste of a liquid nature and any pipes which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Residential unit means a structure used primarily as housing and generating wastewater that includes but is not limited to human waste, kitchen waste, domestic wash water and bathwater. If there is located within or upon the same property as a residential unit any process, commercial activity or any other activity that generates wastewater not included in this definition, such wastewater shall not be classified as domestic wastewater. 
    Septic tank wastes means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. Septic Tank Waste does not include grease interceptor or grease trap waste. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU), except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this definition, means any industrial user who: 
(1)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges 25,000 gallons or more per average workday of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated by the director as having the reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6). 
(3)  The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specially included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The industrial user, prior to director's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section 106-333(b) and Tennessee Rule 0400-40-14-.12(17), as amended from time to time, together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with procedures in Tennessee Rule 0400-10-14-.08(6)(f), determine that such User should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance means the following and shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (c), (d), or (h) in this definition and shall mean): 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 106-151 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any violation of a Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Requirements as defined in section 106-151 that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, Interference or Pass Through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program (40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii)). 
    Sludge means solid, semisolid or liquid residue generated during treatment of domestic or industrial sewage in a treatment works. 
    Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 106-240. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a pipe or conduit which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, excluding domestic and industrial waste or wastewater. 
    Stormwater means any flow of water resulting from any form of precipitation. 
    Suspended solids or total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering by approved procedures according to 40 CFR 136. 
    Toxic material means any substance, or compound containing such substance, as set out in 40 CFR 401.15. 
    Treatment plant means that portion of a POTW designed to treat wastewater. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or allows the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
    Wastewater means industrial or domestic liquid waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial or manufacturing facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to or allowed to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means a control document issued by the director authorizing conditional discharge of pollutants into the POTW as specified in division 6 of this article. 
    Waters of the state means any and all waters, public or private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within, flow through or border upon this state or any portion thereof except those bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in a single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters. 
(Code 1981, § 26-63; Code 1998, § 106-151; Ord. No. 5949, § I, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 6648, § I, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-143. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the meanings designated: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand BMPs Best management practices CFR Code of Federal Regulations CIU Categorical industrial user COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency FOG Fats, oils and grease mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NSCIU Nonsignificant categorical industrial user POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard industrial classification SIU Significant industrial user SNC Significant noncompliance TSS Total suspended solids USC United States Code  
(Code 1981, § 26-62; Code 1998, § 106-152; Ord. No. 5949, § II, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-144. - Policy; applicability; purpose. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and general pretreatment regulations set out in 40 CFR 403. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works, whether located inside the city or outside the city. This article: 
(1)  Authorizes issuance of wastewater discharge permits; 
(2)  Provides for monitoring, compliance, recordkeeping, pretreatment and enforcement; 
(3)  Establishes administrative review procedures; 
(4)  Requires user reporting; and 
(5)  Provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(c)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through inadequately treated into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  Protect publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  Enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(Code 1981, § 26-61; Code 1998, § 106-153) 
Sec. 102-145. - Confidential data. 
(a)  User information or data obtained from reports, surveys, questionnaires, permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs or from the director's inspection and sampling activities under this article shall be made available to the public or other governmental agencies in conformance with T.C.A. § 10-7-503 et seq., without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(b)  No city employee or officer may disclose or use for his private advantage any business information which comes into his possession or to which he gains access, by virtue of his official position or employment, except as authorized by the written policy for handling confidential information. A copy of this policy shall be on file in the office of the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-64; Code 1998, § 106-154) 
Sec. 102-146. - Special agreements. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to prevent special agreements or arrangements between the city and any user of the POTW whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to payment of user charges as may be applicable. The making of such special agreements or arrangements between the city and the user shall be strictly limited to the capability of the POTW to handle such waste without interfering with operations, sludge use and handling or allowing pass through of pollutants which would result in a violation of the NPDES permit. No special agreement or arrangement may be made without adequate documentation by the user of sound operation and management practices in reduction of wastewater volume and strength. 
(b)  Any agreement pursuant to this section shall be null, void, and no longer of effect if the agreement: 
(1)  Interferes with POTW operations; 
(2)  Interferes with sludge use, handling or disposal; 
(3)  Causes pass through of pollutants; 
(4)  Endangers the health of POTW personnel, environment or the general public; 
(5)  Causes a violation of the city's NPDES permit; or 
(6)  Causes failure of toxicity tests. 
(Code 1981, § 26-65; Code 1998, § 106-155) 
Sec. 102-147. - Retention of records. 
    All records and reports required by this article shall be retained for a minimum of three years and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the director or appropriate state or federal agencies. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or when requested by the director or appropriate state or federal agencies. 
(Code 1981, § 26-66; Code 1998, § 106-156) 
Sec. 102-148. - Time of report filing. 
    Under this article, written reports shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of receipt by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-67; Code 1998, § 106-157) 
Sec. 102-149. - Wastewater received from other political jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another public agency, as defined by T.C.A. § 12-9-103, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the public agency shall, prior to connecting to the POTW, enter into an interlocal agreement with the city as authorized by the Tennessee Interlocal Cooperation Act. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the contributing public agency shall provide the director with the following information: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater to be discharged to the POTW by the contributing public agency; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing public agency that will be discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An interlocal agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain but not be limited to the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement that a contributing public agency adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set forth in sections 102-225 and 102-226. The agreement shall specify that such ordinance and limits shall be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to this article or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing public agency to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling and enforcement will be conducted: 
a.  By the contributing public agency; 
b.  By the city; and 
c.  Jointly by the contributing public agency and the city; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing public agency to provide the director with access to all information the contributing public agency obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing public agency's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing public agency's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing public agency's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; 
(8)  A provision providing that any proposed new nondomestic user shall complete an application questionnaire, in a form approved by the director, prior to discharging to lines connected to the POTW; and 
(9)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the interlocal agreement. 
(d)  Any contributing public agency shall also comply with all parts of divisions 2 through 9 of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-68; Code 1998, § 106-158) 
Secs. 102-150-102-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 102-167. - Duties and authority of the director. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the director of public works shall administer, implement and enforce this article by and through the department of public works. 
(b)  The director shall have the following specific powers, duties and responsibilities which may be delegated by the director to other city personnel: 
(1)  Administer and enforce a pretreatment program in accordance with 40 CFR 403, federal pretreatment program requirements, T.C.A. § 69-3-123 et seq. and this article; 
(2)  Develop and implement a uniform enforcement response plan; 
(3)  Recommend a schedule of civil penalties for violations of this article; 
(4)  Maintain all records required by divisions 1 through 8 of this article; and 
(5)  Issue emergency orders. 
(c)  The director shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities, which shall not be delegated: 
(1)  Issue, modify or revoke permits and exceptions, subject to rights of appeal set out in this article; 
(2)  Issue notices of violation whenever it is found that a user has violated or is violating any permit requirement, order or any section of this article. Such notice of violation may require submittal of a plan of correction by the user; 
(3)  Sign and issue consent orders ensuring voluntary compliance, including necessary remedial or preventive action, according to a fixed time schedule; 
(4)  Issue compliance orders; 
(5)  Conduct show cause hearings to review facts of alleged violations in order to determine and pursue any appropriate enforcement remedy; 
(6)  Levy civil penalties for violation of this article, for damages to the POTW or for injury to POTW personnel; and 
(7)  Terminate water service, sewer service or both, in conformance with this article. 
(d)  In the absence or incapacity of the director and in an emergency, the city manager shall assume all duties and responsibilities of the director unless the director shall have previously appointed a person to serve in his stead. 
(Code 1981, § 26-69; Code 1998, § 106-186) 
Sec. 102-168. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
(a)  The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive, and the director may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies for enforcement provided in this article, the director may petition the state or the Environmental Protection Agency, as appropriate, to exercise such methods or remedies as shall be available to such government entities to seek criminal or civil penalties, injunctive relief, or such other remedies as may be provided by applicable federal or state laws to ensure compliance by industrial users of applicable pretreatment standards, to prevent the introduction of toxic pollutants or other regulated pollutants into the POTW, or to prevent such other water pollution as may be regulated by state or federal law. 
(c)  Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-187), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-169. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
(a)  The director shall cause to be published annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means the following and shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violate subsection (3), (4) or (8) of this section): 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six month period exceed by any magnitude a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined in section 102-142; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 102-142, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any violation of a pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements as defined in section 102-142 that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(b)  If any published violation has been appealed by the user and that appeal has not been resolved, the published notice shall so indicate. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-188), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-170. - Adoption of enforcement response plan. 
    Under this article, an enforcement response plan, including a schedule of civil penalties which may be assessed for certain specific violations or categories of violations, shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this section may be in addition to any other penalty assessed by a state or federal authority. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-189), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-171. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, a written explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Any notice or order issued pursuant to this article shall also contain notification to the violator of his right of appeal to the appeals board or, if available, the right of appeal to the chancery court. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-190), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-172. - Consent orders. 
    The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as orders issued pursuant to sections 102-174 and 102-175 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-191), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-173. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The director may order a user who has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(b)  The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. 
(c)  A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for taking any other action against the user, but shall be a prerequisite for issuing any compliance order, cease or desist order, termination of service or assessment of civil penalties, except as provided by section 102-176. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-192), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-174. - Compliance orders. 
(a)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued upon 30 days' written notice, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW. 
(b)  A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-193), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-175. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to immediately comply with all requirements and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-194), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-176. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  Under this article, if the director finds that an emergency exists imperatively requiring immediate action to protect: 
(1)  The public health, safety or welfare; 
(2)  The health of animals, fish or aquatic life; 
(3)  A public water supply; or 
(4)  The facilities of the POTW; 
the director may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the director deems necessary to meet the emergency. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the discharge shall immediately eliminate the contribution. If a user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection. The director may allow the user to recommence the discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 102-177 are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 102-173 or 102-177. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(e)  Any user whose discharge is suspended pursuant to this section, on petition to appeal to the appeals board, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in no case shall such hearing be held later than three working days from the receipt of such a petition by the director. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-195), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-177. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to section 102-319, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 5 of this article; or 
(6)  Failure to pay sewer user charges, administrative penalties, inspection fees or any other fee or charge authorized in this article. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of the discharge and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 102-173 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-196), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-178. - Method of assessment. 
    Under this article, civil penalties shall be assessed in the following manner: 
(1)  The director may issue an assessment against any person responsible for the violation. 
(2)  Any person against whom an assessment has been issued may secure a review of the assessment by filing with the director a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons for his objections and asking for a hearing on the matter before the appeals board. If a petition for review of the assessment is not filed within 30 days after the date the assessment is served, the user shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and it shall become final. 
(3)  If any assessment becomes final because of a person's failure to appeal the director's assessment, the director may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution of the judgment, and the court in such proceedings shall treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment. Upon final order, if payment is not made the director may terminate water service. 
(4)  In assessing civil penalties the director shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
b.  Damages to the POTW, including compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the POTW, and also including any penalties, costs and attorney's fees incurred by the city as the result of the activity, as well as the expenses involved in enforcing this section and the costs involved in rectifying any damages; 
c.  Cause of the discharge or violation; 
d.  The severity of the discharge and its effect upon the POTW and upon the quality and quantity of the receiving waters; 
e.  Effectiveness of action taken by the violator to provide a remedy; 
f.  The technical and economic reasonableness of reducing or eliminating the discharge; and 
g.  The economic benefit gained by the violator. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-197), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-179. - Assessment for noncompliance with permits or orders. 
(a)  The director may assess any polluter or violator for damages to the city resulting from any person's pollution or violation, failure or neglect in complying with any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the pretreatment program or any part of this article. 
(b)  If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the appeals board by the violator within 30 days of notification of such assessment, he shall be deemed to have consented to such assessment and it shall become final. 
(c)  Damages may include any expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program or division 5 of this article; in removing, correcting and terminating any pollution; and also compensation for any actual damages to the POTW or to personnel employed therein caused by the violation. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-198), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-180. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A civil penalty up to the maximum permitted by the constitution and laws of the state, not to exceed $10,000.00 per day, may be assessed against any user who has violated or continues to violate any section of this article or any of the following: 
(1)  A wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  Any valid order issued under this article; 
(3)  Any pretreatment standard or requirement; 
(4)  Any terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to the pretreatment program; 
(5)  Failing to complete a filing requirement of the pretreatment program; 
(6)  Failing to allow entry, inspection or monitoring, or violates reporting requirements; 
(7)  Failing to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by the pretreatment program; or 
(8)  Violation of a final determination or order of the appeals board or director. 
(b)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, account shall be taken of all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-199), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-181. - Performance bonds. 
    The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any section of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-200), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-182. - Financial assurance. 
    The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any section of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that he has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-201), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-183. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, potable water service to the user may be severed. A user holding a valid wastewater discharge permit shall be given ten days' written notice by certified mail prior to the severance of the water supply. Severance of water service for all other users shall be in conformance with section 102-59. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-202), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-184. - Injunctive relief, authority to pursue civil or criminal penalties by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(a)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the appropriate court, through the city attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies for enforcement provided in this article, the director may petition the state or the Environmental Protection Agency, as appropriate, to exercise such methods or remedies as shall be available to such government entities to seek criminal or civil penalties, injunctive relief, or such other remedies as may be provided by applicable federal or state laws to ensure compliance by industrial users of applicable pretreatment standards, to prevent the introduction of toxic pollutants or other regulated pollutants into the POTW, or to prevent such other water pollution as may be regulated by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-203), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-185. - Appeals process. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 69-3-123 et seq., the stormwater appeals board created in section 42-79, and referred to in this article as the appeals board, shall serve at the local hearing authority for appeals. Except in emergency suspensions pursuant to section 102-176, any user against whom a penalty has been assessed for a violation of this article, a permit denied, revoked, suspended, against whom the director has issued an order or who is otherwise aggrieved by an act of the director shall have 30 days after having been served with the assessment or order, or after a permit has been denied, revoked or suspended, or such person has been aggrieved to appeal the action by filing with the director a written petition for appeal setting forth the grounds and reasons for the appeal. The failure to serve the director within 30 days with the written petition for appeal is jurisdictional, and if an appeal is not taken within the 30 days the matter shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-204), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-186. - Duties of appeals board. 
    The appeals board shall have the power, duty and responsibility to: 
(1)  Conduct hearing on and promulgate decisions on appeals from orders issued by the director assessing penalties or damages, or revoking or modifying permits in accordance with the procedures and requirements contained in T.C.A. § 69-3-124; 
(2)  Promulgate such procedural rules as may be necessary in the interest of justice, fairness, and impartiality. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-205), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-187. - Appeals to appeals board. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a written petition from an aggrieved user under this article but not less than 15 days after notice of a matter to be appealed, the director shall give the petitioner 30 days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing, but in no case shall such hearing be held more than 60 days from the receipt of the written petition unless the director and the petitioner agree to a postponement. 
(b)  An appeal to the appeals board shall be a de novo review. 
(c)  Hearings or rehearings before the appeals board shall be conducted in accordance with T.C.A. § 69-3-124 and shall include the following: 
(1)  The presence of at least three members of the appeals board shall be necessary to conduct a hearing. 
(2)  A verbatim record of the proceedings shall be taken, together with the findings of fact and conclusions of law. The transcript so recorded shall be made available to any party upon prepayment of a charge adequate to cover the costs of preparation. 
(3)  In connection with the hearing, subpoenas shall be issued in response to any reasonable request by any party to the hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the chancery court shall have jurisdiction, upon application of the appeals board or the director, to issue an order requiring such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require, and any failure to obey such order of the court may be punished as contempt under law. 
(4)  On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the appeals board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further the purposes of the pretreatment program and shall give written notice of such decisions and orders to the petitioner. The order so issued shall be issued no later than 30 days following the close of the hearing. 
(5)  The decision of the appeals board shall become final and binding on all parties unless appealed as provided in section 102-189. 
(6)  Any person to whom an emergency order is directed pursuant to section 102-176 shall comply therewith immediately but on petition to the appeals board shall be afforded a hearing not later than three working days from the receipt of such a petition by the director. 
(d)  The following shall not be applicable to emergency suspensions pursuant to section 102-176: 
(1)  If a written petition of appeal is filed by a user, the effective date of the matter properly appealed shall be stayed until a decision is announced by the appeals board; provided, however, that in no case shall such a stay exceed a period of 90 days, except as provided in section 102-188, from the date of receipt of a written petition to the director to appeal as set out in this section. 
(2)  If a continuance of a hearing before the appeals board is requested by a user, no additional time shall be added to the limitations of subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  If the appeals board is not able, for good cause, to hold a hearing within the 60-day limit, the stay shall be extended by the number of days such period is exceeded. 
(4)  If a continuance is requested by the city, the time of the stay shall be extended by the same number of days as the continuance. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-206), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-188. - Additional stay. 
    The appeals board may grant an additional continuance and stay beyond that set forth in section 102-187 upon the request of a user and upon the posting of an appeal bond payable to the city in a sum to be determined by the director as necessary to protect the interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-207), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-189. - Judicial review. 
    An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final determination of the appeals board by any party, including the city, who is or may be adversely affected thereby, to the chancery court pursuant to the common law writ of certiorari set out in T.C.A. § 27-8-101, within 60 days from the date such order or determination is made, all in accordance with T.C.A. § 69-3-124. 
(Ord. No. 5949, § III(106-208), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-190. - Affirmative defenses to an upset. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  The term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards for any user, because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. 
(2)  The term "upset" does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c) of this section are met. 
(c)  To establish the affirmative defense of upset, a user shall demonstrate through properly signed contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  A user will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  A user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of his treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Code 1981, § 26-141; Code 1998, § 106-209; Ord. No. 5949, § IV, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-191. - Affirmative defense to a bypass. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Severe property damage. 
(1)  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 
(2)  The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  Allowed bypass. A user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Prior notice. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, he shall submit prior notice to the director at least ten days before the date of the bypass, or as early as possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time he becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report is received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Enforcement action; approved bypass. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 26-142; Code 1998, § 106-210) 
Secs. 102-192-102-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 102-221. - Requirements for proper wastewater disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any waters of the state any wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain a private wastewater disposal system within the city. 
(c)  Except as provided in this section, the owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, industry, recreation or other purposes located where sewers are available is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with this article and the city plumbing code within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the sewer is within 200 feet of the structure and at a suitable elevation. Any residence, business or industrial establishment having sewers available for 90 days shall be considered a user whether connected or not and shall be subject to paying all valid charges imposed by this Code and appropriate fees as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(d)  Where a sewer is not available, the building shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with division 4 of this article and any requirements of the state. 
(e)  An industrial facility may discharge wastewater to the waters of the state, provided that it obtains an NPDES permit and meets all the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., the NPDES permit and any other applicable local, state or federal statutes and regulations. Such facility shall be considered a user of the public sewers or the POTW only if it contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
(f)  Every industrial user not holding an NPDES permit shall be required to connect to the POTW if a public sewer is available. 
(Code 1981, § 26-72; Code 1998, § 106-236) 
Sec. 102-222. - Physical connections to the public sewer. 
(a)  All sanitary sewers and appurtenances to be connected to the POTW, whether located inside or outside the city limits, shall be installed in conformance with state specifications and specifications of this Code then in effect. Upon completion and prior to acceptance by the board of mayor and aldermen, each project or addition shall be inspected and approved by the city to ensure compliance. 
(b)  No acceptance shall be made of sewers or sewer lines unless and until easements are provided for maintenance with the exclusive right to control the lines and appurtenances as set forth in the governing codes. 
(c)  No person shall fill, cover, uncover, make any connection to, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(d)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The director shall assess a charge against the user for work required to repair damages and add such charge to the user's sewer service charge. 
(e)  Building sewers shall conform to all applicable city building and plumbing codes. 
(f)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found upon examination and testing by the city to meet all requirements of this article. All others shall be sealed to the specifications of the building official. 
(g)  No person shall connect roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or any other drain used exclusively for the carrying away of precipitation, groundwater or surface water runoff to a building sewer which is connected directly or indirectly to the POTW, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-73; Code 1998, § 106-237) 
Sec. 102-223. - Inspection of connections. 
    All connections from the building to the public sewer line shall be inspected by the city to ensure compliance with this article and all building code requirements. 
(Code 1981, § 26-74; Code 1998, § 106-238) 
Sec. 102-224. - Maintenance of building sewers. 
    Each individual user of the POTW shall be entirely responsible for maintenance of the building sewer. The maintenance shall include repair or replacement as deemed necessary by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-75; Code 1998, § 106-239) 
Sec. 102-225. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause or allow to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. This subsection shall apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause or allow to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Pollutants which may cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or greater than or equal to 12.5 standard units, unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, such as but not limited to grease, garbage, paunch manure, bones, hair from veterinary, animal grooming, slaughterhouses, or animal shelter facilities, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grain, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuels or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(4)  Not to be discharged. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat, polluted wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit), unless the director approves alternate temperature limits. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director. 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process to the point of thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. 
(11)  Wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or uncontaminated noncontact cooling water, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(13)  Sludge, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit or notification letter. 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(17)  Fat, oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(18)  Liquids, solids or gases which because of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient to cause a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL). 
(19)  Enzymes, hot water, emulsifiers or other agents to cause oil or grease to pass through the user's grease trap or treatment unit designed to remove oil and grease. 
(20)  Increased use of process water in an attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(c)  Not to be discharged. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Code 1981, § 26-76; Code 1998, § 106-240; Ord. No. 5949, § V, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-226. - Restrictions on wastewater strength. 
(a)  No user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the standards established in Table A, User Discharge Restrictions, as set out in subsection (c), unless an exception is permitted in this article. Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements shall be considered a violation of this article. The director is authorized and has established Local Limits pursuant to Tennessee Rule 0400.40-14-.05(3). The director may develop best management practices (BMPs), in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement Local Limits and the requirements of section 106-240. 
(b)  The director shall monitor the treatment works influent for each parameter in table A, user discharge restrictions, as set out in subsection (c), nondomestic users shall be subject to reporting and monitoring requirements regarding these parameters as set forth in table A, user discharge restrictions, as set out in subsection (c). If the influent at the POTW reaches or exceeds the established allowable loadings for these parameters, the director shall initiate technical studies to determine the cause of the influent violation and shall recommend to the board of mayor and aldermen the necessary remedial measures, including but not limited to establishment of new or revised pretreatment levels for these parameters. The director shall also recommend changes to any of these criteria if the POTW effluent standards are changed, if there are changes in any applicable law or regulation affecting such or if changes are needed for more effective operation of the POTW. 
(c)  The pollutant limits in the table A, user discharge restrictions, as set out below, are established to protect against pass through and interference. Unless specifically authorized by the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or special agreement as authorized by section 106-155, no user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum or monthly average allowable discharge limits: 
Table A. User Discharge Restrictions 
Pollutant Daily 
Maximum 
Limit 
(mg/l)* Monthly 
Average 
Limit 
(mg/l)* Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) 66.87 25.24 Benzene 0.048 0.032 Carbon tetrachloride 0.468 0.312 Chloroform 1.610 1.074 Trans-1, 2-Dichloroethylene 0.035 0.023 Ethylbenzene 0.122 0.081 Methylene chloride 0.881 0.587 Naphthalene 0.026 0.017 Tetrachloroethylene 0.153 0.102 Toluene 0.248 0.165 1, 1, 1 Trichloroethane 0.410 0.165 Trichloroethylene 0.289 0.193 Total phthalates** 1.301 0.867 Arsenic (total) 1.13 0.75 Cadmium (total) 0.12 0.08 Chromium (total) 3.68 2.43 Copper (total) 1.62 1.07 Cyanide (total) 0.52 0.35 Lead (total) 1.06 0.71 Mercury (total) 0.0126 0.0084 Molybdenum (total) 7.9 5.3 Nickel (total) 1.97 1.30 Phenols (total) 0.70 0.46 Selenium (total) 3.46 2.31 Silver (total) 0.23 0.23 Zinc (total) 1.79 1.18 Xylene 0.180 0.120 Hydrogen sulfide 0.5 NA  
;le=2;*Based on 24-hour flow proportional composite samples, if appropriate for parameter. 
;le=2;**Total phthalates is defined as the sum of benzylbutyl phthalate, bis (2 ethylhexyl) phthalate, Di-n-butyl phthalate, and diethylphthalate. 
(d)  The limits in table A apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations of metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Code 1981, § 26-77; Code 1998, § 106-241; Ord. No. 5949, § VI, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 6648, § II, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-227. - Application for exception to discharge criteria. 
(a)  Nondomestic users of the POTW may apply for a temporary exception to the wastewater discharge restrictions established by section 102-226. Exceptions may be granted according to the guidelines set forth in section 102-228. The director shall allow applications for temporary exceptions at any time; however, the director shall not accept an application if the applicant has submitted the same or substantially similar application within the preceding year and the application has been denied. Any exception granted shall not exceed 180 days. 
(b)  Upon finding that the POTW treatment process may be jeopardized, the director may revoke an exception. 
(Code 1981, § 26-78; Code 1998, § 106-242) 
Sec. 102-228. - Conditions applicable to exceptions. 
    A user requesting an exception pursuant to section 102-227 shall demonstrate to the director that he is making a concentrated and serious effort to maintain high standards of operation control so that restricted discharges to the POTW are being minimized. If negligence is found, exceptions will be subject to termination. A user requesting an exception must demonstrate that compliance with stated concentration and quantity standards is technically or economically infeasible and the discharge, if excepted, will not: 
(1)  Interfere with collection or the operation of the POTW; 
(2)  Limit sludge management alternatives or increase the cost of providing adequate sludge management; or 
(3)  Pass through the POTW in quantities or concentrations that would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(Code 1981, § 26-79; Code 1998, § 106-243) 
Sec. 102-229. - Review of application for exception by the director. 
(a)  All applications for an exception pursuant to section 102-227 shall be reviewed by the director. If the application does not contain sufficient information for complete evaluation, the director shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and request additional information. The applicant shall have 30 days following the notification by the director to correct such deficiencies. This 30-day period may be extended upon approval and for just cause shown. Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall evaluate the application within 30 days and make a determination. The director shall consider: 
(1)  Whether or not the applicant is subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard containing discharge limitations more stringent than those in section 102-226. No exception will be granted if the national categorical pretreatment standard is equal to or more stringent than the discharge restrictions listed in section 102-226. 
(2)  Whether or not the exception would apply to discharge of a substance classified as a toxic substance under regulations promulgated by the EPA under provisions of 33 USC 1317, and then grant an exception only if such exception is within limitations of applicable federal regulations. 
(3)  Whether or not the granting of an exception would create conditions that would reduce the effectiveness of the treatment works taking into consideration the concentration of the pollutant in the treatment works influent and the design capability of the treatment works. 
(4)  The age of equipment and industrial facilities involved to the extent that such factors affect the quality of wastewater discharge. 
(5)  The process employed by the user and process changes available which would affect the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(6)  The engineering aspects of various types of pretreatment or other control techniques available to the user to improve the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(b)  The appeals board shall hear appeals from the director's decisions. 
(Code 1981, § 26-80; Code 1998, § 106-244) 
Secs. 102-230-102-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE SYSTEMS AND HOLDING TANKS 

Sec. 102-252. - Availability of system. 
(a)  Where the POTW is not available under section 102-221, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with this division. 
(b)  A private pumping system will be provided if any residence, office, recreational facility or other establishment used for human occupancy is below an elevation to obtain proper flow through the building sewer, unless an exception is granted by the director. 
(c)  When a public sewer becomes available, connection shall be made to the sewer within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, and any septic tank or other private disposal facility shall be abandoned. 
(Code 1981, § 26-81; Code 1998, § 106-271) 
Sec. 102-253. - Requirements for private domestic systems. 
(a)  Private domestic wastewater disposal systems shall not be constructed within the city until a letter is obtained from the director stating that a public sewer is not accessible to the property and no such sewer is proposed for construction in the immediate future. No letter shall be issued for any private domestic wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that specified by the state. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall obtain a written permit from the appropriate state agency. 
(c)  Private wastewater disposal systems shall not be placed in operation until the installation is approved by the state. The work may be inspected at any stage of construction, and in any event the owner shall notify the state when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. 
(d)  The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the appropriate state agency. No septic tanks or cesspools shall be permitted to discharge to the waters of the state except as specifically permitted for the appropriate system. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at the owner's expense. 
(f)  No part of this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state. 
(Code 1981, § 26-82; Code 1998, § 106-272) 
Sec. 102-254. - Holding tank waste disposal. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall clean out, drain or flush any septic tank or any other type of wastewater or excreta disposal system within the city unless such person obtains a permit from the director to perform such acts or services. Any person desiring a permit to perform such services shall file an application on the prescribed form. Upon such application, a permit shall be issued by the director when the conditions of this division have been met, provided the director is satisfied the applicant has adequate and proper equipment to perform the services contemplated in a safe and competent manner. The director may require domestic septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  Fees. For each permit issued under this section, an annual fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(c)  Designated disposal locations. The director shall designate approved locations for the emptying and cleaning of all equipment used in the performance of the services rendered as provided for, and it shall be a violation for any person to empty or clean such equipment at any place other than a place so designated. 
(d)  Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all sections of this article shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of such permit by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-83; Code 1998, § 106-273) 
Sec. 102-255. - Hauled nondomestic wastewater. 
    Nondomestic waste haulers shall be subject to all the provisions of section 102-254 and, in addition: 
(1)  The director shall require haulers of nondomestic waste or wastewater to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director may require generators of hauled nondomestic waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director may also prohibit the disposal in the POTW of hauled nondomestic waste. The discharge of hauled nondomestic waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(2)  Nondomestic waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director and with the prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require nondomestic waste haulers to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(3)  Nondomestic waste haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load. 
a.  The form shall include at a minimum: 
1.  The name and address of the nondomestic waste hauler; 
2.  Permit number; 
3.  Truck identification; 
4.  Names and addresses of sources of waste; and 
5.  Volume and characteristics of waste. 
b.  The form shall identify: 
1.  The type of industry; 
2.  Known or suspected waste constituents; and 
3.  Whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Code 1981, § 26-84; Code 1998, § 106-274) 
Secs. 102-256-102-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 102-274. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 405-471 are incorporated by reference, the same as if copied verbatim in this section. 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1981, § 26-85; Code 1998, § 106-301; Ord. No. 5949, § VII, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-275. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with section 102-226 and shall achieve compliance with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and local limits within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before such facilities are constructed. Review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user of the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-86; Code 1998, § 106-302) 
Sec. 102-276. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary pursuant to this article, the director may require a user to restrict the discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with requirements of this article. 
(b)  The director may require, provided just cause exists, any user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain on his property and at his expense a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for domestic users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired as needed by the user at his expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(e)  Any industrial, commercial or manufacturing facility having upon the premises any raw material, intermediate material, finished products, byproducts, residue, waste material or other substance that has the potential to adversely impact the POTW, the environment or the health or safety of POTW personnel may be ordered, at the discretion of the director, to sample or monitor the wastewater stream at the expense of the user. 
(Code 1981, § 26-87; Code 1998, § 106-303) 
Sec. 102-277. - Dilution. 
    Under this article, no user shall ever increase the volume of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who use dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1981, § 26-88; Code 1998, § 106-304) 
Sec. 102-278. - New sources. 
    New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall be operating, all pretreatment facilities required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge wastewater to the POTW. New sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards within 90 days of the beginning of discharge. 
(Code 1998, § 106-305; Ord. No. 4573, § I, 9-1-1998) 
Secs. 102-279-102-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 102-305. - Application for discharge of wastewater. 
(a)  Application for a wastewater discharge permit shall be required from all new dischargers of wastewater, as well as for any existing discharger desiring additional service. Connection to the POTW shall not be made until the application is approved in writing by the city and the building sewer is installed in accordance with section 102-222. 
(b)  Receipt of an application for service shall not obligate the city to render such service. If the service applied for cannot be provided in accordance with this article and the city's rules and regulations, the connection charge will be refunded in full, and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for such service, except that conditional waivers for additional services may be granted by the director for interim periods if compliance may be ensured within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1981, § 26-89; Code 1998, § 106-331) 
Sec. 102-306. - Application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall submit an application accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. The director may require all users to submit, as part of an application, the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 102-348; 
(2)  A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and average and maximum amounts per day of raw materials processed; site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details showing all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; and all points of discharge; 
(6)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(7)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and shall be returned to the user for revision or completion. The application shall be resubmitted within 30 days. 
(Code 1981, § 26-93; Code 1998, § 106-332) 
Sec. 102-307. - Application signatures and certification. 
(a)  Every nondomestic wastewater discharge permit application and any reports required by this article shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and shall contain the following certification: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(b)  Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users, a facility determined by the director to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user, as defined in section 102-142, as part of the term significant industrial user, must annually submit the certification statement set forth in this subsection, signed by an authorized representative, as defined in section 102-142. The following certification statement must accompany an alternative report required by the director: 
    "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR ____________ , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ to ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ____________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in 1.4 GG (3); [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
(c)  The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information: ____________ 
_____ ."  
(Code 1981, § 26-94; Code 1998, § 106-333; Ord. No. 5949, § VIII, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-308. - Applications by significant industrial users and categorical users. 
(a)  All significant industrial users (SIUs) or categorical users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the director an application accompanied by the wastewater discharge permit fee established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. Proposed SIUs shall apply at least 180 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The director may reduce or extend the deadline for new discharge applications. 
(b)  The application shall be on a form prescribed by the city and shall include but not be limited to the following information: name, address, location if different from address and the standard industrial classification (SIC) number of the applicant; wastewater volume; wastewater constituents and characteristics; discharge variations; description of all toxic materials handled on the premises; details showing all POTW connections by size, location and elevation; description of existing and proposed pretreatment facilities and other information deemed necessary by the director. Such additional information may include but is not limited to site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details showing all sewer appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(c)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria for an SIU has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
(d)  As part of the application for a wastewater discharge permit, any user who elects or is required to construct new or additional facilities for pretreatment shall submit plans, specifications and other pertinent information relative to the proposed construction to the director for approval. Plans and specifications submitted for approval must bear the seal of a professional engineer registered to practice engineering in the state. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be issued until such plans and specifications are approved. Approval of such plans and specifications shall in no way relieve a user of the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent which complies with the terms of this article and an applicable wastewater discharge permit. 
(e)  If additional pretreatment, operation or maintenance will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the application shall include the shortest completion schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. For the purpose of this section, pretreatment standards shall include either a national pretreatment standard, as specified in 40 CFR, protection of the environment, or a pretreatment standard imposed by division 5 of this article. 
(f)  The following conditions shall apply to a completion schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); however, no time increment shall exceed nine months. 
(2)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, at minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(g)  The director shall evaluate data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(h)  Receipt by the director of a prospective customer's application for a wastewater discharge permit shall not obligate the city to render the wastewater collection and treatment service. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this article, the application shall be rejected and the city shall have no liability to provide such service. 
(i)  The director shall act only on applications containing all the information required in this section. A user who files an incomplete application will be notified by the director that the application is deficient and the nature of such deficiency and will be given 30 days to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within such extended period as allowed by the director, he shall deny the application and notify the applicant in writing of such action. 
(Code 1981, § 26-95; Code 1998, § 106-334) 
Sec. 102-309. - Characteristics of nondomestic or industrial wastewater. 
(a)  When requested by the director, a nondomestic user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request. The director shall prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require nondomestic users to update this information. 
(b)  Upon analysis of the wastewater characteristics and the type, volume and nature of activities, processes and material carried out or located upon the user's premises, the director may require a user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-90; Code 1998, § 106-335) 
Sec. 102-310. - Sampling and monitoring to determine necessity of pretreatment. 
    Any industrial, commercial or manufacturing facility having upon the premises any raw material, intermediate material, finished products, byproducts, residue, waste material or other substance that has the potential to adversely impact the POTW, the environment or the health or safety of POTW personnel shall be subject to section 102-309. 
(Code 1981, § 26-91; Code 1998, § 106-336) 
Sec. 102-311. - Nondomestic wastewater producers, new connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with this division, must be filed at least 180 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Code 1981, § 26-92; Code 1998, § 106-337) 
Sec. 102-312. - Conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all sections of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-96; Code 1998, § 106-338) 
Sec. 102-313. - Decisions. 
    The director shall evaluate the data furnished by the user on the application for the wastewater discharge permit and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director shall determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit only for good cause, which shall be specified in writing to the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 26-101; Code 1998, § 106-339) 
Sec. 102-314. - Notice of issuance. 
    Each completed application for a wastewater discharge permit shall be evaluated and, if a tentative decision to issue a permit is made, the director shall prepare a draft permit for review by the user and provide public notice of the intent to issue the permit. The director shall issue a copy of the draft permit to the user with the stipulation that written comments concerning the draft permit shall be submitted within 30 days of receipt thereof and also make the draft permit available to all interested parties. All comments received within the comment period shall be considered by the director prior to issuance of the final permit. 
(Code 1981, § 26-104; Code 1998, § 106-340) 
Sec. 102-315. - Contents. 
(a)  A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A statement indicating the duration of the permit, which shall not exceed five years; and a statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior written approval of the director; and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law; 
(6)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(8)  Requirements for submission of technical reports of discharge characteristics; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater being introduced into the POTW; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 26-103; Code 1998, § 106-341; Ord. No. 5949, § IX(106-341), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-316. - Violation of terms or conditions. 
    Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subject the permit holder to the penalties set out in this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit shall not relieve a user of the obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state or local law. 
(Code 1981, § 26-97; Code 1998, § 106-342) 
Sec. 102-317. - Modifications. 
    The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the permit was issued; 
(3)  A change in the POTW requiring either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of authorized discharges; 
(4)  Information indicating that a permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator as provided in section 102-318. 
(Code 1981, § 26-98; Code 1998, § 106-343) 
Sec. 102-318. - Transfers. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance written notice to the director and the director approves the permit transfer. 
(b)  Within ten days of completion of the transfer in operational control, but in no case later than 90 days after the date of approval as set out in subsection (a) of this section, the new owner or operator shall provide written certification to the director that: 
(1)  States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations or processes that affect the quality or quantity of the wastewater discharge; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer occurred; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with an existing wastewater discharge permit; and 
(4)  Contains a statement conforming to section 102-307, signed by the new owner or operator. 
(c)  Failure to comply with this section shall render the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Code 1981, § 26-99; Code 1998, § 106-344) 
Sec. 102-319. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A wastewater discharge permit is subject to suspension or revocation in whole or in part during its term for cause, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article; 
(2)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts; 
(3)  An unreported change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge; 
(4)  Failure to accurately report discharge constituents and characteristics or to report significant changes in plant operations or wastewater characteristics; 
(5)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(6)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(7)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(8)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(9)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(10)  Failure to pay fees, penalties or sewer use charges; 
(11)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(12)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; or 
(13)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of ownership of a permitted facility. 
(b)  A wastewater discharge permit shall be voidable upon cessation of operations. Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a particular user shall be void upon issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user for that location. 
(Code 1981, § 26-100; Code 1998, § 106-345) 
Sec. 102-320. - Duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, but not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. A user is authorized to continue discharge under the terms and conditions of an existing permit, provided that an application for reissuance of the permit is filed no later than 180 days prior to the expiration date for the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 26-102; Code 1998, § 106-346) 
Sec. 102-321. - Petition to reconsider. 
(a)  Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(b)  In the petition, the appealing party shall indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  If the director fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. The director shall provide notice to the user of his failure to act, and such notice shall include the rationale for the failure to act. 
(d)  A decision by the director not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit as requested may be reviewed by the appeals board. 
(e)  An appeal pursuant to section 102-187 may be filed concurrent with or in lieu of a petition to reconsider. 
(Code 1981, § 26-105; Code 1998, § 106-347) 
Sec. 102-322. - Renewal. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a new wastewater discharge permit by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with this article not less than 180 days prior to expiration of the existing permit. 
(Code 1981, § 26-106; Code 1998, § 106-348) 
Secs. 102-323-102-347. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 102-348. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Categorical/significant industrial users discharging to POTW. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical or significant industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Required information. Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set forth in section 102-358. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 106-151 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set forth in section 106-377. 
(Code 1981, § 26-107; Code 1998, § 106-376; Ord. No. 5949, § IX(106-376), 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-349. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 102-348(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. Such events include but are not limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-108; Code 1998, § 106-377) 
Sec. 102-350. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 102-348(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-333. 
(Code 1981, § 26-109; Code 1998, § 106-378; Ord. No. 5949, § X, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-351. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year, in March and September, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 102-358, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Code 1981, § 26-110; Code 1998, § 106-379; Ord. No. 5949, § XI, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-352. - Reports of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user shall notify the director of any changes to the user's operations or system which may alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before any planned change occurs or as early as practicable under the circumstances in all other cases. 
(b)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under division 6 of this article. 
(c)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under division 6 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 102-318 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 26-111; Code 1998, § 106-380) 
Sec. 102-353. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    Every user not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide such reports as the director may require. 
(Code 1981, § 26-112; Code 1998, § 106-381) 
Sec. 102-354. - Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
(Code 1981, § 26-113; Code 1998, § 106-382; Ord. No. 5949, § XII, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-355. - Notification of accidental discharge and control plans. 
(a)  Protection from accidental discharge. All nondomestic users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW from liquid or raw material storage areas, truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials-handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds. The wastewater discharge permit of any user who has a history of significant leaks, spills or other accidental discharge of waste regulated by this article shall be subject, on a case-by-case basis, to a special permit condition or the requirement for the construction of facilities and establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for such accidental discharge. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans of facilities and operating procedures required by this subsection shall be submitted to the director before the facility is constructed. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of responsibility for modifying the facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification of accidental discharge. Any person causing or suffering any accidental discharge shall, immediately upon becoming aware of such discharge, notify the director by telephone to enable countermeasures to be taken to minimize damage to the POTW, the health and welfare of the public and the environment. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. This notification shall be followed within five days of the date of the occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the accidental discharge and measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Upon request by a user, the director may grant an exception to the written notification requirement. Such notification shall not relieve the user of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, natural resources, fish kills or any other damage to persons or property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or state or federal law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause, suffer or become aware of such discharges are aware of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Compliance. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-114; Code 1998, § 106-383) 
Sec. 102-356. - Slug reporting and control. 
(a)  Under this article, all users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for slug discharges. 
(b)  Any user who has a history of slug discharges shall be subject, on a case-by-case basis, to a requirement to construct facilities and establish procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for slug discharges. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans of facilities and operating procedures required by this subsection shall be submitted to the director before the facility is constructed. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of responsibility for modifying the facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Any person causing or suffering any slug discharge shall, immediately upon becoming aware of such discharge, notify the director by telephone to enable counter measures to be taken to minimize damage to the POTW, the health and welfare of the public and the environment. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. This notification shall be followed within five days of the date of the occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the slug discharge and measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification shall not relieve the user of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, natural resources, fish kills or any other damage to persons or property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or state or federal law. 
(d)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(e)  Slug control plan. Any industrial user may be required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). At least once, the city shall evaluate whether any significant industrial user needs such a plan. New significant industrial users will be evaluated for such a plan within 12 months of the start of their operation. After the initial slug control plan is provided to the city, the city may periodically evaluate the significant industrial user for any changes that need to be made to the plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan to the city which addresses at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices including nonroutine discharges; 
(2)  Description of all stored chemicals, including oil and fuel; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for followup written notification within five days; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading, operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(f)  Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause, suffer or become aware of such slug discharges are aware of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-114.5; Code 1998, § 106-384; Ord. No. 4573, § II, 9-1-1998; Ord. No. 5949, § XIII, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 102-357. - Notification of discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 70 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and an estimate of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(b)  All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 102-352. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of division 7 of this article. 
(c)  A discharger is exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which he discharges no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the waste is acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(d)  For any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(e)  For any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(f)  This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued under this article or any applicable federal or state law. 
(g)  All industrial users of the POTW shall make a one-time notification to the city on the hazardous waste notification form. Hazardous waste notification forms may be obtained from the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-115; Code 1998, § 106-385; Ord. No. 4573, § IV, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 102-358. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Code 1981, § 26-116; Code 1998, § 106-386) 
Sec. 102-359. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user shall collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow proportional composite collection techniques. If flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a grab sample where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Where time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge, and use protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate EPA guidance. The city may require, based on permit violations or identification of a particular pollutant problem at the POTW, that an industrial user collect more than one grab sample in a 24-hour period. 
(b)  If multiple grab samples are required for a user, upon approval from the director, the multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: 
(1)  For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; 
(2)  For volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. 
    Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, a grab sample may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(c)  A grab sample for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques. All pH grab sample results will be reported as individual sample results. If the industrial user is required to monitor pH continuously, then the industrial user will report any instance and duration for each pH limit violation. 
(d)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in sections 102-348 and 102-350 and Tenn. Comp. R. and Regs. § 0400-40-14-. 12(2) and (4), as amended from time to time, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section 102-35 1 and Tenn. Comp. R. and Regs. § 0400-40-14-.12(5) and (8), as amended from time to time, the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(e)  For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. 
(Code 1981, § 26-117; Code 1998, § 106-387; Ord. No. 4289, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 5949, § XIV, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 6648, § III, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-360. - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article, calibration of monitoring equipment records and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established under section 102-226. Records shall include the date; exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall be retained for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 26-118; Code 1998, § 106-388; Ord. No. 5949, § XV, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 102-361-102-378. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 102-379. - Right of entry and inspection. 
(a)  The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article. Users shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties required by this article. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and metering of the user's operations. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(f)  The director shall at all times, while upon the user's premises, observe and comply with all safety and security measures of the facility. 
(Code 1981, § 26-119; Code 1998, § 106-416) 
Sec. 102-380. - Monitoring and sampling facilities. 
(a)  The installation of a monitoring facility shall be required for all users regulated by a wastewater discharge permit. All other users may be required to provide suitable monitoring facilities. The purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the wastewater produced by a user. 
(b)  Monitoring facilities shall be located on the user's premises outside of any building unless an exception is approved by the director in writing. 
(c)  The director may require separate monitoring facilities to be installed for each source of discharge of a single user. 
(d)  The monitoring facility shall be a manhole or other suitable facility approved by the director and shall be constructed and maintained at the user's expense. 
(e)  If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the director, it shall be provided and installed at the user's expense. Such sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. There shall be ample room in or near all monitoring facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. 
(f)  All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained at the user's expense in accordance with the director's requirements and all applicable local building codes. Construction must be completed not later than 180 days after permit approval, unless an extension is granted by the director. 
(g)  All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated not less than every three months to ensure accuracy. 
(Code 1981, § 26-120; Code 1998, § 106-417) 
Sec. 102-381. - Search warrants. 
    If the director has been refused reasonable access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued under this article or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Code 1981, § 26-121; Code 1998, § 106-418) 
Secs. 102-382-102-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - FEES AND BILLING 

Sec. 102-406. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for equitable recovery of costs from users of the city's POTW, including costs of operation, maintenance, administration, bond service, inspection and monitoring, testing, capital improvements, depreciation and equitable cost recovery of EPA administered federal wastewater grants. 
(Code 1981, § 26-143; Code 1998, § 106-446) 
Sec. 102-407. - Authorization to establish charges and fees. 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen may adopt by resolution reasonable charges and fees which shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Inspection fees and tapping fees; 
(2)  Sewer user charges; 
(3)  Surcharge fees; 
(4)  Wastewater discharge permit fees, including the cost of processing such applications; 
(5)  Monitoring, inspection and surveillance fees which shall include the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(6)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharges; 
(7)  Fees for filing appeals, including but not limited to attorney's fees and enforcement fees; and 
(8)  Such other fees as may be deemed necessary from time to time to carry out the requirements of this article. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties the city is authorized to levy. 
(Code 1981, § 26-144; Code 1998, § 106-447) 
Sec. 102-408. - Inspection fees and tap-on fees. 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen may provide for extension of sewer services by means other than improvement districts and shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of tap-on fees including but not limited to the following categories of use: 
(1)  Existing residences and row houses with existing septic tanks; 
(2)  Additional existing units on same lot or parcel of land with existing residence and connected to the same sewer tap; 
(3)  New residences and row houses; 
(4)  New residences located in subdivisions, planned residential developments and multifamily projects developed under regulations governing subdivision of land of the regional planning commission on file in the city clerk's office in which adequate and proper sewer lines constructed by the developer in conformity with applicable statutes of the state and ordinances of the city pertaining to sanitation have been constructed as part of a private subdivision development, specifically providing for an inside municipal corporate boundary rate and an outside municipal corporate boundary rate; 
(5)  Small commercial user (i.e., service stations, office buildings, warehouses, etc.); 
(6)  Carwash for first bay and a fee for each additional bay thereafter; 
(7)  Existing multifamily complexes and new multifamily complexes specifically providing a fee for the first unit and a fee for each additional unit thereafter; and 
(8)  Factories and shopping centers; the fee to be based on a basis of 10,000 square feet of floor space with a fee for each additional 10,000 square feet of floor space over and above the base amount. 
(b)  A tap-on fee shall not be permitted in lieu of participation in an improvement district. Where a tap-on fee is paid prior to creation of an improvement district serving the property, it will be credited against the assessment of an improvement district later created serving the property. 
(Code 1981, § 26-145; Code 1998, § 106-448) 
Sec. 102-409. - Sewer use charges. 
(a)  Classification of users. Users of the wastewater system shall be classified into two general classes depending upon the users' contribution of wastewater loads, each class of user being identified as follows: 
(1)  Class I. Those users whose average biochemical oxygen demand is 250 milligrams/liter concentration by weight or less, and whose suspended solid discharge is 250 milligrams per liter concentration by weight or less. 
(2)  Class II. Those users whose average biochemical oxygen demand exceeds 250 milligrams/liter concentration by weight, or whose suspended solid discharge exceeds 250 milligrams per liter concentration by weight. 
(b)  Determination of costs. The board of mayor and aldermen shall establish, by resolution, monthly rates and charges for use of the wastewater system and for all services supplied by the wastewater system. The charges shall be based upon administrative costs, including billing and accounting costs; operation and maintenance costs of the wastewater collection and treatment system; depreciation; return on investment; and debt service costs. 
(1)  All class I users shall pay a single unit charge expressed as dollars per 1,000 gallons of water purchased with the unit charge being determined in accordance with the following formula: 
C i = TSC 
V t  
Where: 
C i = The class I total unit cost in dollars per 1,000 gallons. 
TSC = The total cost of operation, maintenance, administration and debt service determined by yearly budget projections. 
V t = The total volume of wastewater contribution, in thousands of gallons, from all users per year as determined from projections from one city fiscal year to the next. 
(2)  All class II users shall pay the same base unit charge per 1,000 gallons of water purchased as class I users (C i ) and in addition shall pay a surcharge based on excessive amounts of biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids in direct proportion to the actual discharge quantities. The following formula shall be used to compute the appropriate surcharge (C u ): 
C u = B c B u  + S c S u  
Where: 
C u = Total surcharge per month. 
B c = Total cost for treatment of one pound of BOD. 
B u = Total BOD contribution, in pounds, above the base level from a user per month. 
S c = Total cost for treatment of one pound of suspended solids. 
S u = Total suspended solids contribution, in pounds, above the base level from a user per month. 
(Code 1981, § 26-146; Code 1998, § 106-449; Ord. No. 4080, § II, 7-5-1995) 
Sec. 102-410. - Billing. 
(a)  The billing of normal wastewater services shall consist of monthly billing in accordance with rates established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Any user connected to the sanitary sewer shall have water service either from the city or some other water utility system authorized to provide potable water by the state or such user shall, at his sole expense, install a sewage flow meter meeting the approval of the director to measure the flow of sewage through such meter. 
(c)  Private wells or private water systems shall not be construed to constitute water utility systems authorized to provide potable water by the state. 
(Code 1981, § 26-147; Code 1998, § 106-450; Ord. No. 4080, § III, 7-5-1995) 
Chapters 103-105 - RESERVED 
Chapter 106 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Tennessee Plant Pest Act, T.C.A. § 43-6-101 et seq.; eradication and control of weeds on state highway rights-of-way, T.C.A. § 54-5-133. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 

Sec. 106-19. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings given herein: 
    City property means all real property that is owned or leased by the city. 
    City right-of-way means property offered for dedication, and used or accepted as a public right-of-way. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH) means a standard of measure of tree size, being the diameter of a tree measured at a height of 41/2 feet above the ground. 
    Landscape specialist means the landscape specialist or other city employee designated by the landscape specialist to enforce this article. 
    Maintenance standards means generally accepted standards for maintenance of trees as set forth by the American National Standards Institute and published by the International Society of Arboriculture in the following publications: 
(1)  ANSI A300 (Part 1), 2001. 
(2)  ANSI A300 (Part 2), 1998. 
(3)  ANSI A300 (Part 3), 2000. 
(4)  ANSI Z133, 2000. 
    Park means all city public parks. 
    Parkway means the part of a public street or highway right-of-way not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the adjacent property line and that portion of the public street or highway used for vehicular traffic. 
    Planting plan means a scaled drawing depicting all plant materials, specifications, and any other reasonable information required by the landscape specialist to evaluate permit applications. 
    Property owner means the owner of record or any person owning an interest in property including a lienholder. 
    Public trees means trees growing on any real property owned in fee by the city. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on real property lying within any city right-of-way on either side of any public street. 
    Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs or trunks within the canopy of a tree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
    Tree means a woody plant with a single trunk or multiple trunks capable of growing to a height of 15 feet or more. 
    Urban forest means all trees located within the city. 
(Code 1998, § 94-402; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-402), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-20. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the city court, be fined not more than $50.00. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty pursuant to this article shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or the taking of other punitive or remedial action or injunctive relief. 
(c)  Each day such violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1998, § 94-412; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-412), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-21. - Purpose. 
    The goals and intent of this article are to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain maximum tree coverage; 
(2)  Maintain trees in a healthy condition; 
(3)  Establish and maintain the optimum level of age and species diversity; 
(4)  Promote the conservation of tree resources; 
(5)  Select, situate and maintain street trees so as to minimize hazard, nuisance, damage and maintenance costs; 
(6)  Promote the efficient and cost-effective management of the urban forest; and 
(7)  Foster community support for the local urban forest program and encourage good tree management on privately owned properties. 
(Code 1998, § 94-401; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-401), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-22. - Tree advisory board. 
    The city tree advisory board, with the advice and consultation of the landscape specialist, shall: 
(1)  Study tree problems and needs of the city and advise the board of mayor and aldermen on tree-related issues. 
(2)  Assist officials of the city, the board of mayor and aldermen, and citizens of the city, in disseminating news and information regarding selection, planting and maintenance of trees, whether on private or public property. 
(3)  Conduct meetings about trees with any parties interested in the city's urban forest. 
(4)  Recommend to the board of mayor and aldermen a comprehensive tree management plan to guide planting, maintenance, and replacement of trees on city property. The comprehensive tree management plan shall include: 
a.  Provisions for educating the public about trees; 
b.  An inventory of tree resources; 
c.  Standard planting; 
d.  Maintenance and replacement specifications; and 
e.  Needed maintenance work complete with cost and time schedules. 
(Code 1998, § 94-403; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-403), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-23. - Landscape specialist-Duties. 
(a)  The landscape specialist shall: 
(1)  Have authority to regulate planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on city-owned property to promote safety and preserve aesthetics, in accordance with maintenance standards. 
(2)  Enforce and administer this article and the comprehensive tree management plan. 
(3)  Assist in educating the community, agencies, city boards, departments and divisions of the city, regarding trees. 
(4)  Issue or deny permits for planting, maintenance, trimming or removal of trees as authorized herein. 
(b)  The landscape specialist, chief of police and traffic engineer shall consult on matters concerning street trees or other trees that may be a hazard to traffic safety. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this article to the contrary the director of leisure services, or successor, shall control the planting, maintenance and removal of trees within the boundary of the Bays Mountain Park and Nature Preserve. 
(Code 1998, § 94-404; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-404), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-24. - Same-Interference. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the landscape specialist or assistants while engaged in administration or enforcement of this article; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by any party. In lieu of the penalty established herein upon approval of the board of mayor and aldermen, the city manager is authorized to bring suit for injunctive relief in the event any person violates this section. 
(Code 1998, § 94-405; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-405), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-25. - Trees on property owned in fee by the city. 
(a)  City authority on public grounds. The city has the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, branches, and shrubs and supervise the same on all city property, as it may deem necessary or desirable, to promote public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  Private planting on city property. The planting of trees on city property by adjacent property owners is permitted, provided the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with section 106-28. Any tree planted pursuant to this subsection shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Damage. Unless specifically authorized by the landscape specialist, no person shall: 
(1)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any public tree; or 
(2)  Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other substance that may be harmful to any public tree. 
(d)  Topping. It shall be unlawful for any person to top any public tree on city property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under or around utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical are exempted from this provision. 
(e)  Construction protection. 
(1)  All public trees within 50 feet of any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches of diameter at breast height (DBH), whichever is greater, and all equipment and building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier; provided, however, that upon good cause shown the landscape specialist may alter or waive the requirements set forth in this subsection at their discretion. 
(2)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first notifying the landscape specialist. 
(3)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any city property any stone, brick sand, concrete or other materials which will impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any public tree growing therein, without first notifying the landscape specialist. 
(4)  All work performed by public and private utilities or by their contractors, agents or employees, which install or maintain overhead and underground utilities (including, but not limited to, cable television installations, telephone service, gas service, water and sewer service) shall be performed in accordance with maintenance standards set out herein. 
(f)  Minimum clearances. Except where an electrical hazard is involved, it shall be the duty of any person owning or occupying real property upon which there are trees, to prune such trees in such a manner so that they do not obstruct or shade street lights, obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, obstruct the view of any street intersection, or otherwise endanger the public. Where an electrical hazard is involved in such pruning, it shall be the duty of the person owning or occupying said property to contact the appropriate utility supplier to request the pruning required herein. The minimum clearance of any overhanging tree shall be eight vertical feet over a sidewalk and 14 vertical feet over any street. 
(g)  Planting near fire hydrants, utilities. No public tree shall be planted closer than ten linear feet to any fire hydrant. No public tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet in a radius to any overhead electrical, telephone, or other utility wires as measured from the base of the trunk to the vertical plane created by the nearest wire, unless specifically approved by the landscape specialist as a low growth variety suitable for such location. 
(Code 1998, § 94-406; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-406), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-26. - Trees on city right-of-way. 
(a)  City authority on city right-of-way. The city shall have the right to prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, branches and shrubs and supervise the same within city rights-of-way as deemed necessary to promote public safety, or to prevent interference with the use of the right-of-way by the city or the public. 
(b)  Private planting on city right-of-way. The planting of trees by property owners on city right-of-way is lawful provided that the selection and location of such trees do not interfere with public safety or with the use of the right-of-way by the city or the public. 
(c)  Construction protection. 
(1)  All street trees near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches of diameter at breast height (DBH), whichever is greater, and all equipment and building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier; provided, however, that upon good cause shown the landscape specialist may alter or waive the requirements set forth in this subsection at their discretion. 
(2)  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first notifying the landscape specialist. 
(3)  No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any city right-of-way any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any street tree growing therein, without first notifying the landscape specialist. 
(d)  Minimum clearances. Except where an electrical hazard is involved, it shall be the duty of any person owning or occupying property bordering city right-of-way upon which there are trees, to prune such trees in such a manner so they will not obstruct or shade streetlights, obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, obstruct the view of any street intersection, or otherwise endanger the public. Where an electrical hazard is involved in such pruning, it shall be the duty of the person owning or occupying said property to contact the appropriate utility supplier to request the pruning required herein. The minimum clearance of any overhanging tree shall be eight vertical feet over a sidewalk and 14 vertical feet over any street. 
(e)  Planting near fire hydrants, utilities. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten linear feet to any fire hydrant. No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet in a radius to any overhead electrical, telephone or other utility wires as measured from the base of the trunk to the vertical plane created by the nearest wire, unless specifically approved by the landscape specialist as a low growth variety suitable for such location. 
(f)  Dedicated right-of-way area. The area of any dedicated right-of-way lying between the outer edges of sidewalks, or, between outer pavement edges when no sidewalk is present, shall be subject to the same regulations as set out in section 106-25. 
(Code 1998, § 94-407; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-407), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-27. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Except as provided herein, no person shall plant, apply insecticide, pesticide, fertilize, paint, prune, remove, cut above ground, or conduct ground disturbing activities within a ten-foot radius, or otherwise disturb or damage any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the landscape specialist. For ground-disturbing activities specifically described in section 106-26(c), the restrictions and distance requirements of section 106-26(c) shall control. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the maintenance standards set out herein. 
(2)  A permit application may be waived in the event of an emergency that could endanger public safety or cause damage or loss of property. 
(3)  An application for a permit must be made not less than two working days in advance of the time the work is to be performed. A permit fee may be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(4)  Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration, and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(5)  Within five days of completion of the permitted work, the permittee shall notify the landscape specialist who shall make a final inspection. 
(b)  Planting permit. 
(1)  Application contents. The application for a planting permit shall state: 
a.  The number of trees or shrubs to be planted; 
b.  The location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree or shrub; 
c.  The method of planting; and 
d.  Such other reasonable information as the city landscape specialist shall find reasonably necessary for a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
A planting plan shall be required and submitted to the landscape specialist for approval if 15 or more trees or shrubs are to be planted. 
(2)  Improper planting. Any tree or shrub planted in a manner in conflict with the provisions of this section shall be subject to removal at the sole expense of the person performing the improper planting. 
(3)  Permit denial. Planting permits may be denied if the application for planting is not complete, or if it is found that the planting would conflict with any part of this article, or that planting would endanger public safety, or interferes with the use of the city property by the city. 
(c)  Maintenance permit. 
(1)  Application contents. An application for a maintenance permit shall state: 
a.  The number and kinds of trees or shrubs to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise maintained; 
b.  The kind of treatment to be administered; 
c.  The composition of the spray material to be applied; and 
d.  Such other information as the landscape specialist shall find reasonably necessary to make a determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(2)  Permit denial. Maintenance permits may be denied or revoked if the application is not complete, if it is found that the maintenance requested would conflict with any part of this article, if the maintenance is not being performed in accordance of the permit requirements and maintenance standards set out herein, or if there is a possible danger to public safety, or it interferes with the use of the city property by the city. 
(d)  Removal permit. 
(1)  Application contents. The application for a removal permit shall state: 
a.  The number of trees or shrubs to be removed; 
b.  The location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree or shrub; 
c.  The method of removal; and 
d.  Such other reasonable information as the city landscape specialist shall find reasonably necessary to make a determination of whether a removal permit should be issued. 
(2)  Permit denial. Removal permits may be denied or revoked if the application is not complete or if it is found that the removal requested would conflict with any part of this article. 
(Code 1998, § 94-408; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-408), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-28. - Trees on private property. 
(a)  The landscape specialist shall have the right to order or cause the removal of any tree on private property that constitutes a hazard to life or property of others, or that harbors insects or disease that is a threat to other trees within the city. 
(b)  In the event the owner fails to comply with an order to remove the tree, and if public safety considerations require immediate removal, the city may elect to remove said tree, and to charge removal costs to the owner of the property. 
(c)  Unless such tree poses an immediate hazard to public safety, the property owner and any party in interest may be ordered in writing by the landscape specialist to remove the tree in conformance with section 106-29. 
(Code 1998, § 94-409; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-409), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-29. - Notice requiring abatement of violations; abatement by city; lien for costs. 
(a)  With the exception of trees posing immediate hazard to public safety pursuant to this section, if the landscape specialist determines that the owner or occupant of property has violated any provision of this article or fails to comply with an order issued pursuant thereto, the landscape specialist may issue a citation to the owner or occupant, or both, to appear in city court. Alternatively, when the landscape specialist determines that the owner or occupant of property has violated any provision of this article, he may provide notice to the owner of record, any lienholder, and the occupant, to abate the condition immediately. The notice shall be given by United States mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner of record, any lienholder, and the occupant, or may be delivered by personal delivery by a person not less than 18 years of age. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the landscape specialist in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the landscape specialist shall make affidavit to that effect, the serving of such notice upon such persons may be made by publishing the notice once each week for four consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be written in plain language and shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Describe briefly the conditions constituting a violation of this article; 
(2)  The name of the person giving the notice with their office address and telephone number; 
(3)  A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which shall be in conformity with reasonable and customary costs for such service in the city; 
(4)  A notice that a hearing will be held before the public works director at a time and place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the notice; 
(5)  That the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the notice and appear in person or otherwise to give testimony under oath at the time and place fixed in the notice; 
(6)  That any party may be represented by counsel; 
(7)  That the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling at such hearing; 
(8)  That if, following the hearing, the public works director finds that the owner or occupant of the property has violated the ordinance, the owner will be required to abate the violation within not more than 60 days. 
(9)  That upon failure to abate within the time limit provided, the violation may be abated by the city, or cause such conditions to be abated under the direction of the landscape specialist at the expense of the owner, and the city shall have a lien on the property to secure the amount expended for abatement of the violation and the cost of any publication for service needed. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing the public works director determines there is a violation of this article, the public works director shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served on the owner an order requiring the owner to abate the violation in not more than 60 days. If the owner fails to comply with the order, the landscape specialist may cause the violation to be abated at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  Costs incurred by the city to abate a violation and the cost of publication for service shall, upon the filing of a notice of such costs with the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property lies, be a lien in favor of the city against the real property on which such costs were incurred, second only to liens of the state, county and city for taxes, any lien of the city for special assessments, and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be collected by the city at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent taxes. Alternatively, the city may collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1998, § 94-410; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-410), 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 106-30. - Right of appeal. 
    Any decision by the public works director shall be final, subject to review of the decision by petition for common law writ of certiorari. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date written notice of the decision is given the aggrieved party. 
(Code 1998, § 94-411; Ord. No. 5171, § II(94-411), 1-20-2004) 
Secs. 106-31-106-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRASS AND WEEDS 

Sec. 106-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation mean and include all weeds, grasses, plants, bushes, poison oak, poison ivy and other vegetation not cultivated, whether living or dead, except vegetation as recommended by the state agricultural extension service for the purpose of conservation or preventing erosion, trees, ornamental shrubbery, ornamental grass, flowers, garden vegetables or other plants or vegetables customarily planted and/or cultivated by farmers or gardeners. 
    Improved land or premises means any privately owned parcel of land that has located thereon any building, structure, dwelling or house, or any part thereof designed or used either wholly or in part for human occupation or habitation, whether inhabited temporarily or continuously or whether uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such land. The term "improved land or premises" also includes any privately owned parcel of land that has located thereon any parking area, paved or graveled area, private roadway or any other type of improvement. 
    Land or premises means and includes any real property, private ways and any buildings or structures thereon. 
    Unimproved land means any privately owned parcel of land or legally subdivided and platted lot or parcel, which does not have located somewhere on it a building, structure, dwelling or house, or any part thereof designed or used either wholly or in part for human occupation or habitation, whether inhabited temporarily or continuously or whether uninhabited or vacant, or any walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such land, nor does it have located on it any parking area, paved or graveled area, private roadway or any other type improvement. 
(Code 1981, § 16-63; Code 1998, § 66-61(f); Ord. No. 4607, § I, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 5343, § I, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 106-50. - Maximum permitted height. 
    Except as otherwise set forth in this section it is unlawful for the owner, lienholder, occupant or any person or persons, agent, firm, corporation, other legal entity, lessee, or agent having control or management of any improved land or premises within the city to permit, allow or maintain grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation exceeding a height of 12 inches or more above the ground and such a condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 16-63; Code 1998, § 66-61(a); Ord. No. 4607, § I, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 5343, § I, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 106-52. - Growth encroaching on streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways. 
    Notwithstanding any other requirements and conditions set out in this section no owner, lienholder, occupant or any person or persons, agent, firm, corporation, other legal entity, lessee or agent having control or management of any land or premises shall allow or permit any plant growth of any sort to remain in such a manner as to render the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways adjoining said land or premises unsafe for public travel or in any manner so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or public way. 
(Code 1981, § 16-63; Code 1998, § 66-61(e); Ord. No. 4607, § I, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 5343, § I, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 106-53. - Duty to cut or remove. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant or any person or persons, agent, firm, corporation, other legal entity, lessee or agent having control or management of any land or premises upon which any of said grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation is located to cause the same to be cut down and removed, including up to and along the traveled portion of the street or public right-of-way adjacent to the lot, place, area or parcel of land. 
(Code 1981, § 16-63; Code 1998, § 66-61(c); Ord. No. 4607, § I, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 5343, § I, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 106-54. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in this article, the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Undeveloped wooded areas where tree growth is in excess of ten feet in height. 
(2)  All government-owned land or premises, and street rights-of-way. 
(3)  Streambeds or banks. 
(4)  Heavily wooded parcels of land or premises that are densely wooded with trees, shrubs and overgrowth where equipment cannot maneuver due to the density of the area. 
(5)  Slopes covered with vegetation as recommended by the state agricultural extension service for the purpose of conservation or preventing erosion. 
(6)  Portion of land or premises, excluding the curtilage of any dwelling located thereon, that, due to steepness of terrain, rock or rock outcroppings, marshes or wetlands, cannot be mowed using wheeled, motorized equipment, unless such vegetative growth is an immediate threat to the health or safety of life or property. 
(7)  Land or premises zoned for agricultural use or that is actively and legitimately used for agricultural purposes, such as, but not limited to, mowing hay, pasture, gardens or field crops. 
(Code 1981, § 16-63; Code 1998, § 66-61(d); Ord. No. 4607, § I, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 5343, § I, 10-4-2005) 
Chapters 107-109 - RESERVED 
Chapter 110 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor carriers generally, T.C.A. § 65-15-101 et seq.; mass transit generally, T.C.A. § 13-10-101 et seq.; local ordinances regarding mass transit, T.C.A. § 13-10-108. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Authorization for fees for buses. 
    A fare schedule shall be established by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen from time to time for use of buses owned and operated by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 110-1; Ord. No. 4122, § I, 10-3-1995) 
Secs. 110-2-110-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADA PARATRANSIT SERVICES 

Sec. 110-21. - ADA paratransit service eligibility appeal process. 
(a)  Any individual who is denied eligibility for ADA paratransit services, or who has been awarded only conditional or temporary eligibility, or whose eligibility is suspended, altered or terminated may appeal the decision as follows: 
(1)  A written request for hearing, before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager or designee, must be filed within 65 days of the date of the letter notifying an individual that they have been determined ineligible for ADA paratransit service. 
(2)  The written request for hearing shall be filed in the office of the director of the Kingsport Area Transit Authority (KATS) and shall include the grounds and reasons for the appeal. All requests for hearing must be signed and dated. The request for hearing may be filed by such individual (hereinafter appellant), individually, or through a representative of their choice. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the request for hearing, the city manager or designee will appoint a hearing officer. The hearing officer will be a person not involved with the decision being appealed. The city may make rules governing the conduct of the hearing consistent with 49 CFR 37.125(g), as amended. 
(4)  The appellant, or a representative of their choice, will have the opportunity to be heard and to present information and arguments in support of their position to the hearing officer. The hearing will be informal and the rules of administrative or civil procedure or the rules of evidence will not apply; however, all witnesses will testify under oath or affirmation and the proceeding will be recorded. 
(5)  A written determination of the decision on the appeal, including the reasons for such decision, will be forwarded to the appellant within 30 days of the completion of the appeals process. If a decision is not made within 30 days, the appellant will be provided with ADA paratransit services until and unless a decision to deny the appeal is issued. 
(b)  These procedures do not prohibit an individual's right to consult with, seek assistance from, and/or file a complaint concerning alleged noncompliance with: 
(1)  The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); 
(2)  The Department of Justice (DOJ); 
(3)  The Federal Transit Administration (FTA); or 
(4)  Other federal agencies having authority to enforce nondiscrimination requirements: 
a.  With state or local agencies having such authority; 
b.  With a federal or state court; or 
c.  To exercise any other applicable constitutional rights. 
(c)  This section shall be construed to meet or exceed the requirements contained in 49 CFR 37.125(g), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 5746, § I(110-2), 9-16-2008) 
Chapters 111-113 - RESERVED 
Chapter 114 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is derived from appendix A, zoning, to the 1981 Code of Ordinances, which was originally derived from Ordinance No. 2555, adopted June 16, 1981 and subsequently amended by the city.: 
State Law reference- Zoning generally, T.C.A. § 13-7-101 et seq.; municipal zoning generally, T.C.A. § 13-7-201 et seq.; municipal zoning outside city boundaries, T.C.A. § 13-7-301 et seq.; historic zoning, T.C.A. § 13-7-401 et seq.; boards of appeal, T.C.A. § 13-7-205 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having, as more than 50 percent of the face value of its stock in trade, books, magazines, motion pictures, periodicals and other materials which are distinguished or characterized by depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. 
    Adult cabaret means any restaurant, bar, dancehall, nightclub or other such place which features dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers for the entertainment of a predominantly adult clientele. 
    Adult motion picture theater means any public place, whether open or enclosed, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult-oriented establishment means a business or facility that is sexually explicit and that caters exclusively or predominately to adult clientele, including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult motion picture theaters, cabarets or other enterprises which regularly features materials, acts or displays involving the display of the human form, wholly or partially clothed, static or animated. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, by any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, or by specified sexual activities. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, animal and poultry husbandry and other similar uses and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the principal agricultural activities. 
    Alley. See Street. 
    Animated sign means an electronic message board that uses physical movement or change of lighting to depict motion, with a slightly progressive change. The display of video shall be prohibited. 
    Automobile and truck repair, major, means the rebuilding or reconditioning of engines or transmissions, vehicles or trailers; repair and collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening; painting; upholstering; auto glass work; and the like. 
    Automobile and truck repair, minor. 
(1)  The term "minor automobile and truck repair" means minor repairs including auto inspection lanes, engine tune-ups; adjusting lights and brakes; upholstering. 
(2)  The term "minor automobile and truck repair" does not include any operation specified under the definition of automobile and truck repair, major. 
    Automobile service station means a building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubrication, tires, batteries, accessories, supplies, including installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication. 
    Boarding house means a building or part thereof, including a lodging house, with sleeping rooms available for hire with or without meals to five or more persons primarily not transients. Where cooking equipment or provisions for cooking are included in a sleeping room, such room shall be deemed a dwelling unit. 
    Brewery means a facility where malt liquors, regardless of alcohol content by volume, are produced in accordance with any manufacturing or wholesaling license required by Tennessee Code Annotated 
    Brewpub means a type of eating or drinking establishment that includes as an accessory use the production of malt liquors, regardless of alcohol content by volume, for consumption on the premises; except that sales for off-premises consumption, if not prohibited by other local ordinance or state or federal law, shall be allowed in specialty containers holding no more than one U.S. gallon (128 U.S. fluid ounces), commonly referred to as growlers. The area of the establishment devoted to the production of malt liquors shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
    Buffer means any land maintained in either a natural or landscaped state and used to screen or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties, or rights-of-ways. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term is further defined as follows: 
    Building, accessory. See Use, accessory use and accessory structure. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which the primary use of the lot, on which the building is located, is conducted. 
    Climate controlled indoor storage facility means a building or a group of buildings utilizing a common entrance with indoor access to individual climate controlled units used for the storage of personal property with no commercial transactions permitted other than the rental of the storage units. 
    Club, private, means a building and facilities for social, educational or recreational purpose, generally open to members, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    Cluster (or clustering) means a site planning technique that concentrates building and structures in specific areas on a lot, site, or parcel to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, open space or preservation of features or structures with environmental, historical or cultural significance. 
    Commission means the municipal-regional planning commission, or simply the planning commission. 
    Communication facilities means a land-use facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that sends or receives radio frequency signals. The term "communication facilities" includes the structure, towers and accessory buildings. 
    Community center means a building and facilities for a social, educational or recreational purpose generally open to the public but not primarily for profit or to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
    Comprehensive plan or community plan means the official document or elements thereof adopted by the planning commission and intended to guide the development of the community or portions thereof. 
    Court means an open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building. 
    Court, outer, means a court which extends directly to and opens for its full width on a street or other permanent open space or on a required yard at least 20 feet wide or deep or on a side yard at least 50 percent wider than the required side yard's least width, but not less than ten feet. 
    Craft brewery, winery and distillery means a type of brewery, winery or distillery wherein the area of the establishment devoted to the production of malts and liquors may not exceed 10,000 square feet in commercial zone districts or 20,000 square feet in industrial zone districts. The establishment may include a tasting room and may also include office, retail, eating and drinking establishment or event facility components in addition to the area devoted to the production of malts and liquors. 
    Decorative lighting means any lighting that is intended to attract attention to a business as does signage. Decorative lighting is different from illuminating lighting whose purpose is to provide visibility, safety and security on the premises of a business. Decorative lighting is deemed to be an accessory usage to the building and property which it decorates and it is intended that such decorative lighting be appropriate, but not excessive in performing its function. Decorative lighting can be neon lighting, incandescent lighting, LED lighting, string of lights, and any other form of lighting that serves to attract attention to a business. 
    Director means planning director for the planning department. 
    Distillery means a facility where distilled liquors are produced in accordance with any manufacturing or wholesaling license required by Tennessee Code Annotated. 
    Driveway means that space or area of a lot that is specifically designated and reserved for the movement of vehicles from the street to the required off-street parking and loading areas. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof occupied for residence purposes, but not including travel trailers or motels, boarding houses, hospitals or other accommodations used more or less for transient occupancy. The term "dwelling" is further defined as follows: 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building or portion thereof occupied by more than two families or more than two housekeeping units. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building occupied exclusively by two families or two housekeeping units, commonly known as a duplex. 
    Dwelling unit means one room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by a family as owner, by rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same building, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Electronic message board means a sign that uses electronic technology to display information. 
    Family means a person living alone or two or more persons customarily living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities, but not including a group occupying a hotel, club, boarding house, lodging house, fraternity or sorority house, institution for human care or other similar building. 
    Flood-hazard-related definitions. See section 114-251. 
    Floor area. 
(1)  The term "floor area" means the sum of the gross areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, the term "floor area" includes basement space; elevator shafts or stairwells at each floor; penthouses; attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, providing structural headroom of eight feet or more; interior balconies; mezzanines; hallways; lobbies; floor space in accessory buildings, except for floor space used for off-street parking; and any other floor space not specifically excluded. 
(2)  The term "floor area" does not include cellar space, where the cellar ceiling is less than four feet above grade, except that cellar space used for retailing shall be included for the purpose of calculating requirements for accessory off-street parking spaces and accessory off-street loading berths; elevator or stair bulkheads; accessory water tanks or cooling towers; outside steps that are uncovered; attic space, whether or not a floor actually has been laid, providing structural headroom of less than eight feet; floor space used for mechanical equipment; floor area used exclusively as parking space for motor vehicles. 
    Floor area, parking, means the floor area of a structure, less storage and warehouse areas used principally for nonpublic purposes of the structure. 
    Floor area ratio means the floor area of a building on a lot, divided by the ground area of the lot on which it is located. 
    Franchised auto dealership means an auto seller that sells new and used cars for auto manufacturers such as Ford, General Motors, Honda and other major brands. The manufacturer is often listed in the dealerships name (i.e. Hoffman Ford). 
    Garage, community, means a structure only for the storage of vehicles or trailers of residents of the neighborhood. 
    Garage, private, means a space or structure, including a carport, on the same lot with or in the building to which it is accessory, primarily for storage only of automobiles of the residents of the premises. 
    Grade means a reference plan representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls. 
    Group residential project means a building or group of buildings used for the purpose of providing a family-like atmosphere for mentally retarded, mentally handicapped, physically handicapped or socially disadvantaged persons, which may include two persons, not residents, acting as house parents or guardians, who need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally retarded, mentally handicapped, physically handicapped or socially disadvantaged persons residing in the home. The term "group residential project" is further defined as follows: 
    Large group residential projects means group residential projects which house eight to 15 residents. 
    Small group residential projects means group residential projects which house no more than eight residents. 
    Height means the vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs, with all measurements made from the curb level, if the building is within ten feet of the property line, or from the grade in all other cases. 
    Height-to-yard ratio means the height of a building as related to the minimum rear yard and each side yard permitted as used in some zoning districts (i.e., for 2:1 ratio, a 40-foot building must have a minimum of 20 feet for the rear yard and each side yard). 
    Highway identification signs means those signs that are for the purpose of directing interstate traffic to establishments which conduct business on a premises. 
    Home occupation means professional offices, studios or customary incidental home occupations conducted within the principal building, but only by a person resident in the dwelling, provided that: 
(1)  Not more than one person, not a resident of the premises, is employed; 
(2)  Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area in any dwelling unit is devoted to such use; and 
(3)  The use does not adversely affect the uses permitted in the immediate neighborhood by excessive traffic generation, parking, noise or other disturbing characteristics. 
    Hotel, motel means a building or group of buildings containing individual sleeping or living units designed for the temporary occupancy of transient guests and including hotels, tourist courts, motor lodges, motor hotels or auto courts, but not including boarding houses or lodging houses. 
    Institution for human care means a building or group of buildings providing health, medical or rehabilitation services to individuals such as hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes, rest homes, orphanages, rehabilitation centers. 
    Interstate highway means a divided highway with fully controlled access (owners of abutting property have no legal right of access except by the public authority) by the public authority giving preference to through traffic. 
    Junkyard means a place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, handled, including auto wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for use of salvaged house wrecking structural steel materials and equipment, but excluding such uses when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and excluding pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture and household equipment, and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
    Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum zone requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and open spaces as required under this chapter and includes the term "plot" or "parcel." The term "lot" is further defined as follows: 
    Lot area means the computed ground area inside the lot lines, excluding any public right-of-way or public water body. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street and where, in either case, the interior angle formed by intersection of the street lines does not exceed 135 degrees. 
    Lot or ground coverage means the computed ground area occupied by all buildings within a lot. 
    Lot depth refers to the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot frontage means the distance between the side lot lines measured along the front building line of the lot, as determined by the prescribed front yard requirement. 
    Lot line, front, means, for a lot line abutting upon only one street, the line separating such lot from such street. For any other lot, the owner shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the privilege of electing any street lot line as the front lot line, provided that such choice, in the opinion of the building official, will not be injurious to the existing or to the desirable future development of adjacent properties. 
    Lot line, rear, means ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be considered the rear lot line. In other cases not covered in this definition, the building official shall designate the rear lot line. 
    Lot line, side , means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot line, street or alley, means a lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. 
    Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot. 
    Lot width means the mean horizontal distance across the lot measured at right angles to the depth. 
    Manufactured home means a structure having the same general appearance as required for site-built homes and transportable in two or more sections which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements, except the size requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under T.C.A. § 68-126-202(4), (6) and (7). 
    Medical clinic means a facility properly licensed in the state for examining and treating patients with medical problems on an outpatient basis. A medical clinic is not a methadone treatment clinic or facility or substance abuse treatment facility as may be defined or used in this Code. 
    Methadone treatment clinic or facility means a facility properly licensed in the state for counseling of patients and the distribution of methadone for outpatient, nonresidential purposes only. Such facility is not included in the meaning of a medical clinic, substance abuse treatment facility, or institution for human care as may be defined or used in this Code. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle or similar portable structure having been constructed with wheels, whether or not such wheels have been removed, or without wheels but designed to be moved on the highway when attached to a suitable wheeled undercarriage and not meeting the requirements to be classified as a manufactured home. 
    Monopole means a freestanding sign which is supported by one pole. 
    Motel. See Hotel. 
    Nit means a unit of measurement of luminous intensity or brightness of electronic message boards as determined by the PR-650 SpectraScan Colorimeter. 
    Occupied includes the term "arranged, designed or intended to be occupied." 
    Open Space means the portion of a site set aside for the enjoyment of the residents and owners of the development. The only structures allowed to be constructed inside open space are those specific to the use of open space as shown on the plan. Streets and street right-of-way are not to be considered part of open space. 
See also Usable open space. 
    Parking area or structure means an off-street area or structure for required parking or loading spaces including driveways, accessways, aisles, parking and maneuvering space, but excluding a required front yard or public right-of-way. The term "parking lot or structure" also means a street area or structure, other than the parking or loading spaces or areas required or permitted under this chapter, for the parking of automobiles, and available to the public customarily for a fee. 
    Personal services or personal service establishments means commercial businesses providing services to individuals such as beauty shops and barbershops, shoe repair, dressmaking and tailoring. 
    Planned development means a project area consisting primarily of residential uses in mixed densities with opportunities for commercial development. 
    Primary point of intersection means the point at which the centerline of the median on the interstate facility intersects with the centerline of the cross road. When the cross road has more than two lanes, the centerline of the median, bridge, or the exact center of the roadway surface crossing the interstate main line will be used. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment where food is served and consumed within the building or off the premises. 
    Restaurant, drive-in, means an eating establishment where food is generally served by employees or by self-service on the premises outside the building and generally consumed on the premises outside the building or off the premises. 
    Roadside stand means a temporary structure designed or used for the display and sale of agricultural or other products grown or produced on the premises upon which such a stand is located. 
    Scrolling means a type of animated sign that uses change of lighting to create the appearance of words, numbers, or objects moving across the face of the sign horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. 
    Sexual encounter establishment. 
(1)  The term "sexual encounter establishment" means an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment, offering public accommodations which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  The term "sexual encounter establishment" does not include an establishment for a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person engaging in sexual therapy and licensed by the state. 
    Short-term bicycle parking facility means a parking area with a typical use duration of less than two hours, unsheltered, and used for business and related uses as set out in subsection 114-564(4). 
    Shopping center, planned, means a retail business development, planned as a unit, and characterized by groups of retail uses having the common use of specifically designated off-street areas for access, parking and service, whether in a B-4P district or other zone. 
    Sign means any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land, in view of the general public, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. The term "sign" is further defined as follows: 
    Sign area means the area of the sign contained within the smallest square, rectangle, circle, or combination thereof which will encompass the entire sign inclusive of all border, trim, ornamental base, apron supports, structural members and sign surface area. 
    Sign, complex, means a freestanding sign for a commercial development containing one or more businesses on the same parcel, sharing common access, parking, or other amenities. 
    Sign, copy area, means alphabetic, pictorial, numerical and/or graphic display of permanent or removable words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, symbols, logos or insignia that are used on a sign display surface area for advertising and/or informational purposes. Copy area shall be measured as defined in Figure 1 below. 

    Sign, directional, means any noncommercial sign of an instructional nature, bearing no business advertising and displayed for the convenience of the public. 
    Sign, fascia, means a wall sign. 
    Sign, flashing. 
(1)  The term "flashing sign" means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use. 
(2)  The term "flashing sign" does not mean illuminated signs that indicate time, temperature, weather or other similar public service information. 
    Sign, gasoline price, means signs for any establishment that offers the sale of gasoline and or diesel for the purpose of refueling any motorized vehicle. 
    Sign, identification, means a sign which indicates only the name and address of the building or management and which has no direct advertising value. 
    Sign, illuminated, means a sign designed to emit artificial light. 
    Sign, indirectly illuminated, means any sign designed to reflect artificial light from any source. 
    Sign, interstate identity, means a high-rise freestanding sign within a TA/C district, adjacent to the Federal Interstate System having copy that identifies a particular development and tenants within the development by utilizing an electronic billboard or stationary sign face. 
    Sign, mobile, means a sign which is affixed to a frame having wheels or capable of being carried, or otherwise portable, and designed to stand free from a building or other structure. A sign designed to be affixed to the surface of real estate shall be deemed a freestanding sign and not a mobile sign, but the mere removal of wheels or the temporary securing of a sign to the surface of real estate shall not prevent its being a mobile sign within this definition. 
    Sign, monument, means a permanent, freestanding sign mounted on a base or other supports and where the bottom of the sign face is located within three feet of ground level. 
    Sign, mural, means any mosaic, painting, photograph, graphic art technique, or combination thereof placed on the wall and containing no copy, advertising symbols, lettering, trademarks or other references to the premises or to the products and/or service offered for sale on the premises. 
    Sign, non-illuminated, means any sign which is not artificially lighted, either directly or indirectly. 
    Sign, off-premises means a sign which directs attention to a business, product, service or activity generally conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where such sign is located. 
    Sign, on-premises, means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, product, activity or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
    Sign, projecting, means a sign which is attached directly to a canopy, marquee or wall of a building or other structure and which extends horizontally outward from such canopy, marquee or wall more than 12 inches. 
    Sign, single-tenant, and multi-tenant identity, means a monument or low profile freestanding sign used to identify single and multi-tenant centers located at the entrance drive adjacent to parking areas of single or multitenant center. 
    Sign, site wayfinding, means a monument style freestanding directional sign within the TA/C district along internal roadways and driveways at major decision points to assist individuals in finding their destinations. 
    Sign, street level identity, means a monument style freestanding sign within the TA/C district; provided at street level along the intersection of major streets having direct access to the road system within the development and identify center and tenants within the center to the major street in front of the development. 
    Sign surface area. 
(1)  The term "sign surface area" means the entire aggregate area of the actual sign surface. 
(2)  The term "sign surface area" does not include any structural elements outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
    Sign, temporary, means any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only. 
    Sign, tenant identity, means a wall-mounted backlit letters, canopy and or awning-mounted signs on tenants exterior building walls to identify the business location. 
    Sign, tract, means a temporary sign advertising the original sale of property in a subdivision. 
    Sign, wall, means any sign, including a fascia sign, which is attached parallel to the face of the wall of a building or other structure. 
    Site plan means the development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and the proposed conditions of the lot. 
    Solid underpinning/screening means solid material, such as brick, which shall be used to screen the foundation system of all residential dwellings, to prevent the creation of a habitat for vermin, to provide covering for utilities, to prevent freezing of water and sewer lines and to aid in the anchorage and stabilization of homes. 
    Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even when completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(4)  Flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship. 
(5)  Masochism, sadism, erotic or sexual oriented torture, beating or infliction of pain. 
(6)  Erotic touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a cellar or mezzanine, including between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
    Street means any vehicular way, which is a general term used to describe a right-of-way, that provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement between certain points in the community that may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and that may also provide space for the location of underground or aboveground utilities. Streets are classified by function as follows: 
(1)  Freeways. The first rank in the classification of streets, and which are used only for movement of vehicles, providing for vehicular or pedestrian access to adjoining properties; interchange of traffic between a freeway and any other streets is accomplished by grade separated interchanges with merging deceleration and acceleration lanes, and no at-grade intersections are permitted. (Interstate highways are an example.) Freeways generally carry higher volumes, require greater right-of-way width and permit higher speed limits than any other class of street and should be depressed in urban or urbanizing areas. Arterials are the only class of street which generally should be connected with expressways at interchange points. 
(2)  Arterials. The second rank in the classification, and should be used only for the movement of vehicles and preferably should not provide for vehicular access to adjacent properties. Interruption of traffic flow should contain medians, deceleration lanes, and left-turn storage lanes. Arterials are the link between freeways and collectors and rank next to freeways in traffic volumes, speed limits and rights-of-way widths. 
(3)  Collectors. The third rank in the classification of streets, and are used more for movement of vehicles than for providing access to adjacent properties. Access to adjoining properties should be planned and controlled so that minimum disturbance is made to the traffic moving efficiently on the collector street. Intersections should contain medians, deceleration lanes and left-turn storage lanes. Collectors are the link between arterials and local streets and generally rank next to arterials in traffic volumes, speed limits and rights-of-way widths. 
(4)  Locals. The fourth rank in the classification of streets, and are used primarily for providing access to adjacent properties. Vehicles moving on these streets should have an origin or destination in the immediate vicinity, and all types of through traffic should be eliminated through initial design of its connections with other streets. Local streets are the primary link between trip generation points (homes, offices, stores, work, etc.) and collector streets. Locals have the least right-of-way, the lowest speed limit and the least amount of vehicular traffic. Local streets can be subdivided further into the following six subclasses: 
a.  Continuing streets. Continuing streets are local streets having two open ends, with each end generally connecting with different streets, one or more other streets may intersect it between its two open ends and property fronts on both sides of the streets. 
b.  Marginal access streets. Marginal access streets are local streets or service roads generally having two or more open ends which are sometimes referred to as access points, other streets may intersect between the ends and property fronts on only one side of the streets, the other street side is parallel and adjacent to a higher classification street such as a collector or arterial. 
c.  Loop streets. Loop streets have two open ends, with each end generally connecting with the same street; other streets generally intersect between its two ends and property fronts on both sides of the street. 
d.  Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets are local streets having only one open end providing access to another street, the closed end provides a turnaround circle for vehicles, no other street generally intersects between the two ends and property fronts on both sides of the streets. 
e.  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are similar to cul-de-sacs except that they provide no turnaround circle at their closed end and are not permitted as streets in any proposed subdivision. 
f.  Alleys. Alleys generally have two open ends, with each end connecting with different streets, and property generally backs onto both sides of the alley. Special permission from the planning commission is required whenever alleys are used for development. 
    Structure means anything built or constructed, the use of which may require permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having permanent location on the ground and includes the term "building". The term "structure" is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Accessory structure means a detached structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal structure on the same lot and is constructed after the principal structure. See also "Use". 
(2)  Principal Structure means a structure in which the primary use of the property is conducted. The principal structure must be erected prior to the construction of an accessory structure. 
    Substance abuse treatment facility means a facility properly licensed in the state with the purpose of providing outpatient treatment, counseling, or similar services to individuals who are dependent on legal and illegal drugs, opiates, alcohol or other similar substances. Such facility is not included in the meaning of a medical clinic or methadone treatment clinic or facility, or institution for human care as may be defined or used in this Code. 
    Tasting room means a facility, or portion of a facility, accessory to a brewery, winery or distillery at which guests may sample the manufacturer's products and consume other nonalcoholic beverages. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling, attached or detached, with each dwelling designed and erected as a unit on a separate lot and separated from one another by a yard or common wall. 
    Trailer means any portable structure having no foundation, other than wheels, jacks or skirtings, or a vehicle so designed or constructed as to permit: 
(1)  Temporary occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes; 
(2)  The conduct of any business, trade, occupation, profession or use as a selling or advertising device; or 
(3)  The transportation of personal property and including automobile trailers, campers and tourist trailers, but not including a mobile home. 
    Travel plaza or truck stop means use primarily engaged in the maintenance, servicing, storage, parking or repair of commercial vehicles, including the sale of motor fuels or other petroleum products and the sale of accessories or equipment for the over-the-road trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A travel plaza or truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers, vehicle scales, restaurant facilities, game rooms and/or other services and diversions intended mainly for the use by truck drivers and interregional travelers. 
    Usable open space means the outdoor area of a lot or tract which is designed and used for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access or landscaping. Such areas may be: 
(1)  Ground or roof space 75 percent open to the sky; 
(2)  Balconies a minimum of five feet wide; 
(3)  An enclosed deck, porch; or 
(4)  Ground floor portions of a building constructed on columns. 
Off-street parking and loading areas, driveways, unenclosed fire escapes or required front and street side yard areas do not qualify as usable open space; provided, however, that those portions of the required street side yard not located between the building and the adjacent property line may qualify as usable open space; provided that such open space is separated from the street right-of-way by an open fence or solid screen planting. 
    Use means any purpose for which a structure or tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; also, includes any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in or on a structure or on a tract of land. The term "use" is further defined as follows: 
    Use, accessory, means a use or structure subordinate to the principal use or structure on a lot and clearly and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Use, principal, means the main use of land or a structure, as distinguished from a secondary, or accessory, use. 
    Used includes the phrase "arranged, designed or intended to be used." 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter, where specified enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Video means the display or transmission of moving pictures (not animated) such as television images or video recordings. 
    Winery means a facility where vinous liquors are produced in accordance with any manufacturing or wholesaling license required by Tennessee Code Annotated. 
    Yard means any open space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, lying between the building or building group and the nearest lot line, unobstructed from the ground upward and unoccupied except by specific uses and structures allowed in such open space by this chapter. The term "yard" is further defined as follows: 
    Yard, front, means an open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified in the definition of yard. The least depth of a front yard is the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of a building, exclusive of such parts excepted, and the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear, means an open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as specified in the definition of yard. The least depth of a rear yard is the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of a building, exclusive of such parts excepted, and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side, means an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and a side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as specified in the base definition of yard. The least width of a side yard is the shortest distance, measured horizontally, between any part of a building, exclusive of such parts excepted, and the nearest side lot line, except that where the sidewall of a building is not parallel with the sideline, the least width is the average distances. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-1; Ord. No. 4018, § I, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4083, § I, 7-18-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I(art. I), 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 4456, § 1, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 4497, § 1, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 4517, § 1, 5-5-1998; Ord. No. 4518, § 1, 5-5-1998; Ord. No. 5613, § I, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 5616, § I, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 6001, § I, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 6187, § I, 3-20-2012; Ord. No. 6306, § I, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 6354, § I, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 6387, §§ I, II, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 6451, § I, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 6533, § I, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 114-2. - Zoning map adopted by reference. 
    The map referred to in this chapter, which is identified by the title "Zoning Map of Kingsport, Tennessee," dated June 16, 1981, as amended, and all explanatory matter thereon is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-2) 
Sec. 114-3. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. 
(2)  Facilitate orderly and harmonious development in the visual or historic character of the community. 
(3)  Regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. 
(4)  Provide for vehicle parking and loading space. 
(5)  Improve the appearance of vehicular use areas and property abutting public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Require buffering between incompatible land uses. 
(7)  Protect, preserve and promote the aesthetic appeal, character and value of the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(8)  Promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air pollution, visual pollution, air temperature and artificial light glare. 
(9)  Facilitate fire and police protection. 
(10)  Prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in the circulation of people and commodities. 
(11)  Prevent the loss of life, health or property from fire, flood or other dangers. 
(12)  Protect airports, highways and other transportation facilities, public facilities, including schools and public grounds, historic districts, central business districts, natural resources and other specific areas of the city which need special protection. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted in accordance with and authority has been conferred by the state legislature in T.C.A. §§ 13-7-201-13-7-210. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-3; Ord. No. 4318, § I, 12-17-1996) 
Sec. 114-4. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law, ordinance or resolution (except the prior zoning ordinance which this chapter has replaced) or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the use of buildings or premises, or with any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or recorded plat; provided, however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the heights of buildings or where this chapter requires greater lot areas, larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by permits or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-4) 
Sec. 114-5. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Whenever this chapter or the development plans or subdivision plats approved in conformance within this chapter are in conflict with other local ordinances, regulations or laws, the more restrictive ordinance, regulations or law shall govern and shall be enforced by appropriate local agencies. When subdivision and development plans, approved by the planning commission, contain setback or other features in excess of the minimum requirements of this chapter, such features as shown on the approved plan shall govern and shall be enforced by the building official. Private covenants do not fall within the jurisdiction of enforcement by any local agency and cannot be enforced by the building official. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-5) 
Sec. 114-6. - Zoning map atlas. 
(a)  Adopted; composition. The city is divided into zones and districts as provided in this chapter and as shown on the zoning map atlas. The zoning map atlas, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The zoning map atlas is composed of a series of map sheets, each of which represents a different geographical area of the city. Each map sheet shall be identified as part of the zoning map atlas, shall be the official record of zoning status of all land in the city, shall be kept on file in the office of the planning commission and shall be known in this chapter as "the zoning map" or "zoning map atlas." 
(b)  Posting map amendments. Zoning map amendments, after official passage by the city, shall be promptly posted on the appropriate map sheets along with a numerical designation referring to the planning commission record of the amendment proceeding. 
(c)  Interpreting zoning district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Streets. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  City limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Railroads. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Shorelines, streams. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and, if the shorelines are changed, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Extensions. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in the subsections (c)(1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map atlas shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Lot division. Where a zone or district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership on June 16, 1981, the board of zoning appeals may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the zone or district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(8)  Determination by board of zoning appeals. Where the rules in this subsection (c) do not indicate the exact location of the zone or district boundaries, the boundaries shall be determined by appeal before the board of zoning appeals. 
(d)  Annexation. All territory which may be annexed by the city shall be shown on the appropriate zoning map atlas sheet as an agriculture zoning district, unless already zoned in another manner by the city prior to annexation. Any further change shall follow the required procedure for any zoning ordinance map amendment. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-6) 
Sec. 114-7. - Amendment procedure; fees. 
    Any amendment to this chapter shall be in conformance with the following: 
(1)  Procedure. Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries as are provided for in this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. All changes and amendments shall be effective only after official notice and public hearings. An application for an amendment to this chapter that has been denied shall not be reinstituted sooner than 12 months from the date of the denial, unless substantial changes in conditions or circumstances have occurred in the opinion of the planning commission. 
(2)  Approval of planning commission. No amendment shall become effective unless it is first submitted to and approved by the planning commission or, if disapproved, unless it shall receive a majority vote of the entire membership of the board of mayor and aldermen. Prior to planning commission action on any proposed zoning map revision or amendment, the planning commission may give public notice of such proposed revision or amendment by erecting an appropriate sign on the property that would be affected by the proposed change, and it may send a notice of the time and place for a public discussion of the proposed change to owners fronting or abutting the property in question. 
(3)  Applications and fees. Applications for amendments to this chapter shall be filed in the offices of the planning department and shall contain information and shall follow the procedures established by the planning commission. The commission also may establish a schedule of fee payments for such amendments and may require such fees to accompany the filing of an application in order to defray administrative costs of application processing. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-7) 
State Law reference- Amendment of municipal zoning ordinances, T.C.A. § 13-7-105. 
Sec. 114-8. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Under this chapter, nonconforming uses shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  Conditions for continuation. Any building or use existing on June 16, 1981, or whenever a district is changed by an amendment may be continued, subject to subsections (3) and (4) of this section, even though such building or use does not conform to this chapter. 
(2)  Extension of uses. No building or land containing a nonconforming use shall be extended unless such extension shall conform with the sections of this chapter for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior to June 16, 1981. 
(3)  Damage or deterioration. Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, wind or other act of God or man, including dilapidation, to the extent of more than 50 percent of the assessed value, as established from time to time by the appropriate county property assessor, shall not be reconstructed. However, any structure suffering such degree of damage or dilapidation may be reconstructed and the nonconforming use permitted to continue if the reconstruction is completed within 12 months of the date of such damage or finding of dilapidation. All reconstruction authorized by this subsection shall be accomplished in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code, as set forth in chapter 22, and the applicable sections of this chapter in force immediately preceding the date of the zoning change by which the structure or its use became nonconforming. 
(4)  Discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of any building or land has ceased for a period of one year, it shall not be reestablished or changed to any use not in conformity with this chapter without the written approval of the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. I, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-8) 
Secs. 114-9-114-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-36. - Building permit. 
(a)  Required. Under this chapter, it shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building, including accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, including accessory buildings, until the building official has issued for such work a building permit. 
(b)  Issuance. In applying for a permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or scale plan, as required by the building official, indicating the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of any building already on the lot. The applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and shall supply such other information as may be required by the building official for determining whether the requirements of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation or construction as set forth in the application are in conformity with this chapter and other city ordinances in force, the building official shall issue a building permit for such excavation or construction. If a building permit is refused, the building official shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 1(A), (B); Code 1998, § 114-37) 
Sec. 114-37. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Upon the completion of the construction or alteration of a building or structure for which a building permit has been granted pursuant to section 114-36, application shall be made to the building official for a certificate of occupancy. Within three days of such application, the building official shall make a final inspection of the property in question and shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or structure is found to conform to this chapter and the statements made in the application for the building permit. If such a certificate is refused, the building official shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause. No building erected or altered in its use shall be used until such a certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 1(C); Code 1998, § 114-38) 
Sec. 114-38. - Remedies. 
    If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 2, art. XVII, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-39; Ord. No. 4099, § VIII, 8-1-1995) 
Secs. 114-39-114-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal boards of appeal, T.C.A. § 13-7-205 et seq. 

Sec. 114-65. - Established; appointment; terms; vacancies. 
    A board of zoning appeals is established, to consist of five members, who may be members of the planning commission. The members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. The terms of membership shall be five years. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and confirmation by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(A); Code 1998, § 114-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, T.C.A. § 13-7-106 et seq. 
Sec. 114-67. - Powers. 
(a)  Generally. The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the building official or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any section of this chapter and for interpretation of the zoning map and text. 
(2)  Conditional uses or special exceptions. To hear and decide applications for conditional uses or special exceptions as specified in this chapter and for decisions on any special questions upon which the board of zoning appeals is specially authorized to pass by this chapter. 
(3)  Variances. Except as provided herein to hear and decide applications for variance from the terms of this chapter, because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property which on June 16, 1981, was a lot of record or where, because of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a piece of property, the strict application of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to exception or undue hardship upon the owner of such property; provided that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. Before any variance is granted, the board must find all of the following, which shall be recorded, along with any imposed conditions or restrictions, in minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to constitute proof of the variance: 
a.  The specific conditions in detail which are unique to the applicant's land. 
b.  The manner in which the strict application of this chapter would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land. 
c.  The unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
d.  Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm, the public safety and welfare and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Granting procedure for variances. Further, a variance may be granted only if the board finds that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the zoning plan and this chapter. Variances shall not be granted: 
(1)  Permitting an increase in floor area or density above the maximum permitted by the zoning district; 
(2)  Allowing a use other than those specifically authorized by this chapter in the applicable zoning district; or 
(3)  From the denial of a zoning permit when such denial is due to the fact that such lot has no frontage on a public street unless such lot was a lot of record on June 16, 1981. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(D); Code 1998, § 114-68; Ord. No. 5868, §§ I, II, 8-4-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, T.C.A. § 13-7-207 et seq. 
Sec. 114-68. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau affected by any decision of the building official based in whole or in part upon this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the board of zoning appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, shall give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing any person or party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(b)  A fee, to be set by resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall accompany each appeal. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(C); Code 1998, § 114-69) 
Sec. 114-69. - Limitation of authority. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall not possess the jurisdiction to grant a variance to permit a use of any land, building or structure which is not permitted by this chapter in the zone in question. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(E); Code 1998, § 114-70) 
Sec. 114-70. - Applicability and transferability of variance. 
    For the purpose of this division, a variance applies to the property for which it is granted, and not the individual who applied for it. A variance runs with the land and is transferable to any future owner of the land, but it cannot be transferred by the applicant to a different site. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(F); Code 1998, § 114-71) 
Sec. 114-71. - Appeals from board action. 
(a)  The aggrieved party, against whom the decision of the board of zoning appeals is made, may have a review of the decision of the board of zoning appeals by petition for a common law writ of certiorari, addressed to either the law court or chancery court in the county. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date the decision of the board of zoning appeals is made and written notice thereof given the aggrieved party. 
(b)  Immediately upon the grant of the writ of certiorari and service thereof, the secretary of the board of zoning appeals shall cause to be made, certified and forwarded to such court a complete transcript of the proceedings in the cause by the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  The action may be reviewed by either the law court or the chancery court in which the petition for certiorari is filed and shall be heard solely upon the transcript of the proceedings before the zoning appeal board, and neither party shall be entitled to introduce new evidence in such court. 
(d)  Any party dissatisfied with the decree of the court hearing the cause may, upon giving bond as required by law, take an appeal, as is made and provided by law, where the case shall be heard upon the transcript of the record from the court in which the cause is heard. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. II, § 3(G); Code 1998, § 114-72) 
Secs. 114-72-114-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 114-101. - Intent. 
    This division sets forth the content and procedures for submission, review and approval of all development plans required in this chapter, unless other procedures or contents are specified elsewhere in this chapter. The intent of this division is to recognize that public necessity requires that the conversion of open land to developed land or the redevelopment of urban land be preceded by plans that can be reviewed for compliance with community needs. Such changes may be reviewed under the land subdivision regulations (on file in the clerk's office), other local laws or the provisions established in this division for zoning development plans. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-101) 
Sec. 114-102. - Building permit. 
    When this chapter or planning commission action, taken under this chapter, requires a development plan, no building permit shall be issued until such development plan is approved by the planning commission and its approval is certified to the building official. Such plan shall then limit and control the issuance of all building and occupancy permits, and restrict the construction, location and continuing use of all land, structures and other facilities, to the conditions as set forth in the plan. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-102) 
Sec. 114-103. - Required. 
    Under this chapter, development plans shall be required as described in the following: 
(1)  Certain districts require commission approval. As required in this chapter, applications for a B-4P district, planned development (PD), planned village district (PVD), MX district, BC district, and development plans in any district where a change or amendment in zoning is made require approval of preliminary or final zoning development plans by the commission. 
(2)  Development plans that the director may approve. For zones R-3, R-4, R-5, B-2, B-3, P-1, TA, M-1, M1-R and M-2, the director may approve a development plan containing multiple principal structures provided the plan meets all other zoning regulations, requires no variances and the property is zoned appropriately for multiple principal structures prior to submission of the development plan. In addition to the requirements set out in section 114-105, the development plan must also contain the following for director approval: all building footprints (drawn to scale); all proposed landscaping; all proposed driveways, parking spaces, and their dimensions; all proposed HVAC unit locations; location information; property owners name and address; all adjacent public streets; all proposed sign information; and all property lines that contain the tract of land being developed. 
(3)  Approved items. Development plans approved, pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, by the director will be presented to the commission for information purposes. If the director denies the development plan, the applicant, within ten days of the denial, may request in writing to have the item placed on the next available commission agenda for approval or denial. 
(4)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued until a final development plan has been approved by the commission or director, as provided in this section. 
(5)  Zoning map amendment. The planning commission, at its discretion, may require the submission and approval of a preliminary or final zoning development plan for any zoning map amendment request where the commission finds there are existing or potential substantial flood, drainage, traffic, topographic or other similar problems relating to the development of the property that could have an adverse influence on existing or future development of the property or other property in this neighborhood. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-103; Ord. No. 6354, § II, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 114-104. - Contents of preliminary plan. 
    Unless otherwise designated by appropriate sections of this chapter, any preliminary zoning development plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Community location. A location map sufficient in size and content to quickly relate others to the property's location within the community. 
(2)  Plot plan. For the property, the following shall be shown as a plot plan: 
a.  Property lines and adjacent uses. The boundary of the property with dimensions and the approximate location of adjoining property and its use and zoning and the nearby location of streets, utilities and any other pertinent features or facilities required by the planning commission. 
b.  On-site information. The on-site information to be shown will include topography at five-foot contour intervals or less and the existing and proposed streets, drives, access points, parking and loading areas, walkways, other transportation features, all utilities and easements, screening, landscaping and building ground coverage areas. Elevation drawings of buildings or structures also may be required for sign control or other purposes. 
(3)  Legends, notes, tables. The plan also shall contain a legend and title box with ownership, zoning and other appropriate information; tabulations of pertinent data for land area, building area, parking area, number of units, density, etc.; and notes and certifications of various kinds, including if necessary references to soil erosion control plans or other requirements. The plan shall be prepared and signed (with seal) by a registered engineer, architect or land surveyor, as licensed by state law. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-104; Ord. No. 6469, § I, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 114-105. - Contents of final development plan. 
    Under this division, the final development plan shall contain information as described for the preliminary development plan, except that it also shall include all revision required by the planning commission. The contour intervals shall be five feet or less. Property lines shall carry accurate bearings and dimensions. Other pertinent physical features and easements shall carry accurate dimensions and shall be prepared and signed (with seal) by a registered engineer or architect or land surveyor, as licensed by state law. This plan will be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, unless a different scale is specified elsewhere in the text. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-105; Ord. No. 4199, § VII, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-106. - Preliminary plan submission procedure. 
(a)  When a preliminary development plan is required, no review by the planning commission or public hearing shall be given on any zoning map amendment request until the required plan has been submitted to the commission. If the preliminary development plan is disapproved by the commission or if the commission fails to approve or disapprove the plan and the zoning map amendment is subsequently approved by the appropriate legislative body, the commission shall take action on the development plan for the property, which shall be the final development plan. 
(b)  Vesting rights shall be in accordance with T.C.A. § 13-3-413 or 13-4-310, whichever is applicable, and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-106; Ord. No. 4199, § VIII, 5-7-1996; Ord. No. 6456, § I, 12-16-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6456, § I, adopted Dec. 16, 2014, changed the title of § 114-106 from "Procedures" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 114-107. - Amendments. 
(a)  Amendments may be made to any zoning development plan only by official action of the planning commission, except that amendments which fully meet the requirements of this chapter may be approved and signed by the director of the planning department without further action by the commission. If any question arises as to compliance, however, or if the proposed use differs from the use notated on the approved zoning development plan, the director shall refer the plan to the commission for action. 
(b)  Action by the director of the planning department is intended to expedite approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally relate to the shifting of previously approved spaces. Such amendments must meet the requirements of this chapter. Such amended plans also shall have written on them the exact changes made, and a note for the director's signature shall be added, signifying his approval under this section for the amendments as noted. Any plans approved by the director shall be fully described to the commission at its next meeting and properly entered into the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XII, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-107) 
Sec. 114-108. - Zoning development plan requirements for off-premises signs. 
    All zoning development plans for off-premises signs shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Community location. A location map drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 500 feet and encompassing an area of not less than 2,000 feet from the proposed sign base location as measured in a radius. 
(2)  Legends, notes, tables. The legend and title box shall contain the property address, name and address of the sign owner and property owner, height of the proposed sign as constructed, sign area dimensions, method of illumination, and all design and construction materials proposed. 
(3)  Required topographic information. Petitioner shall submit topographic information with five-foot contour intervals for an area including a one-mile radius from the proposed sign base. 
(4)  Proposed site inspection. The exact site location shall be marked by stakes and clearly visible and ready for inspection by the planning commission 30 days prior to plan submission. 
(5)  Required certification. Sign plot plans shall be certified by a registered surveyor or architect lawfully practicing in the state. 
(6)  Conformance with other restrictions. All other provisions concerning zoning development plan submission shall also apply as identified within this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1998, § 114-108; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 5-5-1998) 
Secs. 114-109-114-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-129. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to describe certain regulations and provisions which apply generally to two or more zoning districts in relation to yards, courts, fences, height, lot area, lot width and other similar characteristics or features. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-136) 
Sec. 114-130. - List of districts. 
    The following is a list of districts and their corresponding acronyms: 
Acronym Districts A-1 Agricultural District R-1A Residential District R-1B Residential District R-1C Residential District R-2 Two-Family Residential District R-3 Low Density Apartment District R-4 Medium Density Apartment District R-5 High Density Apartment District PD Planned Development District R-1MP Mobile Home Park District P-1 Professional Offices District TA Tourist Accommodation District B-1 Neighborhood Business District B-2 Central Business District B-3 Highway Oriented Business District B-4P Planned Business District M-1 Light Manufacturing District M-1R Light Manufacturing Restricted District M-2 General Manufacturing District MX Mixed-Use District BC Business Conference Center District PVD Planned Village District H-1O Historic District Overlay H-2O Historic District Overlay GDO Gateway District Overlay CDO Conservation District Overlay GC Golf Course Community District  
Sec. 114-131. - Uniform regulations. 
    The regulations of this chapter within each zoning district shall be minimum or maximum limitations, as appropriate to the case, and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land and, particularly, except as follows: 
(1)  Conformance to chapter. No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations specified in this chapter for the zone and district in which it is to be located unless otherwise specifically permitted in this chapter. No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to exceed the height, bulk or floor area ratio; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces; or to have less perimeter and interior lot landscaping for vehicular use area and incompatible land uses than required in this chapter or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Exclusive areas. No part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or other special use area required about or in connection with any building or land for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, off-street parking, loading space or other special use area similarly required for any other building or land unless otherwise specifically permitted in this chapter. 
(3)  Reduction of yard or lot. No yard or lot existing on June 16, 1981, shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. Yards or lots created after June 16, 1981, shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 
(4)  One principal building. There shall be no more than one principal structure and its accessory structures on any lot or parcel of land, unless otherwise specifically permitted in this chapter, and a development plan is approved as provided in this chapter. 
(5)  Permitted and prohibited uses. Only those uses specifically permitted or substantially similar to permitted uses are permitted in each zone or district, and all uses specifically prohibited or substantially similar to prohibited uses are prohibited. 
(6)  Street access. No residential structure shall be erected on any lot or tract of land which does not adjoin and have direct access to a street or other public right-of-way for the dimension as specified for that zoning district. 
(7)  Foundation requirements for residential dwellings. All residential dwellings, including manufactured homes, shall be located in appropriately zoned districts and shall meet minimum setback and landscaping requirements of the district in which the property is located. All residential dwellings, including manufactured homes, shall have a minimum of four-inch-thick solid underpinning/screening of the foundation system. All manufactured homes shall have the chassis tongue and hitch permanently removed. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-137; Ord. No. 4083, § II, 7-18-1995; Ord. No. 6354, § III, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 114-132. - Conversion of dwellings. 
    The conversion of any building into a dwelling or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families shall be permitted only within a zone in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this chapter, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in such zone with respect to minimum lot size, floor area, dimensions of yards and other open spaces and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject, also, to such further requirements as may be specified in this chapter applying to such zone. The requirements of this section with respect to yards and other open spaces shall not apply if the conversion will not involve any exterior structural changes. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-138) 
Sec. 114-133. - Accessory building location and height. 
    Under this chapter, the following shall apply to the location and height of accessory buildings: 
(1)  Yards. No accessory building shall be erected in any required court or yard other than a rear yard with exceptions as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  Location. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, no accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard. Accessory residential structures shall be on the same lot as the principal residential structure. The floor area of accessory structures located upon any property zoned for residential use shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor area of the principal structure, or 1,100 square feet, whichever is greater. Lots that are two acres in size or larger may use the following calculation to determine accessory structure size: maximum of two percent of total parcel area but never more than 5,000 square feet. Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal structure or 35 feet, whichever is less. Accessory structures shall be at least three feet from all lot lines and five feet from any other building on the same lot; provided, however, that where two adjoining property owners desire to build a double garage on the property line, one-half of which would be located on each property, they may secure a building permit to construct such garage by submitting written agreements signed by both parties concerned to the building official. The height of both the accessory structure and the principal structure shall be measured according to the provisions outlined in the current building code, as set forth in article III of chapter 22. Swimming pools not covered by a permanent roof, tennis courts, pet enclosures not exceeding 100 square feet floor area, and satellite dish antennas shall not be subject to size or height restrictions in this section or included in calculating floor area. 
(3)  Garage. Where the average natural grade of a required yard is more than eight feet above or below the established street grade, a private garage may be erected within such yard, but not within five feet of any street right-of-way. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-139; Ord. No. 5083, § I, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 6386, § I, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-134. - Traffic visibility across corner lots. 
    In any residential zone, on any corner lot, no fence, structure or planting shall be erected or maintained within ten feet of the intersection of the two street pavement edges, except as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-140) 
Sec. 114-135. - Agricultural use exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, land which is used solely for agricultural, farming, dairying, stock raising or similar purposes shall have no regulations imposed as to height, yard, location or court requirements for agricultural buildings, except that a setback may be required for the protection of existing and proposed streets and rights-of-way and that all buildings or structures in a floodway or floodplain or which tend to increase flood heights or obstruct the flow of floodwaters may be fully regulated. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-141) 
Sec. 114-136. - Height limits and exceptions. 
    Except as provided in this section, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered to a height greater than the maximum specified for the respective zone. Notwithstanding other sections of this chapter, including those for the zoning districts, the following shall be excluded from height limits, except as may be covered by other laws or regulations: 
(1)  Barns, silos or other farm structures on farms; church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, not for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, masts and aerials. 
(2)  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery lofts, provided that any such structure shall not have an aggregate area greater than 25 percent of the lot area and provided that no linear dimension of any such structure shall exceed 50 percent of the corresponding street lot line frontage if the structure is within 25 feet of such street lot line. 
(3)  Monuments or towers, including fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, sugar refineries, gas holders and other structures shall have no height limits, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height; provided, however, that every such structure above the limiting height specified in this chapter shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the area of the lot, shall be distant not less than 25 feet from every lot line not a street lot line, and not less than one foot from the otherwise required setback at the limiting height for each foot of vertical height above such limiting height. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-142) 
Sec. 114-137. - Lot area and lot width minimum. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no principal building shall be erected on a lot which has less than the minimum area or width specified for the respective zone, and no building shall be erected or converted for dwelling use on a lot containing less than the minimum lot area so specified. The total gross floor area in all buildings on the lot shall be considered in determining the adequacy of lot area. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-143) 
Sec. 114-138. - Yards. 
    The following shall apply to yard requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Line of more restricted zoning boundary. Along any zone boundary line, any abutting side yard or rear yard on a lot adjoining such boundary line in the less restricted zone shall have a minimum width and depth equal to the required minimum width and depth for such yards in the more restricted zone. 
(2)  Minimum yards. Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, every lot shall have a front yard and a rear yard, the least depths of which shall not be less than those specified for the respective zone, and every lot shall have a side yard on each side which shall not be less than the side yard as specified for the respective zone. 
(3)  Front yard. The following shall apply to front yards: 
a.  Exceptions for existing alignment. In any residential district in this chapter, when the average depth of front yards of existing buildings, located within 100 feet of each side of a lot in the same block front as such lot, is less or greater than the least front yard depth prescribed for a building on such lot, the depth of the front yard of any building or structure on such lot shall not be less than the average depth of the existing front yards, except that it shall not be required to exceed the average depth of front yards of existing buildings on the two lots immediately adjoining or the average depth of front yards of existing buildings on the two lots immediately adjoining, but shall be at least ten feet, and need not exceed 50 feet in any zone, but in no event shall any building be constructed closer than any setback established on a plat of record. 
b.  Nonresidential zone adjoining residential. On a lot in any nonresidential zone sharing the same block front with a lot in any residential zone, the minimum front yard required shall equal in depth the front yard required for that residential zone. 
c.  Through lots. In any zone where a lot runs through a block from street to street, a front yard as otherwise required shall be provided along each street lot line. 
(4)  Side yards. The following shall apply to side yards: 
a.  Decrease for narrow lots. For each foot by which a lot of record existing on June 16, 1981, is narrower than 50 feet and where the owner of record does not own any adjoining property, 11/2 inches may be deducted from the required least width of any side yard for buildings not exceeding 21/2 stories in height; provided, however, that no side yard shall be narrower at any point than three feet in any case. 
b.  Increase for deep buildings. In any zone where a side yard is required, the least width of each side yard shall be increased by one inch for each foot by which the sidewall of a building adjacent to a side yard exceeds 50 feet. 
c.  Corner lot. On a corner lot in any residential zone, the required least width of a side yard along the side street shall be at least 50 percent greater than the side yard required for that zone. 
d.  Attached dwellings. For attached dwelling units, the entire structure shall be considered as a single building with respect to side yard requirements. 
(5)  Multifamily yards. In addition to other yard requirements, whenever the principal entrances to a multifamily structure or to the individual dwelling units therein face on the side yard portion of a building, whether opening on an interior hall or to the exterior, each side yard width shall not be less than the front yard requirement. No parking shall be permitted within the side yard space required under this subsection. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-144) 
Sec. 114-139. - Walls and fences. 
    No barbed wire fences shall be permitted within residential zoning districts; provided, however, that protective devices utilizing barbed wire may be installed upon walls or fences constructed or used in conjunction with a commercial or industrial use in a residential district. In any residence, business or professional district, a wall or fence of not more than six feet in height may be erected or maintained within a front yard, and a wall or fence of not more than eight feet in height may be erected in any other yard. No height restriction shall be placed on a wall or fence erected or maintained in any industrial district or on an approved retaining wall in any district. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 10; Code 1998, § 114-145) 
Sec. 114-140. - Projections. 
    Under this chapter, the following shall apply to projections: 
(1)  Porches, etc. Porches, stairways, terraces or other similar features that are uncovered or unenclosed may project into a required front, side or rear yard not more than eight feet, provided that such porches, stairways, terraces or other similar features conform to subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Fire escapes, stairs. Fire escapes may extend not more than three feet into any required court or side yard, and fire escapes or outside stairways may extend not more than five feet into any required rear yard. 
(3)  Chimneys, etc. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like may extend not more than 24 inches into any required yard. 
(4)  Limitations. Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section, no projection shall extend into any required side yard more than one-third the width of such yard or into any required court more than one-fourth the width of such court or within ten feet of the front or rear lot line or within three feet of any accessory building. The limitations of this subsection shall not apply to terraces and steps rendered necessary in side yards due to topographic situations or to loading docks or tailboards required in a side yard in connection with an industrial use in an industrial district because of topographic constraints. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 11; Code 1998, § 114-146) 
Sec. 114-141. - Land use within sinkholes. 
    Within any sinkhole (a land surface feature characterized by the absence of surface drainage), no building floor shall be permitted at an elevation lower than the lowest surface drainage outlet along the rim of the sinkhole, except when it can be demonstrated by a licensed engineer that corrective measures have been taken which would protect a lower level from flooding. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 12; Code 1998, § 114-147) 
Sec. 114-142. - Yard or garage sales. 
    A yard or garage sale may be permitted within a residential zone. Such sales shall not exceed two per year, with each not exceeding three consecutive days. Sales shall be held on the property of the resident. Sale items shall consist only of used personal property of the resident and shall not be used for retailing items purchased from others for resale purposes. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. III, § 13; Code 1998, § 114-148) 
Sec. 114-143. - Alcoholic beverage sales in TA/C, B-2, B-3, B-4P, MX, PVD, BC and GC districts. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage sales site means any lot, parcel or property providing on-premises alcoholic beverage sales, whether owned or leased. 
    School. 
(1)  The term "school" means any facility that houses or provides education experiences for a person who is five years of age or older in kindergarten through the 12th grade. 
(2)  The term "school" does not include a preschool, day care or home school. 
(b)  Within the boundaries of any district zoned as B-3, B-4P, BC, MX, PVD, TA or GC, on-premises alcoholic beverage sales shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any school, from kindergarten through the 12th grade, whether public or private, as measured from the school property boundary to the boundary of the property of an alcoholic beverage sales site. Measurement, for the purpose of this section, shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects. This measurement shall be made at the nearest points between the school boundary line and the boundary line of an alcoholic beverage sales site. 
(Code 1998, § 114-149; Ord. No. 4018, § II(art. III, § 14), 3-21-1995; Ord. NO. 6602, § I, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 114-144. - Communication facilities. 
(a)  Scope. The communication towers for mobile telephone services and other radio and television information services, which provide for the needs of the citizens of the city, will be subject to the standards of this section to minimize adverse visual and operational effects of towers through careful design, siting, and screening; to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure and falling ice through engineering and careful siting of towers; and to maximize use of any new communication tower and existing structures to reduce the number of towers needed. 
(b)  Building permit. The application for a building permit for a communication facility shall include the following: 
(1)  A report prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state describing the height and design of the tower; that demonstrates the tower's compliance with applicable structural standards, building codes, electrical codes and fire codes; and that describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate. For an antenna mounted on an existing structure, the report shall indicate the existing structure's suitability to accept the antenna and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings and the precise point of attachment shall be indicated. 
(2)  An adequate report inventorying existing towers and antenna sites within a reasonable distance from the proposed site, outlining the opportunities for shared use as an alternative to the proposed use. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed tower or antenna cannot be accommodated on an existing approved tower or facility due to one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  Unwillingness of the owner to entertain a cellular telephone facility proposal. 
b.  The equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing approved tower and facilities. 
c.  The planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned equipment, which cannot be reasonably prevented. 
d.  Existing or approved towers or facilities do not have space on which proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably. 
e.  Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment proposed by the applicant on existing and approved towers or facilities. 
(c)  Site plan. A site plan shall be approved by the building official prior to issuing a permit. The following standards shall be used in the design of the facilities: 
(1)  Setback. The minimum setback shall be 20 percent of tower height or equal to the existing zoning district, whichever is greater. Where appropriate, the requirements of the flood district, Historic District Overlay and Gateway District Overlay also apply. Setback shall be measured from the base of the tower, or guy-wire supports for lattice towers, to the property line. Ground structures shall not be located within required setbacks. 
(2)  Landscaping and screening. The visual impacts of a communication facility shall be mitigated from nearby viewers by an evergreen screen located outside the fence. This screen may consist of evergreen trees, having a minimum height of six feet at planting and a minimum height of 15 feet at maturity, or a continuous hedge with a three-foot height at planting and a six-foot height at maturity. Sites may be exempted from the landscaped area requirement, provided that the building official finds the vegetation or the topography of the site provides a natural buffer. 
(3)  Fencing. A chain link fence or solid wall not less than eight feet in height from the finished grade shall be provided around each communication facility. Access to the facility shall be through a locked gate. 
(4)  Lighting. The facility shall not be artificially lighted except to ensure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. All lighting shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto surrounding property. 
(5)  Radiation standards. All proposed communication facilities shall comply with current standards of the Federal Communication Commission or the American National Standards Institute for nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) and electromagnetic fields (EMF). Each request for a building permit shall be accompanied by certified documentation or a statement from a registered engineer or other professional indicating compliance with these standards. 
(6)  Aircraft hazard. Communication facilities shall not encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach path as established by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(7)  Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site unless repairs are being made. 
(8)  Removal of obsolete or unused facilities. All obsolete or unused communication tower facilities shall be removed by the property owner within 12 months of cessation of use. The applicant shall submit an executed removal agreement to ensure compliance with this subsection. 
(9)  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising purposes, including banners, streamers, etc., is prohibited. Warning signs or identification signs will be permitted. 
(10)  Maintenance. Adequate inspection and maintenance shall be performed to ensure the structural integrity of the facility and prevent deleterious conditions occurring on the site. 
(11)  Access and parking. All access roads and parking areas for facilities adjacent to platted subdivisions or developed areas shall be paved as required by this chapter. These requirements may be waived for rural or undeveloped areas. 
(12)  Changes to facilities. Any changes to antennas, reception or transmitting devices shall require review in the same manner as the existing facility was originally approved. 
(Code 1998, § 114-150; Ord. No. 4276, § I(art. III, § 14), 9-3-1996) 
Secs. 114-145-114-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT 

Sec. 114-172. - Intent-District; categories. 
    The intent of this division is to recognize the various ways in which people make use of land and buildings and to classify such uses by relative compatibility and their relationship to various community facilities and services; to delineate areas of relatively compatible use into zoning districts that permit certain dimensional and other requirements for the use of such land and buildings. Although human activities and use of the land can be classified in various ways, this chapter establishes five broad categories with recognition of some overlapping and intermingling. Common to all five categories as permitted are the streets, walkways, underground pipes, overhead wires and surface ditches, which are used to move people, goods, energy, wastes, sounds and images. The categories and their intent are as follows: 
(1)  Planned development district. For urban activities in which buildings, land use, transportation facilities, utility systems and open spaces are integrated through an overall design. 
(2)  Agricultural. For rural activities primarily related to use of the land in its natural state for raising crops or livestock, or leaving the land in its natural state. 
(3)  Residential. For urban activities primarily related to the social family, such as the primary place of being together with one's family, or being alone, for eating, sleeping, recreation and other nonwork activities. 
(4)  Business. For urban activities related to the exchange of services and manufactured goods that provide for physical, social and economic needs common to all residents. 
(5)  Manufacturing. For urban activities related to the production of goods which must precede their availability for purchase in the business areas of the community. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-181) 
Sec. 114-173. - Same-Planned Development District. 
    The Planned Development Zoning District is established to permit flexibility and design innovation in the site planning and land use, to provide open space and recreational areas and options in land development which encourage imaginative solutions to environmental design problems. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-182) 
Sec. 114-174. - Same-Agricultural areas. 
    Only one agricultural district is established in this chapter, an A-1 Agricultural District. The intent is to recognize the agricultural needs of the community. It also is used as a holding zone for newly annexed areas where additional study may be necessary before designation into the appropriate urban zoning district. It also permits single-family use. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-183) 
Sec. 114-175. - Same-Residential areas. 
    The intent of the residential zoning districts is to accommodate the private living needs of individuals and families, in a variety of building types and in locations generally separated from commercial and industrial activities. The intent of providing variety is achieved by establishing residential districts with variation in lot sizes and other dimensional requirements. The residential districts include the following: 
(1)  R-1A, Residential District. For single-family detached homes on lots of at least 10,000 square feet, with certain other dimensional requirements for light, air and personal preference. 
(2)  R-1B, Residential District. For single-family detached homes on lots of at least 7,500 square feet, with certain other dimensional requirements. 
(3)  R-1C, Residential District. For single-family detached homes on lots of at least 5,000 square feet, with certain other dimensional requirements. 
(4)  R-2, Two-Family Residential District. For buildings as permitted by section 114-185, placed side by side or one above the other, on lots of at least 7,500 square feet. 
(5)  R-3, Low Density Apartment District. For buildings as permitted by section 114-186, where floor area can equal no more than half of the land area. 
(6)  R-4, Medium Density Apartment District. For buildings as permitted by section 114-187, where floor area can equal no more than 70 percent of the land area. 
(7)  R-5, High Density Apartment District. For buildings as permitted by section 114-188. 
(8)  Residential area modifiers. Other sections of this chapter may modify some of the residential zones and their requirements as described in this section. 
(9)  GC, Golf Course Community District. The GC (Golf Course Community) zoning district has been established to permit residential development in areas developed integrally with a new and/or existing golf course. It is the intent of this district to permit golf course development by providing for a more flexible placing of buildings on land, and providing for flexibility in accessory uses associated with a golf course while protecting the integrity of the surrounding residential community. In addition to the requirements specified herein for this zoning district, the planning commission and/or the board of mayor and aldermen may impose any reasonable conditions deemed necessary to safeguard the health, safety, welfare, and property values of the surrounding area of the city. 
(10)  [The UAE (Urban Agricultural Estate) Zoning District.] The UAE (Urban Agricultural Estate) zoning district has been established to provide areas permitting uses and activities that are more rural in character than practical in more concentrated urban areas and, at the same time establishing and maintaining a living environment of high standard for single family uses that will avoid compatibility issues with urbanized areas. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-184; Ord. No. 6181, § I, 3-6-2012; Ord. No. 6405, § I, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 114-176. - Same-Business areas. 
    Under this chapter, business areas are intended for the sale or exchange of goods and services conveniently located to their users and giving proper recognition to safe and efficient traffic control, adequate parking, sign control and related characteristics. The seven business districts and their intent are as follows: 
(1)  P-1, Professional Offices District. For buildings primarily containing offices, and acting as a buffer between residential and retail business uses. 
(2)  TA/C, Tourist Accommodation District. To provide the traveling public with convenient services adjacent to controlled access highway interchanges. 
(3)  B-1, Neighborhood Business District. For businesses providing goods and services, not for the entire community, but rather for only a neighborhood area in order to reduce travel time for the acquisition of the most frequently needed services and goods. 
(4)  B-2, Central Business District. For community activities serving the entire community or larger area, and often the only one of its kind (city hall, library, etc.) or the major one of its kind (finance, insurance, retailing, etc.), benefiting from and contributing to that area which generally is the most accessible to the region, and contains the area's greatest variety, intensity and concentration of land use. 
(5)  B-3, Highway Oriented Business District. For business activities dependent upon or motivated by access to the community's major highway system and often referred to as "strip commercial" development. Great care must be exercised to ensure that legitimate uses are permitted in a manner that does not, in turn, strangle and make unnecessarily dangerous the major streets and highways that originally attracted them to such locations. 
(6)  B-4P, Planned Business Development District. For planned business developments that are coordinated with adjacent activities. The purpose is to permit a more efficient, integrated and aesthetically pleasing environment than generally is the case in the other business zones. 
(7)  BC, Business Conference Center District. As provided in division 9 of this article, for a range of activities such as, but not limited to, regional convention centers, employment based officers, commercial services, recreational facilities, educational uses and cultural events. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-185; Ord. No. 4498, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-177. - Same-Manufacturing areas. 
    Under this chapter, industrial areas are intended for the storage, manufacturing or other processing of goods and materials, with proper provision for environmental controls and vehicular movement and parking. The three districts and their intent are as follows: 
(1)  M-1, Light Manufacturing District. This zone is established for light industrial activities which are the least prone to create objectionable environmental problems related to smoke, noise, heat, odor, vibration, light and waste generation and disposal. 
(2)  M-1R, Light Manufacturing Restricted District. This light industrial zone is similar to the M-1 district, except that higher provisions are established for light and air and for physical appearance. 
(3)  M-2, General Manufacturing District. This zone is established as a general industrial district in order to provide locations for a broad range of heavier industrial activities. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-186) 
Sec. 114-178. - Same-Mixed-use district. 
    The MX, Mixed-Use District is established to allow flexibility in the development of compatible mixed-use areas of light manufacturing, professional office and limited commercial uses and to do so by developing a self-contained, campus-like atmosphere which protects the adjacent land uses. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-187) 
Sec. 114-179. - Same-Overlay districts and other modifiers. 
(a)  Under this chapter, the flood hazard district provisions overlay any other zoning district when flood hazards may exist. (See division 5 of this article.) 
(b)  Under this chapter, the historic zoning district provisions for H-2 overlay any other zoning district where historic buildings or areas have been designated. (See division 4 of this article.) 
(c)  Under this chapter the GDO, Gateway District provisions overlay any other zoning district within the designated Gateway District. (See division 10 of this article.) 
(d)  In addition, the various districts must also meet provisions for sign control, parking and loading, landscaping, soil erosion and development plans as described in other articles of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-188; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(29), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-180. - Restrictions by type of zoning district. 
(a)  Sections 114-181 through 114-201 provide specific requirements and restrictions for various zoning districts. For all districts so listed, where the principal uses are specified, other substantially similar uses shall also be deemed permitted uses. For all districts so listed, where prohibited uses are listed, substantially similar uses are also prohibited. 
(b)  For all districts listed in sections 114-181 through 114-201, principal uses shall include the following: 
(1)  Governmental use. 
(2)  Public parks. 
(3)  Public and private utilities to serve the residents of the area. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-189; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(9), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-181. - A-1, Agricultural District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the A-1, Agricultural District are as follows: 
(1)  Customary general farming and horticulture. 
(2)  Commercial raising of livestock and poultry. 
(3)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Small group residential projects. 
(5)  Hunting, fishing and forestry. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the A-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Home occupations within the principal building by a resident using no more than 25 percent of total floor space, and no more than one nonresident employee. 
(2)  Garages, barns and other customary farm accessory buildings. 
(3)  Roomers or boarders within the principal building not exceeding 25 percent of the total floor area. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the A-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries and other burial grounds. 
(2)  Tenant homes, only for persons working on the farm. 
(3)  Hospitals, nursing homes and rehabilitation homes. 
(4)  Sewage treatment plants or landfills operated by a government. 
(5)  Private recreation areas, country clubs and golf courses. 
(6)  Churches and other places of worship, schools and colleges. 
(7)  Commercial kennels and veterinary facilities. 
(8)  Communication facilities. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the A-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, other than single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Retail sales and services, wholesaling, offices and industrial uses. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the A-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 20,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 100 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 50 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, 20 feet; plus six feet on the street side yard. 
e.  Rear yard, 50 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, no limit. 
b.  Building height, 35 feet. 
Note. Commercial raising of livestock and poultry shall not be conducted on a tract of land of less than five acres, and no structure housing poultry shall be located nearer than 200 feet to a property line. Other accessory buildings shall have minimum setbacks as described under subsections (e)(1)a through e of this section, except that the setback shall be 30 feet from any side street property line. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the A-1 district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The following non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated signs are permitted in the A-1 district: 
(1)  One name and address identification sign, not to exceed two square feet, for a property owner or occupant. No permit is required. 
(2)  For residential developments, one identification sign at each major entrance thereto. 
(3)  One identification sign not exceeding 30 square feet for any permitted use not previously covered. 
(4)  Height of freestanding signs shall be no greater than five feet above ground, and building mounted signs shall not extend above the roof. 
(g)  Parking. The following numbers of vehicle parking spaces are required for the corresponding uses in the A-1 district: 
(1)  Two spaces per dwelling unit, provided that only one such space shall have convenient access to a street. 
(2)  For other uses, see the parking and loading provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-190; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(10), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 114-182. - R-1A, Residential District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-1A, Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Small group residential projects. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-1A district as follows: 
(1)  Private garages, storage sheds, parking and private recreation. 
(2)  Living quarters without cooking facilities, but only for guests or domestic employees. 
(3)  Home occupations and roomers or boarders as for A-1 districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-1A district as follows: 
(1)  Cemeteries and other burial grounds. 
(2)  Day care nurseries. 
(3)  Country clubs and golf courses. 
(4)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(5)  Schools and colleges for academic instruction. 
(6)  On-site subdivision sales offices while sales are underway. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-1A district are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, other than single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Retail sales and services, wholesaling, offices and industrial uses. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the R-1A district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 60 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 40 feet. 
d.  Each side yard: 
1.  Ten feet for one or two stories; 
2.  15 feet for three stories; 
3.  Plus 50 percent on the street side yard. 
e.  Rear yard, 30 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 30 percent including accessory buildings. 
b.  Building height, 35 feet or three stories. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-1A district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The signs permitted in the R-1A district are the same as for the A-1 district. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required for the R-1A district are the same as the A-1 district. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-191; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(11), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 5083, § III, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 114-183. - R-1B, Residential District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-1B, Residential District are the same as for R-1A districts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-1B district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-1B district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-1B district are the same as for R-1A districts. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the R-1B district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 50 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 30 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, eight feet. 
e.  Rear yard, 30 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 30 percent, including accessory buildings. 
b.  Building height, two stories. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-1B district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The signs permitted in the R-1B district are the same as for A-1 districts. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required in the R-1B district are the same as for A-1 districts. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-192; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(12), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 5083, § IV, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 114-184. - R-1C, Residential District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-1C, Residential District are the same as for R-1A districts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-1C district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-1C district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-1C district are the same as for R-1A districts. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the R-1C district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 50 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 25 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, eight feet. 
e.  Rear yard, 25 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 40 percent, including accessory buildings. 
b.  Building height, two stories. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-1C district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The signs permitted in the R-1C district are the same as for A-1 districts. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required for the R-1C district are the same as for A-1 districts. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-193; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(13), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 5083, § V, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 114-185. - R-2, Two-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-2, Two-Family Residential District are as follows: 
(1)  The same as for R-1A districts. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-2 district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-2 district the same as for R-1A districts. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-2 district are the same as for R-1A districts, except two-family dwellings are permitted. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 60 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 30 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, ten feet. 
e.  Rear yard, 20 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, not applicable. 
b.  Building height, 35 feet. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-2 district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The signs permitted in the R-2 district are the same as for R-1A districts. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required for the R-2 district are the same as for A-1 districts. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-194; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(14), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-186. - R-3, Low Density Apartment District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-3, Low Density Apartment District are as follows: 
(1)  The same as for R-1A and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  Dormitories, sorority or fraternity houses, boarding houses or lodging houses. 
(4)  Group residential projects. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-3 district as follows: 
(1)  Garages, storage sheds, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(2)  In single-family or two-family dwellings, the keeping of roomers or boarders in no more than 50 percent of total floor area of the principal structure. The term "total floor area" means the area of all floors in the principal structure, including furnished attics and furnished basements. For sign regulations for such use, see section 114-533. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-3 district as follows: nursing homes, rest homes, rehabilitation centers, hospitals, religious and charitable institutions, community centers (such as YMCA, etc.), day care nurseries, communication facilities. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-3 district are as follows: retail sales and services, wholesaling and warehousing, offices and industrial uses. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The maximum density is 15 units per acre. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-3 district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The following non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated signs are permitted in the district: 
(1)  The same as for R-1A districts. 
(2)  For multifamily dwellings, one identification sign not exceeding 30 square feet and set back at least 20 feet from the front property line, and no illumination except indirect. Freestanding signs shall not extend higher than 12 feet above the ground, and wall mounted signs shall not project above the roofline. 
(g)  Parking. The following numbers of vehicle parking spaces are required for the corresponding uses in the district: 
(1)  11/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
(2)  For other uses, see the parking and loading provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-195; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(15), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 5083, § VI, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 6383, § I, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 114-187. - R-4, Medium Density Apartment District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-4, Medium Density Apartment District are the same as for R-3 districts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-4 district the same as for R-3 districts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-4 district the same as for R-3 districts. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-4 district are the same as for R-3 districts. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The maximum density is 20 units per acre. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-4 district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The signs permitted in the R-4 district are the same as for R-3 districts. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required for the R-4 district are the same as for R-3 districts. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-196; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(16), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 5083, § VII, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 6383, § II, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 114-188. - R-5, High Density Apartment District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the R-5, High Density Apartment District are as follows: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings of at least five stories, dormitories. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship, schools and colleges. 
(3)  In five-story or higher apartment buildings, offices may be permitted on no more than the first two floors, with no mixing of offices and apartments on either floor. 
(4)  The same as for R-3 districts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the R-5 district as follows: garages, storage sheds, parking, pools, tennis courts. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the R-5 district as follows: 
(1)  The same as for R-3 districts. 
(2)  Incidental retail or service use intended primarily for building occupants and located only on the first floor with no direct exterior access and no signs or display areas visible from outside the building. 
(3)  Communication facilities. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the R-5 district are the same as for R-3 districts, except that certain retail or service uses are permitted as described in this section. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The maximum density is 40 units per acre. 
(f)  Signs. A sign permit is required for most signs in the R-5 district. See also article IV of this chapter for additional sign provisions. The following non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated signs are permitted in the R-5 district: 
(1)  The same as for R-3 districts. 
(2)  One identification sign for each business establishment no more than two square feet in area, mounted on the face of the building, and no illumination except indirect. 
(g)  Parking. The vehicle parking spaces required for the R-5 district are the same as for R-3 districts. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-197; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(17), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6383, § III, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 114-189. - Planned Development District. 
    The Planned Development District is regulated in division 6 of this article. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-198; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(18), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-190. - R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District. 
    Mobile home parks are regulated in division 7 of this article. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-199; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(19), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-191. - P-1, Professional Offices District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the P-1, Professional Offices District are as follows: 
(1)  Offices for business, professional, governmental, civic, insurance or other groups. 
(2)  Credit agencies, brokers, travel agencies, computer or data processing centers, real estate offices, finance, photography studios, law offices. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the P-1 district as follows: incidental retail or service uses intended primarily for building tenants, employees or patrons. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the P-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Offices of veterinarians, animal hospitals. 
(2)  Hospitals, rest or convalescent homes. 
(3)  Group homes. 
(4)  Communication facilities. 
(5)  Golf courses. 
(6)  Medical or dental offices, clinics provided that upon findings of fact that all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  The use will not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private school, day care facility, park, any area devoted to public recreation activity or a residential dwelling. Measurements shall be made in a straight line on the city zoning map from the nearest property line of the lot on which the facility is situated to the nearest property line of any of the uses set forth in this subsection; 
b.  The use will be designed, located, and proposed to be operated so that the health, safety and welfare will be protected; 
c.  The use will not be detrimental to and will not injure, damage or adversely affect the use, value or enjoyment of the properties in the surrounding neighborhood; 
d.  The use will not have an adverse impact on land use compatibility; 
e.  The use will not materially or adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed use; 
f.  Adequate public facilities are available to accommodate the use; 
g.  The traffic generated by the use will be safely accommodated along major streets without traversing minor streets; 
h.  The use will maintain appropriate traffic patterns and parking as to not strain existing facilities with substantial increases in traffic and projected trip generations; 
i.  The use will conform to all applicable provisions of the district and will not require any variances. 
(7)  The same as for R-5 districts. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the P-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Retail sales and services, except for those permitted as principal or accessory uses. 
(2)  Wholesaling, warehousing and industrial uses. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the P-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 60 feet. 
c.  Front yard, same as the most restrictive adjacent zoning district. 
d.  Each side yard, 12 feet; also see building height in subsection (e)(2)b of this section. 
e.  Rear yard, 12 feet; also see building height in subsection (e)(2)b of this section. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 35 percent, and floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.3. 
b.  Building height, no limit, but a 3:1 height-to-yard ratio for side and rear yards. 
(f)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(g)  Parking. See article VI of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-200; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(20), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 4422, § 1, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 6101, § I, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 114-192. - TA/C Tourist Accommodation/Commerce District. 
(a)  Intent. This district is intended to provide the traveling public and regional residents an area for large scale shopping centers of 350,000 square feet or more in one or more buildings on 40 or more acres of land. Development within each TA district designation is to consist of hotels, retail, office, service, entertainment and recreation uses in building and service areas sharing internal parking and circulation. The TA development may include peripheral parcels for sale to other commercial users as long as such parcels are identified as part of an integrated master plan for the development. 
(b)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the TA tourist accommodation district are as follows: 
(1)  Uses that provide the traveling public with convenient services, but only when adjacent to major highway interchanges, including automobile service stations, restaurants and lounges, motels and hotels, indoor movie theatres, gift shops and other similar shops. 
(2)  Governmental uses. 
(3)  Public and private parks. 
(4)  Public and private utilities to serve residents of the area. 
(5)  Regional shopping centers and shopping malls. 
(6)  Satellite medical facilities, including specialist medical clinics. 
(7)  Public Art. 
(8)  Non-Motorized trails, and trailheads facilities, equestrian use trails. 
(9)  Brewpubs, craft breweries, distilleries, and wineries. 
(10)  Outdoor theatre/Amphitheatre. 
(11)  Stadium, Sports Arena, Auditorium, with fixed seating. 
(12)  Banks and Financial Institutions. 
(13)  Art Galleries and museums; 
and other substantially similar uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the TA district as follows: swimming pools, spas, private parks, tennis courts, and parking facilities. 
(d)  Special Exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are as follows: 
(1)  Franchised Auto dealership. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the TA district are as follows: 
(1)  Retail and service uses, except for those described in subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(2)  Residential, warehousing, industry, and truck stops. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the TA district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, No requirements. 
b.  Lot frontage minimum of 50 feet on a public road with an average of 150 at the building line feet. 
c.  Front yard, 30 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, None Required. When a side yard is provided, it shall not be less than ten feet. 
e.  Rear yard, None Required. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, No requirements. 
b.  Building height: No building or structure shall exceed 60 feet in height. 
(g)  Plan requirements. Tourist accommodation districts require submittal of a zoning development plan for planning commission approval. The planning commission may add other dimensional requirements or restrictions. 
(h)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions except when the development is restricted by a sign regulation covenant accepted by the city at the time of the zoning approval and recorded in the official records of Sullivan County. 
(i)  Parking. See article V of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(j)  Landscaping, buffering and screening. See Article VI of this chapter for landscaping and land use buffering requirements. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-201; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(21), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 4454, § 1, 11-4-1997; Ord. No. 6245, § I, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 6388, § II, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-193. - B-1, Neighborhood Business District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the B-1, Neighborhood Business District are as follows: 
(1)  Only those retail and service activities oriented to serving nearby neighborhoods and not to uses that would draw communitywide traffic into a neighborhood area. 
(2)  Retail uses for sale of goods and merchandise, including food, groceries, gasoline, meals or prepared food, off-premises sale of beer, clothing, medicine, toiletries, hardware, magazines and similar uses. 
(3)  Service uses such as laundries and dry cleaning, appliance repair, barbershops, beauty shops and similar uses. 
(4)  The same as for R-3 districts. 
(5)  Off-premises alcoholic beverage sales. 
(6)  Climate controlled indoor storage, provided that said facilities are only permitted to occupy existing buildings. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the B-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Parking lots or garages. 
(2)  One dwelling unit for the owner, operator or employee of the principal use as part of the principal structure. 
(3)  Warehousing or storage incidental to the principal use. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the B-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Self-service carwashes. 
(2)  Offices. 
(3)  Same as for R-3 districts. 
(4)  Communication facilities. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the B-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Communitywide oriented retail and service uses such as department and discount stores, theaters, auto sales, warehousing, wholesaling, industry. 
(2)  On-premises alcoholic beverage sales. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the B-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, not applicable. 
b.  Lot frontage, not applicable. 
c.  Front yard, 30 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, not applicable. 
e.  Rear yard, 20 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, not applicable. 
b.  Building height, 25 feet. 
Note. For planned neighborhood shopping centers or other B-1 uses, the planning commission may require a development plan with dimensional requirements or other provisions in variance with this subsection. 
(f)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(g)  Parking. See article VI of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-202; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(22), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6569, § I, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 114-194. - B-2, Central Business District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the B-2, Central Business District are as follows: 
(1)  Establishments retailing goods and merchandise such as food, groceries, clothing, hardware, toiletries, furniture and furnishings, gasoline, meals, vehicles, boats, trailers, jewelry, appliances and similar items. 
(2)  Financial offices. 
(3)  Residential, except single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Establishments for the sale or provision of personal appearance or care, finance, clothing and goods repair, offices (including legal, insurance, and real estate offices), printing, parking, entertainment, recreation, hotels, motels, educational institutions, food and drink, brewpubs, craft breweries, distilleries, wineries, museums. 
(5)  On-premises and off-premises alcoholic beverage sales. 
(6)  Municipal and other government uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Uses that are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the B-2E district as follows: wholesaling, warehousing and light industry when accessory and incidental to a retailing or service activity. Storage is permitted when accessory and incidental to a residential use. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the B-2 district as follows: communication facilities and facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or greater per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the B-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Land intensive uses, as opposed to people intensive uses, such as industry and manufacturing. 
(2)  Truck terminals and freight yards. 
(3)  Outdoor and land intensive recreation such as drive-in theaters, car dealerships, racetracks, scrap yards or junkyards, lumberyards, animal hospitals and boarding facilities, stockyards and flour mills, and ministorage facilities. 
(4)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the B-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. No requirements are applicable to this district. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Setbacks. Structures housing principal uses shall be built to the front property line for at least 75 percent of the building frontage. For structures on corner lots, both street frontages shall be considered front property lines for purposes of these requirements. Buildings must provide a primary building entry at the front property line. 
b.  Building height. Building height shall not exceed 74 feet as measured from grade to the top of the roof structure, excluding parapet walls or cornices. 
(f)  Design Requirements. 
(1)  Fenestration. The percentage of openings for glass fenestration on the first floor facing streets, excluding alleys, for office uses is required to be a minimum of 15 percent of the total façade area from finish floor line to finish floor line, and 30 percent for all other uses. Institutional uses, theatres and performance venues may reduce this requirement upon demonstrating that a hardship exists due to programming or structural uses that would preclude meeting the requirement. 
(2)  Cladding. Building materials for areas visible from streets, excluding alleys, shall consist of one or more of the following: brick, architectural block, plate glass, and precast concrete panels. Accent materials may include stucco or EIFS, stone, wood, and architectural metal. Pre-engineered metal, painted or natural concrete block, composite building materials, and vinyl siding are prohibited. 
(3)  Concealed equipment. The following shall be located or screened so as not to visible from any street, excluding alleys: air conditioning compressors, window and wall air conditioners, cooling towers, dumpsters, electrical and utility meters, irrigation and pool pumps, permanent barbeques, satellite antennae, utility appurtenances, mechanical rooftop equipment or ventilation apparatus. 
(4)  Drive-throughs. Facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or greater per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site, are permitted only as special exceptions by the board of zoning appeals. Drive-throughs shall not be accessed from the following streets: Center Street, Main Street, Market Street, Broad Street, Sullivan Street, and Clinchfield Street. Facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or less per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site, should not take their access via Center Street, Main Street, Market Street, Broad Street, Sullivan Street, and Clinchfield Street if possible. 
(5)  Sidewalks and streetscapes. If a master plan containing sidewalk and/or streetscape recommendations has been adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen for an area, sidewalk or streetscape improvements proposed as part of new development or redevelopment shall comply with the recommendations. 
(g)  Signs. 
(1)  FreestandingsSigns. Freestanding signs are permitted only for existing buildings with a setback from the front property line of ten feet or greater. Freestanding signs must be monument signs, not to exceed eight feet in height, including the sign base. Maximum sign square footage shall not exceed 50 square feet, with no more than 25 square feet per side. Sign bases should be constructed of brick, stone, or other durable materials. 
(2)  Wall Signs. Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted wall signs equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 100 square feet total signage. Businesses having less than 5,000 square feet area may utilize up to 50 square feet of signage. 
(3)  Murals and banners shall not be permitted in the B-2 district, except as approved by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(4)  Electronic message boards are prohibited in the B-2 district. 
(5)  Blade Signs. Blade signs are encouraged and a blade sign not exceed six (6) square feet can be provided in addition to wall signage on any façade that has a sidewalk or entrance. One blade sign per exterior wall is permitted. A blade sign is an ornamental rod extending perpendicular from the building no more than six (6) linear feet with a hanging sign suspended from it at a 90 degree angle from building face and street right-of-way. Blade signs shall be placed a minimum of nine (9) feet above sidewalk level to the bottom of the blade sign. Text and graphics on either or both ends of an awning that are oriented perpendicular to the building face for pedestrian view and are no more than six (6) square feet may be provided in lieu of a blade sign. 
(h)  Parking. 
(1)  Non-residential uses. No parking is required for non-residential uses. Any parking lot with ten (10) or more spaces must meet the landscape requirements of Section 114-600(d). Parking lot landscaping requirements may be reduced if enhancements to sidewalks, streetscapes, or parking lot screening are proposed by the property owner. 
(2)  Residential uses. Residential uses in the B-2 zone of 12 units or less are not required to provide parking. New construction or renovation of an existing building that results in the construction of 13 or more residential units shall provide 1.5 spaces per unit, either: 
a.  Onsite. 
b.  Within 1250 feet of the development site through a written arrangement with the external site's property owner or lessee, a copy of which must be filed with the planning division and verified annually; this may include shared parking arrangements; 
(3)  Screening. Parking at grade must be located behind a building and screened from view by the building. If is determined by the planning division that this requirement cannot be met, parking may be located to the side of the building. In no case excepting existing surface parking for existing buildings shall surface parking be located between the front of the building and the street. Surface parking adjacent to any street, excluding alleys, must be screened with a wrought iron style fence with a minimum height of four feet or a planted buffer at least five feet wide. Support piers for the fence must be constructed of brick or other masonry materials; painted or natural concrete block is prohibited. The planted buffer shall be planted with a minimum of one canopy tree and six shrubs per 25 feet of street frontage. Reductions in screening requirements and buffer width may be requested due to site conditions, including limited space on site or screening being available through other means. Alleys are not required to be screened. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-203; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(23), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6569, § I, 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 6388, § III, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 6547, § I, 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 6475, § I, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-195. - B-3, Highway Oriented Business District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses and other substantially similar uses permitted in the B-3, Highway Oriented Business District area as follows: 
(1)  Ambulance services; animal hospitals; antennas; antique shops; artist studios; automobile sales and services; automobile service stations; bakeries, retail and wholesale; boat sales; brewpubs; building materials and services; business services and supplies; catering services; climate controlled indoor storage facilities; convenience stores; craft breweries; distilleries; eating and drinking establishments; equipment sales, service and rentals; financial institutions; fitness centers; food and beverage sales; funeral and internment services; hotels and motels; laboratories; maintenance and repair services; major and minor motor vehicle repair; manufactured and mobile home sales; off-premises and on-premises alcohol sales; plant nurseries; offices; open air uses (garden supplies, lawn furniture, plant nurseries, playground equipment); pawn shops; personal improvement services; printing and publishing; recreation vehicle sales; research and development; restaurants; retail sales; shopping centers; wineries. 
(2)  Clubs and lodges; cultural institutions; community centers; institutions for human care; day care centers; parking lots and structures; public facilities; meeting centers. 
(3)  Commercial recreation and entertainment; park and recreation facilities; public and private campgrounds; RV parks; golf courses; theaters and auditoriums. 
(4)  Government uses; religious assembly; schools, public, private, trade. 
(5)  Communication facilities. 
(6)  Adult oriented establishments: adult bookstores, cabaret, motion picture theater, sexual encounter establishments, provided however, that the property line of such businesses shall not be closer than 1,500 feet from any residential district or residential use; and public amusement or entertainment activity, public gathering place, including but not limited to: arcades, motion picture theaters, bowling alleys, marinas, golf courses, playgrounds, ice-skating or roller skating rinks or arenas, zoos, community centers, and similar amusements offered to the general public; any public recreation, school, library, day care center, park, church, mortuary, hospital or cemetery; or closer than one-half mile from any other adult oriented establishment property line. Measurement for the purpose of this regulation shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the structure used as part of the adult oriented establishment to the nearest property line or boundary of any restricted area set out herein. Documentation illustrating existing land uses, zoning, and other pertinent features located within one-half mile of the property proposed for use by an adult oriented establishment shall be submitted in conjunction with an application for approval for such use, along with site plans, surveys, and other pertinent site information as may reasonably be required by the building official to make a thorough evaluation of such proposal. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are incidental and subordinate to the principal use are as follows: 
(1)  Dwelling unit for owner, operator or employee of principal use. 
(2)  Industry, manufacturing and offices, but only as accessory and incidental to principal use. 
(3)  Telecommunication facilities. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with approval of board of zoning appeals and are as follows: 
(1)  Automobile storage; automobile impoundment yards. 
(2)  Lumberyards. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the B-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, except as provided under accessory uses; industry, manufacturing as principal uses; junkyard; auto salvage. 
(2)  Mini-storage warehouses. 
(e)  Locational standards. Not applicable. 
(f)  Design standards; dimensional requirements. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 50 feet. 
c.  Front yard, 20 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, not applicable. 
e.  Rear yard, 30 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum requirements. 
a.  Lot coverage, 40 percent. 
b.  Building height, not applicable. 
(g)  Parking. Parking and loading provisions shall be as required by article VI of this chapter. Parking areas should interconnect with adjacent commercial property. 
(h)  HVAC Landscaping. All HVAC units located at ground level shall be landscaped by a vegetative buffer containing the entire unit or units. 
(i)  Parking lot landscaping. All parking areas must provide interior landscaping as follows: In addition to all other landscaping requirements, all parking areas shall contain a minimum of one tree per five parking spaces to be located in the interior parking lot area. 
(j)  Property landscaping. The sum of all landscaping contained within any one zoning development plan shall be a minimum of ten percent of the entire land area. 
(k)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(l)  Development plan and building permit. No building permit for a B-3 district shall be issued by the zoning administrator until a final zoning development plan has been approved by the city planning department. The site plan shall contain (at a minimum) all building footprints (drawn to scale); all proposed landscaping; all proposed driveways, parking spaces, and their dimensions; all proposed HVAC unit locations; location information; property owners name and address; all adjacent public streets; all proposed sign information; and all property lines that contain the tract of land being developed. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-204; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(24), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 4498, § 2, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 4629, § I, 2-2-1999; Ord. No. 4629, § 1, 2-2-1999; Ord. No. 5050, §§ I, II, 10-1-2002; Ord. No. 5097, § I, 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5613, § II, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 6388, § IV, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-196. - B-4P, Planned Business District. 
    The B-4P, Planned Business District is regulated in division 3 of this article. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-205; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(25), 3-21-1995) 
Sec. 114-197. - M-1, Light Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-1, Light Manufacturing District is intended for industrial, manufacturing and other uses generally having a lower intensity of smoke, noise, odor, heat, vibrations, light, waste generation and similar characteristics than for M-2 districts. 
(b)  Principal uses. All principal uses shall meet all local, state and federal requirements for control of air, water and noise pollution. Every use shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building, except for outdoor storage which shall be enclosed by a wall or fence at least six feet high. Principal uses permitted in the M-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging or similar treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cellulose, cloth, cork, feather, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious and semiprecious metals, stones, rubber, sheet metal excluding large stampings, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood excluding sawmills and planing mills, and yarn. 
(2)  Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging or similar treatment of such products as: bakery goods, billboards, candy, ceramics, cosmetics, drafting instruments, electrical parts, appliances, electronic instruments, food products, meat, meat packaging, ice cream, medical and dental instruments, musical instruments, pharmaceuticals, pottery, china or figurines, radios, record players, rubber and metal stamps, rubber products, scientific instruments and equipment, shoes, television receivers, toiletries, soaps and detergents, toys and watches and clocks. 
(3)  Other industrial and manufacturing such as auto parts rebuilding, battery manufacturing; nondairy and nonfood product bottling plants; box and crate assembly; building materials sales; rental and storage yards; bag, carpet and rug cleaning and dyeing; cabinet shops; canneries; caterers; cooperages; crematories; dextrine and starch manufacturing; enameling, lacquering and japanning; felt manufacturing; electric foundry; furniture manufacturing; inflammable underground liquid storage; iron works (ornamental); laboratories (experimental, film or testing); lumber sales and lumberyard; nut and bolt manufacturing and wire drawing; parcel delivery stations; phonograph record manufacturing; public utility service yard; radium extraction; railway or truck terminal; stone monument works; tool manufacturing; vehicle storage yard; welding, other metal working shops, wholesaling, warehousing; breweries, craft breweries, wineries, distilleries. 
(4)  Communication facilities. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the M-1 district as follows: on-site dwelling unit for caretaker; office, recreation and food service for employees; and incidental retailing of products manufactured on site. 
(d)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the M-1 district as follows: 
(1)  Public utilities and public service uses and structures. 
(2)  Indoor recreational facilities such as tennis courts, racquet ball courts, gymnasiums, offices, etc. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the M-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, business as principal uses. 
(2)  All uses in the M-2 district not included in the M-1 district. 
(3)  Auto wrecking yard and junkyard. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the M-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, not applicable. 
b.  Lot frontage, not applicable. 
c.  Front yard, 20 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, not applicable. 
e.  Rear yard, not applicable. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 85 percent. 
b.  Building height, not applicable. 
(g)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(h)  Parking. See article VI of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-206; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(26), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6388, § V, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-198. - M-1R, Light Manufacturing Restricted District. 
(a)  Intent. The M-1R, Light Manufacturing Restricted District is the same as the M-1 district, except that provisions are greater for light and air and for physical appearance. 
(b)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the M-1R district are the same as for the M-1 district. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the M-1R district the same as for the M-1 district. 
(d)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the M-1R district the same as for the M-1 district. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the M-1R district are the same as for the M-1 district. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the M-1R district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, not applicable. 
b.  Lot frontage, not applicable. 
c.  Front yard, 50 feet. 
d.  Each side yard, 15 feet. 
e.  Rear yard, 25 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 80 percent. 
b.  Building height, not applicable. 
Note. A minimum of 20 feet of the required front yard shall be landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs. Landscaping must be accomplished prior to any occupancy and use of the property. 
(g)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(h)  Parking. See article VI of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-207; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(27), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 114-199. - M-2, General Manufacturing District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the M-2, General Manufacturing District are as follows: 
(1)  The same as for the M-1 district, except that all provisions in this section shall apply for such uses in this zone. 
(2)  All buildings, storage, loading (but not parking) shall be at least 300 feet from residential districts, and 100 feet from any other district, except the M-1 district. 
(3)  Abrasive manufacturing; acid manufacturing; aerosol packaging; agricultural uses, including hatcheries; asbestos processing; automobile assembling, rebuilding and reconditioning; bleaching plants; boiler shops, structural steel fabrication or other noise-producing machine operated tools; bolt or screw thread rolling or cutting; bottle making; brewing and distillery; brick, tile or terracotta and other clay products manufacturing; briquette manufacture; bronze casting; candle or sperm oil manufacturing; canvas manufacturing; carpet or rug manufacturing; coke manufacturing; concrete mixing, concrete products; die casting and making; disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacturing; dye or dyestuff manufacturing; electric power generation; excelsior and fiber manufacturing; fencing, woven wire manufacturing; fertilizer manufacturing; forge; foundry; glass fiber manufacturing; glucose manufacturing; grain drying and poultry feed manufacturing; hair manufacturing; iron storage, sorting, collecting or bailing; leaf mold and similar products; linoleum oil cloth or oiled goods manufacturing; match manufacturing; nitrating processes; oil, paint, shellac, enamel manufacturing of the grinding of colors by machine; paper or pulp manufacturing, paper scrap or waste storage grading; perfume manufacturing; plaster manufacturing and products; potash manufacturing or refining; pyrroline plastic manufacturing; roofing material factory, rubber manufacturing, treating or reclaiming plant; sand blasting; sewage treatment plant; shoe blacking or polish; soda ash, caustic soda or washing compound containing chlorine, bleaching powder manufacturing or refining; steam power plant; storage, drying, cleaning of rags, glass, cloth, paper or clipping; sugar refining or starch manufacturing; tar or asphalt roofing; textile manufacturing; tire manufacturing; ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder; animal black, lampblack or bone black; asphalt plant; automobile impound yard; automobile wrecking; scrap iron storage; blast furnaces; building materials salvage; celluloid and pyroxyline manufacturing; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris; coal storage; creosote manufacturing; cupola or metal smelting furnace and ore or metal reduction; distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, bones; explosives remanufacturing or storage except for small arms ammunition; fertilizer manufacturing using organic materials compost or storage; fish curing, smoking, or packing; gas (acetylene, illuminating or heating) manufacturing; glue manufacturing; size or gelatin manufacturing; junkyard; livestock feed yards; petroleum or inflammable liquids; rock or stone crushing; stockyards, slaughtering; smelting of metals; steel mills; storage, curing or tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins; landfills, incinerators. 
(4)  Communication facilities. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the M-2 district the same as for the M-1 district. 
(c)  Uses permitted upon review. Uses permitted upon review are a methadone treatment clinic or facility, substance abuse treatment facility with the approval of the planning commission, subject to the following: 
(1)  The consideration for approval by the planning commission of a methadone treatment clinic or facility and substance abuse treatment facility shall be contingent upon the receipt of the appropriate license and certificate of need by the state. 
(2)  Maps showing existing land use and zoning within one-quarter-mile of the proposed site should be submitted with an application for use of review approval along with the license of the applicant, certificate of need, site plan, survey or other information deemed reasonable by the planning commission for use in making a thorough evaluation of the proposal. 
(3)  The clinic or facility shall be located on and have access to a principal arterial street. 
(4)  Measurement shall be made in a straight line on the city zoning map from the nearest property line of the lot on which the methadone treatment clinic or facility and substance abuse treatment facility is situated to the nearest property line of the following uses: 
a.  The clinic or facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a school, day care facility, park, church, synagogue, mosque, mortuary or hospital. 
b.  The clinic or facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any establishment that sells alcoholic beverages for either on- or off-premises consumption. 
c.  The clinic or facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any area devoted to public recreation activity. 
d.  The clinic or facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any amusement catering to family activity. 
e.  The site shall not be within less than 1,000 feet of any residential dwelling at the time of approval. 
f.  The site shall not be less than one-half mile from any other methadone treatment clinic or facility and substance abuse treatment facility. 
(d)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the M-2 district as follows: 
(1)  Any use, except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals. 
(2)  The same as for subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited in the M-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, business and office uses as principal uses. 
(2)  Open garbage dumps. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the M-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Lot area, not applicable. 
b.  Lot frontage, not applicable. 
c.  Front yard, ten feet. 
d.  Each side yard, ten feet. 
e.  Rear yard, 25 feet. 
f.  Usable open space, not applicable. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Lot coverage, 90 percent. 
b.  Building height, not applicable. 
(g)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(h)  Parking. See article VI of this chapter for parking and loading provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-208; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(28), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6001, § II, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 114-200. - MX, Mixed-Use District. 
    The MX, Mixed-Use District is regulated in division 8 of this article. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IV, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-209; Ord. No. 4018, § IV(30), 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 114-201. - Golf Course Community District (GC). 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses for the GC district area are as follows: 
(1)  One single-family detached dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Public uses, including but not limited to playgrounds, parks, recreational buildings, fire and police stations, and reservoirs. 
(3)  Golf course uses, including driving ranges, practice putting greens, clubhouses with parking, maintenance buildings, and restroom outbuildings. 
(4)  Recreational uses, including swimming pools, tennis courts, and basketball courts. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses which are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the GC district as follows: 
(1)  Golf course accessory uses. 
a.  One public or private banquet facility with parking. 
b.  One public or private restaurant with no drive-thru. 
c.  Retail sales utilized by golf course and club members, but not including the sale of motorized golf carts or vehicles. 
d.  On-premises alcohol sales. 
e.  One public or private club with kitchen facilities. 
(2)  Residential accessory uses. 
a.  Accessory to single-family residences: private garages, storage sheds, parking and private recreation. 
b.  Accessory to single-family residences: living quarters without cooking facilities, but only for guests or domestic employees. 
c.  Accessory to single-family residences: home occupations. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Uses permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals are allowed as follows: 
(1)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(2)  On-site subdivision sales offices while sales are underway. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the GC District are as follows: 
(1)  Residential, other than single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Commercial uses other than use incidental to the golf course or club members. 
(3)  Manufacturing/industrial uses. 
(4)  Any use not listed in this section as a principal use, accessory use, or special exception use. 
(e)  Design standards. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. 
a.  Minimum lot area, 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot frontage, 60 feet; and all nonresidential uses must have access directly from an arterial or collector street as designated by the major street and road plan. 
c.  Front yard. Minimum front yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
d.  Side yard. Minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet for one or two stories; 15 feet for three stories; plus 50 percent of the side yard setback listed above for a side yard abutting a public street. 
e.  Rear yard, minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. 
(2)  Maximum permitted allowances. 
a.  Lot coverage, 30 percent including accessory buildings. 
b.  Building height, three stories up, 35 feet maximum height. 
(3)  Master plan. 
a.  Must be submitted and approved by the city regional planning commission. 
b.  Must be stamped and signed by the director of planning and recorded with the Sullivan County register of deeds prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
c.  Any development, uses, location of buildings or facilities must adhere to the approved master plan. 
(f)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading requirements for the GC district shall be regulated by the following provisions: 
(1)  For all residential units, a driveway for at least two spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided and only one such space shall be required to have direct access to a street. 
(2)  For the number of parking spaces required for all other uses, see article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  Parking areas for nonresidential uses in excess of 5,000 square feet must contain interior landscaping. This requirement is not satisfied by any other required setback planting, buffering or screening areas. 
a.  All parking rows shall end in a landscape island containing one small maturing tree. All landscape islands shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet and shall be protected around the perimeter of the island. 
b.  A landscaped island is required every 12 parking spaces and it shall contain one small maturing tree. 
c.  A credit of two planted trees for each existing tree saved will be given when the existing tree saved exceeds the required minimum size tree at planting. (See landscaping, article VII of this chapter) 
d.  All loading docks and bays shall be screened from public streets. 
(g)  Lighting. All lighting for nonresidential areas shall be sufficient for the safe use of the facilities and shall not create a traffic hazard. The use of cutoff boxes shall be required for lighting adjacent to residential areas to reduce light spillage. 
(h)  Signs. Signs as allowed in section 114-528 are permitted. Signs, other than residential signs or signs as allowed in section 114-528, within the district shall be reviewed by the planning commission as part of the site plan approval process. Additionally, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Freestanding signs are permitted for nonresidential areas as follows: 
a.  Freestanding signs are only permitted at the main ingress/egress to the lot and only one sign shall be permitted. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per side. 
c.  The sign shall be a monument style sign mounted on a solid base and shall not exceed five feet in height. 
d.  No freestanding sign shall be closer than 15 feet to any public street or permanent easement. 
e.  Signs shall only be illuminated externally. 
(2)  Signs for residential areas are permitted as follows: 
a.  Home occupations conducted in a dwelling are permitted one freestanding sign, provided: 
1.  The area of one side of the sign does not exceed three square feet; and 
2.  The sign shall not be illuminated by any means. 
b.  Single-family residences are permitted one temporary sign, provided: 
1.  The area of the sign does not exceed three square feet; 
2.  The sign shall not be illuminated by any means; and 
3.  The sign shall be placed no more than three consecutive days at a time. 
c.  Single-family residential subdivisions are permitted one permanent identification sign at each major street access, provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 32 square feet per side with a maximum number of two sides; 
2.  The height of the sign shall not exceed five feet; 
3.  The sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line, except that a sign may be permitted in a grassed median with the approval of the public works director, provided the sign does not interfere with traffic; and 
4.  The sign shall only be illuminated externally. 
(i)  Landscaping, screening and buffering. Landscaping, screening and buffering shall be allowed as set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(j)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a penalty of $50.00 for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 6181, §§ II, III, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 114-202. - UAE, Urban Agricultural Estate District. 
(a)  Intent. 
(1)  To develop opportunities for a range of urban agricultural uses at a level and intensity that is compatible with existing and future single family residences in this zone. 
(2)  To provide a zoning designation exclusively for urban agricultural activities by size and intensity and as a means to this end, requiring substantial lot areas and yards and open spaces. 
(3)  Encourage and support personal urban agricultural opportunities for individuals and families. 
(b)  Principal Uses. In an UAE district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residential; 
(2)  Agricultural crops; 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses. Uses permitted as accessory to the principal use include the following: 
a.  Private stables, sheds and barns; provided such buildings or structures shall not be located any closer than 35 feet to any boundary property line or closer than 45 feet to any building containing a dwelling unit on the lot and further provided there shall be no open-air storage of hay, straw, shavings or similar organic materials closer than 35 feet to any boundary property line or closer than 45 feet to any dwelling unit, or accessory living quarters on the same premises, excepting only leaves and grass clippings to be picked up at the curb as trash by city forces. 
b.  Accessory living quarters (commonly referred to as a "Caretaker in residence quarters") shall not be located any closer than 35 feet to any boundary property line or closer than 25 feet to any building containing a dwelling unit on the same lot and further provided there shall be no open-air storage of hay, straw, shavings or similar organic materials closer than 35 feet to any boundary property line or closer than 45 feet to any dwelling unit, excepting only leaves and grass clippings to be picked up at the curb as trash by city forces. The accessory living quarters shall not exceed the square footage of the primary dwelling unit. 
c.  Greenhouses for the propagation and culture of plant materials with no sales from the premises provided a greenhouse shall not be located any closer than 10 feet to any property boundary line nor any closer than 10 feet to any dwelling unit. 
d.  Horses (Equine species) and cattle (Bovine species) for the use of the residents only; provided not more than one horse or cow for each one-half acre of the total legally fenced property shall be permitted. 
e.  Pasture and grazing, but not including feed lots; provided, where such pasture or grazing area abuts upon any property line which is a common property line with adjacent residential property, there shall be erected and maintained a legal fence not less than five feet in height nor more than six feet. 
f.  Chickens, rabbits, sheep and goats for the use of the residents of the premises only; provided; 
i.  No more than 25 of any one combination of such fowl or animals may be kept on the premises; 
ii.  Any chickens kept on the premises shall be confined within an aviary or the like, or have their wings regularly clipped and placed in an enclosed area with no overhead cover; 
iii.  One rooster is allowed for egg fertilization; 
iv.  Goats shall be contained in a fenced area sufficient to prevent escape and provided a shelter within this area; 
v.  Any buildings, pens, coops, hutches or structures used to house or contain such fowl or animals shall not be located closer than 35 feet to any boundary line of the premises or closer than 45 feet to any building containing a dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises; and 
vi.  No animals allowed except animals allowed without a permit pursuant to T.C.A. § 70-4-403(3), however, no animal of the scientific classification of Suidae family, including domesticated pigs, shall be allowed 
g.  Beekeeping (honey bees) provided: 
i.  A maximum of eight honey bee hives per acre or portion thereof is permitted and the hives shall not be located within 25 feet of any lot line, however this distance may be reduced to ten feet if physical measures are taken to require bees to gain elevation before crossing the property line; and 
ii.  The requirements of the Tennessee Apiary Act of 1995 Per T.C.A. § 44-15-101 et. seq. shall apply. 
()  Hazardous substances. 
(1)  No use permitted in this section, with the exception of public utility and service facilities, shall store any hazardous substance, except that for the purposes of this chapter the following substances shall be exempt: 
a.  Heating oil or propane stored in underground tanks sufficiently contained so as to preclude soil and ground water contamination; 
b.  Gasoline and/or diesel stored above ground in an approved underwriters laboratory container with a sufficient containment area to hold the contents of the container; and 
c.  Pre-packaged retail quantities of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides and auto and home care products for personal use only. 
(e)  Lot area. 
(1)  The minimum required lot area shall be 2 acres. Accessory living quarters are only allowed on lots of 4 or more acres. 
(e)  Lot width. 
(1)  Every lot shall have a minimum lot width on a public right-of-way of not less than 50 feet. 
(f)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Front yard - 40 feet. 
(2)  Rear yard - 50 feet. 
(3)  Side yard - 20 feet unless on a lot with an abutting side street where an additional 10 feet shall be required. 
(4)  The distance between the main dwelling unit and accessory living quarters shall be not less than 25 feet. All measurements will be between the closest covered area of each residence inclusive of all covered porches, decks and patios. 
(g)  Maximum permitted height and lot coverage. 
(1)  Lot coverage maximum 30 percent. 
(2)  Residential and accessory living quarters building height maximum 35 feet or three stories, not including the basement. 
(3)  Barns, stables and silos, maximum 50 feet in height. 
(4)  Greenhouses, sheds, aviaries, coops, pens, hutches or similar structures, maximum 16 feet in height. 
(h)  Signs. 
(1)  Signs are permitted the same as in the A-1 district. 
(i)  Parking. 
(1)  Parking is permitted the same as in the A-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 6405, § II, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 114-203. - B-2E, Central Business Edge District. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the B-2E, Central Business Edge District are as follows: 
(1)  Establishments retailing goods and merchandise such as food, groceries, clothing, hardware, toiletries, furniture and furnishings, gasoline, meals, vehicles, boats, trailers, jewelry, appliances and similar items. 
(2)  Financial offices. 
(3)  Residential, except single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Establishments for the sale or provision of personal appearance or care, finance, clothing and goods repair, offices (including legal, insurance, and real estate offices), printing, parking, entertainment, recreation, hotels, motels, educational institutions, food and drink, brewpubs, craft breweries, distilleries, wineries, museums. 
(5)  On-premises and off-premises alcoholic beverage sales. 
(6)  Climate-controlled indoor storage, provided that said facilities are only permitted to occupy existing buildings. 
(7)  Municipal and other government uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Uses that are accessory, incidental and subordinate to principal uses are permitted in the B-2E district as follows: wholesaling, warehousing and light industry when accessory and incidental to a retailing or service activity. Storage other than climate-controlled indoor storage as described in (a)(6) is permitted when accessory and incidental to a residential use. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are permitted only with the approval of the board of zoning appeals and are allowed in the B-2E district as follows: communication facilities and facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or greater per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site. 
(d)  Prohibited uses . Uses prohibited in the B-2E district are as follows: 
(1)  Land intensive uses, as opposed to people intensive uses, such as industry and manufacturing. 
(2)  Truck terminals and freight yards. 
(3)  Outdoor and land intensive recreation such as drive-in theaters, car dealerships, racetracks, scrap yards or junkyards, lumberyards, animal hospitals and boarding facilities, stockyards and flour mills. 
(4)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the B-2E district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum requirements. No requirements are applicable to this district. 
(2)  Maximum permitted. 
a.  Setbacks. Structures housing principal uses shall have a maximum setback from the front property line of 20 feet, excepting uses as described in (a)(7). Structures housing uses as described in (a)(1) and (a)(3) through (a)(6) as a principal use at ground level shall be built to the property line for at least 75 percent of the building frontage. 
b.  Building Height. Building height shall not exceed 74 feet as measured from grade to the top of the roof structure, excluding parapet walls or cornices. 
(f)  Design Requirements. 
(1)  Fenestration. The percentage of openings for glass fenestration on the first floor facing public streets, excluding alleys, for retail and office uses is required to be a minimum of 15 percent of the total façade area from finish floor line to finish floor line. Institutional uses, theatres and performance venues may reduce this requirement upon demonstrating that a hardship exists due to programming or structur1al uses that would preclude meeting the requirement. 
(2)  Cladding. Building materials for areas visible from streets, excluding alleys, shall consist of one or more of the following: brick, architectural block, architectural metal, plate glass, and precast concrete panels. Accent materials may include stucco or EIFS, stone, and wood. Pre-engineered metal, painted or natural concrete block, composite building materials, and vinyl siding are prohibited. 
(3)  Concealed Equipment. The following shall be located or screened so as not to visible from any street, excluding alleys: air conditioning compressors, window and wall air conditioners, cooling towers, dumpsters, electrical and utility meters, irrigation and pool pumps, permanent barbeques, satellite antennae, utility appurtenances, mechanical rooftop equipment or ventilation apparatus. 
(4)  Drive-throughs. Facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or greater per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site, are permitted only as special exceptions by the board of zoning appeals. Drive-throughs shall not be accessed from the following streets: Center Street, Main Street, Market Street, Broad Street, Sullivan Street, and Clinchfield Street. Facilities with drive-throughs with a weekday peak hour volume of 30 vehicles or less per 1000 square feet (per the 8 th edition ITE Traffic Generation Manual), as measured for the entire site, should not take their access via Center Street, Main Street, Market Street, Broad Street, Sullivan Street, and Clinchfield Street if possible. 
(5)  Sidewalks and Streetscapes. If a master plan containing sidewalk and/or streetscape recommendations has been adopted by the board of mayor and aldermen for an area, sidewalk or streetscape improvements proposed as part of new development or redevelopment shall comply with the recommendations. 
(g)  Signs. 
(1)  Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are permitted only for existing buildings or new construction with a setback from the front property line of ten feet or greater. Freestanding signs must be monument signs, not to exceed eight feet in height, including the sign base. Maximum sign square footage shall not exceed 50 square feet, with no more than 25 square feet per side. Sign bases should be constructed of brick, stone, or other durable materials. 
(2)  Wall Signs. Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted wall signs equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 150 square feet total signage. Businesses having less than 5,000 square feet area may utilize up to 50 square feet of signage. 
(3)  Murals and banners shall not be permitted in the B-2E district, except as approved by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(4)  Electronic message boards are prohibited in the B-2E district. 
(5)  Blade Signs. Blade signs are encouraged and a blade sign not exceed six square feet can be provided in addition to wall signage on any façade that has a sidewalk or entrance. One blade sign per exterior wall is permitted. A blade sign is an ornamental rod extending perpendicular from the building no more than six linear feet with a hanging sign suspended from it at a 90 degree angle from building face and street right-of-way. Blade signs shall be placed a minimum of nine feet above sidewalk level to the bottom of the blade sign. Text and graphics on either or both ends of an awning that are oriented perpendicular to the building face for pedestrian view and are no more than six square feet may be provided in lieu of a blade sign. 
(h)  Parking. 
(1)  Non-residential uses. No parking is required for non-residential uses. Any parking lot with ten or more spaces must meet the landscape requirements of section 114-600(d). Parking lot landscaping requirements may be reduced if enhancements to public space, sidewalks, streetscapes, or parking lot screening are proposed by the property owner. 
(2)  Residential uses. Residential uses in the B-2E zone of 12 units or less are not required to provide parking. New construction or renovation of an existing building that results in the construction of 13 or more residential units shall provide 1.5 spaces per unit, either: 
a.  Onsite. 
b.  Within 1250 feet of the development site through a written arrangement with the external site's property owner or lessee, a copy of which must be filed with the planning division and verified annually; this may include shared parking arrangements. 
(3)  Screening. Surface parking adjacent to any street, excluding alleys, must be screened with a wrought iron style fence with a minimum height of four feet or a planted buffer at least five feet wide. Support piers for the fence must be constructed of brick or other masonry materials; painted or natural concrete block is prohibited. The planted buffer shall be planted with a minimum of one canopy tree and six shrubs per 25 feet of street frontage. Reductions in screening requirements and buffer width may be requested due to site conditions, including limited space on site or screening being available through other means, or if enhancements to public space, sidewalks, or streetscapes are proposed by the property owners. Alleys are not required to be screened. 
(Ord. No. 6545, § I, 2-16-2016) 
Secs. 114-204-114-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-4P) 

Sec. 114-224. - Intent. 
    The intent of the B-4P, Planned Business District is to establish and preserve areas for planned business developments that are coordinated with adjacent activities. The purpose is to permit a more efficient and aesthetically pleasing environment than generally is found in other business zones. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-246; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-225. - Permitted uses. 
    All uses listed below and other substantially similar uses shall be deemed as permitted: ambulance services; animal hospitals; antique shops; artist studios; automobile sales and services; automobile service stations; bakeries, retail and wholesale; boat sales; breweries, wineries, craft breweries and distilleries; building materials and services; business services and supplies; private clubs and lodges; commercial recreation and entertainment; community centers; convenience stores; cultural institutions; day care centers; eating and drinking establishments; equipment sales, service and rental; financial institutions; fitness centers; food and beverage sales; funeral and interment services; golf courses; government uses; hotels and motels; laboratories; malls; manufactured and mobile home sales; meeting centers; offices; off- and on-premises alcohol sales; park and recreation facilities; pawn shops; personal improvement services; printing and publishing; public facilities; recreation vehicle sales; religious assembly; research and development; restaurants; retail sales; schools (public, private, trade); shopping centers; theaters and auditoriums; utilities; and welcome centers. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-247; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998; Ord. No, 6388, § VI, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-226. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses that are incidental and subordinate to the principal use: antennas; lumberyard and material yard (provided they are screened); catering services and banquet facilities; telecommunication facilities. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-248; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-227. - Special exceptions. 
    Permitted only with approval of board of zoning appeals: Helistops; institution for human care; open-air businesses such as plant sales, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and garden supplies; minor automobile repair centers; and parking lots and structures. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-249; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-228. - Prohibited uses. 
    Prohibited uses in the B-4P district are manufacturing, industry, and related uses; wholesale; warehousing; heavy equipment storage yards; motor freight terminal; junkyards; auto salvage; wrecking yards; recycling facilities; residential. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-250; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-229. - Location standards. 
    Uses within a B-4P district shall have frontage on and principal access to a collector or higher class of street as designated in the major street and road plan. Individual highway access should be prohibited and replaced by service roads or other means to greatly reduce street intersections and traffic hazards. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-251; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-230. - Design standards. 
(a)  Multiple principal uses. Multiple structures and accessory uses for each lot are permitted. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. Within a B-4P, Planned Business District shall be 25,000 square feet and shall have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on an arterial, or collector, street as designated by the planning commission. 
(c)  Periphery yard. The B-4P district shall have a 30-foot landscaped development-free periphery yard. The periphery yard shall be measured from the property lines around the district. Structures including parking areas shall not be permitted within the periphery yard. However, transit stops, transit shelters, and other public uses may be located in the periphery yard. 
(d)  Building setback. The following minimum setbacks shall be observed: 
(1)  Front yard. Minimum front yard setback from a public street or right-of-way for vehicular traffic shall be not less than 30 feet. A 2:1 height-to-yard ratio shall be utilized for structures in excess of 60 feet height. Transit stops, transit shelters and other public uses may be located in the front yard setback. 
(2)  Side yard. Minimum side yard setback from a public street or right-of-way for vehicular traffic shall be 15 feet. Zero lot lines in lieu of side yard setback may be permitted on one side only when complementary joint uses are approved by the planning commission. The opposite side yard should have a minimum setback of 30 feet. A 2:1 height-to-yard ratio shall be utilized for structures in excess of 60 feet height. 
(3)  Rear yard. Minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet. A 2:1 height to yard ratio shall be utilized for structures in excess of 60 feet height. 
(e)  Building height. There shall be no maximum building height. 
(f)  Building ground coverage. The building ground coverage for each use and accessory use in the B-4P district shall not exceed 30 percent. This may be the total area of the lot or the average area of several lots when an integrated complex is developed. It shall include all buildings and parking structures. 
(g)  Parking. Parking and loading provisions shall be as required by article VI of this chapter and shall also be regulated by the provisions set forth in this subsection. The amount of off-street parking required may be reduced by the zoning administrator in shared parking facilities, provided that dissimilar peak hours of operations are used. Such parking facilities shall be designed and developed with improved pedestrian ways, having no building more than 400 feet from the most remote shared facility. The reductions are as follows: 
(1)  Two uses, a five percent reduction. 
(2)  Three uses, a ten percent reduction. 
(3)  Four or more uses, a 15 percent reduction. 
(4)  Reduction of parking requirements will be compensated by increased landscaping to a similar amount. 
(h)  Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways shall be required within parking lots of one-half acre in size or greater. These parking lots shall be divided by landscaping and/or walkways at least ten feet in width. The design of pedestrian ways shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Developments that contain more than one principal building or accessory building shall provide pedestrian ways between the principal entrances of the buildings, and to public street sidewalks. Developments that contain one building shall provide pedestrian access from the building to buildings on adjacent lots, or to the public street sidewalks. 
(2)  Where necessary for traffic circulation, pedestrian ways may be broken by crosswalks as long as the crossings are marked or constructed with a contrasting pavement material to indicate a pedestrian area. 
(3)  Where practical, pedestrian ways shall be raised above the grade of streets, drives, parking lots, and other paved areas. Where pedestrian ways cannot be raised, they shall be constructed of material that is different than the adjacent pavement. 
(i)  Parking lot landscaping. Parking areas in excess of 5,000 square feet must provide interior landscaping. This does not include the perimeter/setback planting or screening. 
(1)  A ten-foot landscaped strip shall be required for every four aisles of parking plus a landscaped island for every ten spaces. 
(2)  Landscaped islands shall be at least 324 square feet. These areas shall be protected by a six-inch concrete curb and shall run the length of the abutting space. 
(3)  Each planting area shall contain at least one tree and the facility as a whole shall contain at least one tree for every five parking spaces. 
(4)  Small maturing trees may be used to satisfy parking lot landscaping requirements. Such trees shall meet the planting area specification of the landscape and buffer provisions. 
(5)  Existing trees shall be preserved whenever possible and shall be given a credit of 2:1 (two planted trees for each existing tree saved) whenever the existing tree exceeds the minimum size tree at planting. 
(6)  Shrubbery may be used to satisfy landscaping requirements at a 4:1 ratio (four shrubs for one required tree). 
(j)  Outdoor display areas. Include outdoor display of automobiles, boats, manufactured homes, mobile homes, RVs, motorcycles, ATVs, and other similar products. All outdoor product display areas shall be considered parking areas but shall not be considered when calculating parking space requirements. Outdoor product display areas shall be divided into subareas by a ten-foot landscape strip for each 6,000 square feet of paved area, plus a landscape island for each 900 square feet of paved area. 
(k)  Loading docks. Loading docks, bays, and maneuvering areas shall be screened from abutting public streets. 
(l)  Lighting. All lighting shall be sufficient for safe use of the facilities and shall not create a traffic hazard glare for any and all surrounding areas. 
(m)  Signs. See article IV of this chapter for sign provisions. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. V, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-252; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 114-231. - Development plan and building permit. 
    No building permit for a B-4P district use shall be issued by the zoning administrator in a planned business district until a preliminary zoning development plan for the entire district has been submitted and approved by the planning commission and a final zoning development plan has been submitted and approved by the planning manager and certified to the zoning administrator. Such plans approved by the planning manager shall conform to the requirements of this article, the article on zoning development plan provisions, and any other applicable provisions of this chapter. Should the owner or agent for the development desire or the planning manager desire, the planning commission may be asked to consider approval of the final zoning development plan. For clarification purposes, a district is defined in section 114-6. The zoning map atlas will be used in determining the boundaries for the B-4P planned business district. 
(Code 1998, § 114-253; Ord. No. 4498, § 3, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 6009, § I, 10-5-2010) 
Secs. 114-232-114-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY (H-2O)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Historic zoning, T.C.A. § 13-7-401 et seq. 

Sec. 114-238. - Intent. 
    Within the H-2O, Historic District Overlay, as shown on the zoning map, it is the intent to preserve and protect historic sites and structures. The requirements of the district are designed to protect and preserve historical and architectural values, provide protection from uses that would lessen the significance of the surrounding uses, create an aesthetic atmosphere, strengthen the economy and promote education and knowledge of heritage of the present and future citizens of the community. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-281) 
Sec. 114-239. - Underlying district requirements apply. 
    The H-2O, Historic District Overlay is superimposed as an overlay on any other zoning district, and the use, dimensional and other requirements of such other district shall apply. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-282) 
Sec. 114-240. - Historic zoning commission. 
(a)  Appointment, membership, compensation. The board of mayor and aldermen shall create a seven-member historic zoning commission which shall consist of: 
(1)  A representative of a local patriotic or historic organization; 
(2)  An architect, if available; a member of the planning commission at the time of the appointment; and 
(3)  The remaining members shall be appointed from the community in general. 
Members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the board of mayor and aldermen. Appointment shall be arranged so that the term of one member shall expire each year, and his successor shall be appointed in like manner for a term of five years. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Organization and meetings. The commission shall elect a chairperson and any other officers desired. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or by a majority of the members. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, and all meetings and records shall be open to the public. A quorum shall consist of four members, and official actions may be carried by a majority vote in the presence of a quorum. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The historic zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Make recommendations to the planning commission, the board of mayor and aldermen or others in regard to all matters relating to the: 
a.  Preservation and enhancement of structures, premises and areas of substantial historical or architectural significance; 
b.  Establishment of historic districts and regulations to be enforced thereunder; and 
(2)  Have any other powers and duties as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-283) 
Sec. 114-241. - Procedures for establishing district. 
    The procedure for establishing an historic district shall involve the historic zoning commission, the planning commission and the board of mayor and aldermen. Consideration for designating a site, structure or area as an historic district shall be considered first by the historic zoning commission. Any person, group or agency desiring such a designation shall submit an application to the historic zoning commission containing any relevant information as may be desired by the historic zoning commission, and the historic zoning commission shall inform the occupants and owners of the property involved of the consideration that is being given for designating the property as an historic district. After appropriate review, the historic zoning commission shall forward its report and recommendation to the planning commission. The planning commission and board of mayor and aldermen shall then follow the procedure established for designating any zoning district or for amendment to this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-284) 
Sec. 114-242. - Building permits. 
    In an historic district, any building permit issued shall be in conformance with the following: 
(1)  Permit required. No alteration, moving, demolition, addition or new construction shall take place in an historic district until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed with the building official and an approved permit obtained for the proposed work. In addition, an application shall be made in the same manner for any work, including but not limited to alterations, additions, demolition, removal or new construction which alters or contributes to the exterior appearance of existing structures, including but not limited to exterior painting or finishing of structures and their roofs, guttering, siding, trim and foundations, or their environment, including but not limited to isolated features such as chimneys, walls, trees, streams, foundations, roadbeds and general grading, and an approved building permit shall be obtained before work can begin. 
(2)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be referred directly by the building official to the historic zoning commission. In applying to the building official for a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant shall submit a dimensional scale plan indicating the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of any building already on the lot. The applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and shall provide preliminary exterior elevations indicating material, color, architectural features, signs and such other information as may be required by the building official or the historic zoning commission for determining whether this chapter is being observed. 
(3)  Historic zoning commission action. Upon receiving the application, the historic commission shall, within 30 days following the availability of sufficient data, issue to the office of the building official a letter stating its approval, with or without attached conditions, or disapproval with the grounds for disapproval stated in writing. 
a.  Commission review. In its review of material submitted, the historic zoning commission shall give consideration to: 
1.  The historic and architectural value of the present structure; 
2.  The relationship of exterior architectural features of such structure to the rest of the structures of the surrounding area; 
3.  The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; and 
4.  Any other factor, including aesthetics, which is deemed pertinent. 
b.  Disapproval. If disapproval is being considered, the historic zoning commission shall describe to the applicant, if possible, the types of changes in the application that would be necessary for the historic zoning commission to consider approval. 
c.  Limitations on historic zoning commission. The historic zoning commission shall not consider or make any requirements pertaining exclusively to the interior of a structure, shall not grant variances from the terms of this chapter and shall not make any requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments obviously incongruous to the historic aspects of the district. 
d.  Minor improvements. The historic zoning commission chairman in conjunction with the building official, or designee, shall be responsible for reviewing an application that substantially conforms to the district guidelines and is minor. Minor improvements will not alter the appearance or integrity of the structure, (for example, minor improvements include things such as roof shingles, paint color, or any cosmetic repairs) provided chairman and building official, or designee, agree the minor improvement substantially conforms to the guidelines for that historic district, the chairman is authorized to approve the minor improvement. Upon such approval a copy will be included as an item on the agenda of the next available historic zoning commission meeting to serve as additional notice of the action taken. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-285; Ord. No. 6544, § I, 2-16-2016) 
Sec. 114-243. - Appeal. 
    Anyone who may be aggrieved by any final order or judgment of the historic zoning commission under this division may have the order or judgment reviewed by the courts by the procedure of statutory certiorari as provided for in state law. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VI, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-286) 
Secs. 114-244-114-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 114-251. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate structure to the principal structure on the same lot and, for the purpose of this division, shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of vehicles and storage. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
(4)  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in damage to other structures. 
(5)  Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of floodwaters. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the local enforcement officer's interpretation of any provision of this division or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area. 
    Area of special flood-related erosion hazard means the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as zone E on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone E may be further refined. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This term is also referred to as the 100-year flood or the one-percent annual chance flood. 
    Basement means any portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Emergency flood insurance program or emergency program means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not per se covered under the program. 
    Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this division which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this division. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing structures. See Existing construction. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by FEMA, evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    Flood-related erosion area management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on the city inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By the approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this division. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this division, the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) , as corrected in 1988, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    100-year flood. See Base flood. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency means the state department of economic and community development's local planning assistance office, as designated by the governor of the state at the request of FEMA to assist in the implementation of the NFIP for the state. 
    Structure, for purposes of this division, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the initial improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial improvement, or (2) in the case of substantial damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project or; (2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this division. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this division is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(Code 1998, § 114-320; Ord. No. 5414, § II, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. II), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-252. - Statutory authorization. 
    T.C.A. §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210 delegates the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 1998, § 114-316; Ord. No. 5414, § I(A), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. I, § A), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-253. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The city wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations found in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), ch. 1, § 60.3. 
(b)  Areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Code 1998, § 114-317; Ord. No. 5414, § I(B), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. I, § B), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-254. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This division is designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1998, § 114-318; Ord. No. 5414, § I(C), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. I, § C), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-255. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To protect human life, health, safety and property; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodprone areas; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas to minimize blight in flood areas; 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area; 
(8)  To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP. 
(Code 1998, § 114-319; Ord. No. 5414, § I(D), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. I, § D), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-256. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    In case of conflict between this division or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.26; Ord. No. 5414, § VII(A), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. VII, § A), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-257. - Application. 
    This division shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 114-326; Ord. No. 5414, § III(A), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § A), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-258. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard within the city are identified by FEMA, in its flood insurance study (FIS) and flood insurance rate map (FIRM), Community Panel Number(s) 47073C0110D, 47073C0120D, 47073C0140D dated July 3, 2006, and 47163C0020D, 47163C0030D, 47163C0035D, 47163C0040D, 47163C0045D, 47163C0055D, 47163C0060D, 47163C0065D, 47163C0070D, 47163C0210D, 47163C0230D, 47163C0235D, 47163C0245D, 47163C0255D, 47163C0260D, dated September 29, 2006, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 114-327; Ord. No. 5414, § III(B), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § B), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-259. - Requirement for development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformity with this division prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 1998, § 114-328; Ord. No. 5414, § III(C), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § C), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-260. - Compliance. 
    No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1998, § 114-329; Ord. No. 5414, § III(D), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § D), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-261. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this division conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1998, § 114-330; Ord. No. 5414, § III(E), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § E), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-262. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of mayor and aldermen; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1998, § 114-331; Ord. No. 5414, § III(F), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § F), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-263. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1998, § 114-332; Ord. No. 5414, § III(G), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § G), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-264. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this division or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute an offense and any person who violates this division or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication therefor, pay a penalty of $50.00 for each offense and all costs and expenses involved in the case, and each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1998, § 114-333; Ord. No. 5414, § III(H), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. III, § H), 8-3-2010) 
Secs. 114-265-114-270. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration 

Sec. 114-271. - Designation of administrator. 
    The city building official is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 114-341; Ord. No. 5414, § IV(A), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. IV, § A), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-272. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where base flood elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this division. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed where base flood elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this division. 
c.  A FEMA floodproofing certificate from a state-registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in sections 114-283 and 114-284. 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  Within AE zones, where base flood elevation data is available, any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a state-registered land surveyor and certified by same. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a state-registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Within approximate A zones, where base flood elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a state-registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
c.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or floodproofing. 
d.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Code 1998, § 114-342; Ord. No. 5414, § IV(B), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. IV, § B), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-273. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of economic and community development, local planning assistance office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(4)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community FIRM's through the letter of map revision process. 
(5)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(6)  Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 114-272. 
(7)  Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new and substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 114-272 
(8)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a state-registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 114-272 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division. 
(10)  When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided by FEMA, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in zone A on the city FIRM meet the requirements of this division. 
(11)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this division in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files. 
(Code 1998, § 114-343; Ord. No. 5414, § IV(C), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. IV, § C), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-274. - Board of zoning appeals; variance procedures. 
(a)  Authority. The city board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Procedure. Meetings of the city board of zoning appeals shall be held at such times, as the board shall determine. All meetings of the city board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. The city board of zoning appeals shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record. Compensation of the members of the city board of zoning appeals shall be set by the legislative body. 
(c)  Appeals, how taken. An appeal to the city board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, or bureau affected by any decision of the administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this division. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city board of zoning appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all cases where an appeal is made by a property owner or other interested party, a fee of $50.00 for the cost of publishing a notice of such hearings shall be paid by the appellant. The administrator shall transmit to the city board of zoning appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action was taken. The city board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time which shall not be more than ten days from the date of the hearing. At the hearing, any person or party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  Powers. The city board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the administrator or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of this division. 
(2)  Variance procedures. In the case of a request for a variance the following shall apply: 
a.  The city board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
b.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures as defined, herein, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this division to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
c.  In passing upon such applications, the city board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this division, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent use; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges. 
d.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this division, the city board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division. 
e.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(e)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard and the factors listed in section 114-274. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (as high as $25.00 for $100.00) coverage, and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Code 1998, §§ 114-350.16, 114-350.17; Ord. No. 5414, § VI(A), (B), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. VI, §§ A, B), 8-3-2010) 
Note- The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special flood hazard within the city. 
Secs. 114-275-114-282. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

Sec. 114-283. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this division, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this division; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provision of this division, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced; 
(11)  All new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall provide copies of all necessary federal and state permits, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; 
(12)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development proposals shall meet the standards of section 114-284; 
(13)  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the entire structure shall meet the standards for new construction; 
(14)  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the entire structure shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.1; Ord. No. 5414, § V(A), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § A), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-284. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in section 114-283, are required: 
(1)  Residential structures. In AE zones where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section. Within approximate A zones where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 114-320). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential structures. In AE zones, where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section. In approximate A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 114-320). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: Enclosures. Nonresidential buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A state-registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator as set forth in section 114-272. 
(3)  Enclosures. All new construction and substantial improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a state professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria. 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the finished grade; 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles, storage or building access. 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such partitions shall comply with the provisions of section 114-284. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (3) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either: 
1.  In AE zones, with base flood elevations, the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  In approximate A zones, without base flood elevations, the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength) that are at least three feet in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 114-320). 
c.  Any manufactured home, which has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must meet the standards of sections 114-283 and 114-284. 
d.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
e.  All recreational vehicles placed in an identified special flood hazard area must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction. 
(5)  Standards for subdivisions and other proposed new development proposals. Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
a.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  In all approximate A zones require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data (See section 114-287). 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.2; Ord. No. 5414, § V(B), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § B), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-285. - Standards for special flood hazard areas with established base flood elevations and with floodways designated. 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 114-258 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development shall not result in any increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood elevation, velocities, or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A state-registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data, using the same methodologies as in the effective flood insurance study for the city and certification, thereof. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 114-273 and 114-274. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.3; Ord. No. 5414, § V(C), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § C), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-286. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard zones AE with established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 114-258, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new construction and substantial improvements, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a state-registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 114-283 and 114-284. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.4; Ord. No. 5414, § V(D), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § D), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-287. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways (A zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 114-258, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been provided and where a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations (see subsection (2) of this section), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in approximate A zones meet the requirements of sections 114-283 and 114-284. 
(2)  Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(3)  Within approximate A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 114-320). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in section 114-272. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 114-284. 
(4)  Within approximate A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, no encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a state-registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(5)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 114-283 and 114-284. Within approximate A zones, require that those subsections of section 114-284 dealing with the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, ensuring watercourse carrying capacities are maintained and manufactured homes provisions are complied with as required. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.5; Ord. No. 5414, § V(E), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § E), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-288. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 114-258, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in sections 114-283 and 114-284, apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above as many feet as the depth number specified on the FIRMs, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 114-284. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at least one foot above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be floodproofed to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. A state-registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this division and shall provide such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required in accordance with section 114-272. 
(3)  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.6; Ord. No. 5414, § V(F), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § F), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-289. - Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99 zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 114-258 are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but where base flood elevations have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 zones) all provisions of sections 114-271 through 114-273 and subdivision III of this division shall apply. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.7; Ord. No. 5414, § V(G), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § G), 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 114-290. - Standards for unmapped streams. 
    Located within the city are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments including fill material or other development including structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless certification by a state-registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the locality. 
(2)  When a new flood hazard risk zone, and base flood elevation and floodway data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the standards established in accordance with sections 114-271 through 114-273 and subdivision III of this division. 
(Code 1998, § 114-350.8; Ord. No. 5414, § V(H), 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5992, § I(art. V, § H), 8-3-2010) 
Secs. 114-291-114-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PD) 

Sec. 114-298. - Intent. 
    The intent of this division is to allow flexibility and provide performance criteria for planned developments. This division permits design innovation, encourages a maximum choice of types of environment and living areas available to the public, provides open space and recreational areas, and optional methods of land development which encourage imaginative solutions to environmental design problems. The goal is a development in which buildings, land use, transportation facilities, utility systems and open spaces are integrated through an overall design. The total parcel, rather than a single lot, is the unit into which the public control is directed. Public regulation through a system of overall site plan review permits flexibility in building siting, a mixture of housing types and uses and the grouping of units to create more usable open spaces for the preservation of significant natural features. The planned development allows for placement of buildings on land without adherence to the conventional lot-by-lot approach common to traditional subdivisions. Such concerns as density are determined on a project basis utilizing the physical characteristics of the location allowing for the clustering of buildings which not only may create more useful open spaces but also reduce public facility cost. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-351; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-299. - Establishment of districts. 
    Planned development districts may be established, as provided in section 114-358, prior to submission of development plans by a property owner. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-352; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-300. - Qualifying requirements for development. 
    The following qualifying requirements for a planned development shall be met: 
(1)  The planned development shall be consistent with the adopted land use plan. 
(2)  The planned development shall include at a minimum two acres of contiguous land. 
(3)  The planned development's demand on public facilities and services shall not exceed the capabilities of such facilities and services available. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-353; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-301. - Application for development. 
    A zoning application for a planned development shall include the following items: 
(1)  A statement that the applicant holds title to the entire parcel of land proposed for development or has a legally recognized option to the entire parcel of land proposed for development. 
(2)  A pre-application conference held by the planning department to provide for a mutual understanding of the planned development regulations and to discuss the proposed plans of the applicant. 
(3)  A written statement outlining the main features of the proposed enterprise, including goals and objectives. 
(4)  A survey of the total site requested for approval. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-354; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-302. - Preliminary development plan. 
    A preliminary development plan for a planned development shall contain the following: 
(1)  Location, size and shape of the subject property with distances and bearings of the boundary of the site. 
(2)  Pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns including common parking areas, access to major streets and street layouts, proposed right-of-way, types of streets, and street cross sections. 
(3)  Location of structures/units and open spaces for the district and calculations for the permitted number of dwelling units and calculation for the total amount of open space derived from section 114-304. 
(4)  Landscape drainage calculations and erosion control plans, storm water plans and drainage calculations, grading with topography shown at five foot intervals for existing and proposed contours. These calculations and plans must be stamped by a licensed engineer stating that all calculations and plan meets the city's requirements for public infrastructure. 
(5)  A development schedule indicating the sequential order for stages of development within the district. 
(6)  A plan showing acreage of open spaces, locations and sizes of utilities and easements, density, and housing characteristics. A utility plan must be stamped by a licensed engineer stating that the infrastructure meets or exceeds the standards required by the city for public infrastructure. 
(7)  A drawing of the entire planned development area, including materials and techniques utilized such as plantings, screens, fences and walls. 
(8)  Legend stating the owner's name, address, and contact information, total acreage of the site and total acreage of the proposed open spaces, density and housing characteristics with a note indicating how and who is expected to maintain the open space. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-355; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-303. - Final development plan. 
    A final development plan for a planned development shall: 
(1)  Be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet using black ink containing information as described for the preliminary development plan and including all revisions required by the planning commission. Property lines shall carry accurate bearings, distances and other pertinent physical features. Easements shall carry accurate dimensions. 
(2)  Be prepared and signed (with seal) by a qualified licensed design professional such as an architect, engineer or land surveyor. 
(3)  Meet all the applicable federal, state and city regulations. 
(4)  Contain quantitative data for the total amount of open space and a statement indicating perpetual maintenance responsibility. 
(5)  Contain the treatment of the periphery of the planned development, including materials and techniques utilized such as screens, fences and walls. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-356; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-304. - Development standards. 
    These standards apply to all planned developments using the cluster development technique. No planned development shall be approved that does not follow these minimum standards. 
(1)  For the entire development, a minimum yard of at least 25 feet in depth shall be provided as measured from all public streets and from the side and rear lot lines of the entire development. 
(2)  More than one principal building or structure may be placed on one lot. 
(3)  No minimum width or depth of a lot shall apply. 
(4)  Each lot shall have a minimum access of 12 feet from either a private or public street. 
(5)  Not less than 20 percent of the site shall be conveyed as open space. 
(6)  Density. The number of dwelling units on a site shall be calculated in the following manner: 
4 units/acre with 20 percent open space 
5 units/acre with 25 percent open space 
6 units/acre with 30 percent open space 
7 units/acre with 35 percent open space 
8 units/acre with 40 percent open space 
9 units/acre with 45 percent open space 
10 units/acre with 50 percent open space 
(7)  Frontage. Every dwelling unit shall adjoin a public or private street or common open space providing access to a public street. 
(8)  Parking. Adequate parking spaces shall be provided at a minimum ratio of 2.0 spaces per unit. All required parking shall be off the street and maybe provided via garages or appropriately sized driveways. Parking located within the periphery yard of the development district shall be provided with screening from neighboring districts. 
(9)  Open spaces. Open spaces must be designated no less than 25 feet from any and all principal and accessory structures. This does not include amenity structures specific to the development as designated on the plan. 
(10)  Commercial uses within residential planned development. In a planned residential district of 20 acres or more, commercial uses may be permitted. Such commercial uses shall be governed by the following: 
a.  Commercial facilities may be permitted in developments of 200 dwelling units or more. 
b.  A ratio of one acre of commercial use, including parking, drive and landscaping, is allowed for each 200 residential units. 
c.  All access to commercial facilities shall be from internal streets or drives. 
d.  Construction of such facilities may begin after 25 percent of the residential units have been constructed. 
e.  Commercial areas shall have architectural designs compatible with surrounding residential development as determined by the planning commission. 
(11)  Screening. Screening (fencing, walls, or vegetation) shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
(12)  Street development. The planning commission may approve private streets as follows: 
a.  No present or future impediment exists to through traffic movement in the general area. 
b.  The adjoining properties in the general area have or are capable of providing an efficient and safe street system that will in no way depend upon the private street network. 
c.  For private streets, whether they are to be submitted for public dedication at a later date or remain private, additional space will be devoted for the development of street rights-of-way. Construction plans of private streets must contain a licensed engineer's stamp stating that the design and construction of the private streets meets or exceeds the city's standards for street construction. 
(13)  Responsibilities for private streets, utility access, open space. The following certificate shall be signed, dated and placed on the final development plan: 
a.  Private street responsibilities of owners. The owners of this property agree to assume full liability and responsibility for maintenance, reconstruction, drainage, and other needs relative to the private streets so designated on this plan, and hereby relieve the local government from any such responsibility. Should the private streets be dedicated for public use at a later date, the owners will bear full expense of reconstruction or other action necessary to make the streets and drainage facilities fully conform to the current public street standards. The owners also agree that the streets shall be dedicated to public use without compensation. (Signed and dated by owners.) 
b.  Government and utility access. The owners of this property hereby agree to grant full rights of access to this property over the designated street utilities, and other easements for governmental and utility agencies to perform their normal responsibilities. (Signed and dated by owners.) 
c.  Maintenance of common open space.The owners of this property agree to assume full liability and responsibility for maintenance, reconstruction, drainage, and other needs relative to the common open space so designated on this plan, and hereby relieve the local government from any such responsibility. Should the common open space be dedicated for public use at a later date, the owners will bear full expense of reconstruction or other action necessary to make the common open space and drainage facilities fully conform to the current standards adopted by the city's. The owners also agree that the common open space shall be dedicated to public use without compensation. (Signed and dated by owners.) 
(14)  Amenities. Any amenities shown on the master plan for a planned development shall be built within the first phase of the development. The planning commission will not accept any bonding instruments as a guarantee for said amenities. However the planning commission may grant a variance to the time line of this requirement if constructing said amenity in the first phase creates a substantial hardship, other than financial, to the developer due to the location of an amenity in a master plan. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-357; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-305. - Vested rights. 
    Vesting rights shall be in accordance with T.C.A. § 13-3-413 or § 13-4-310, whichever is applicable, and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-358; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 6456 § III, 12-16-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6456, § II, adopted Dec. 16, 2014, changed the title of § 114-305 from "Procedure for development plans" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 114-306. - Development control following the approval of final development plan. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued until the director of planning or designee has reviewed/approved the permit application and received a stamped house location plan from a qualified design professional stating that the location plan coincides with the approved development plan. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy (CO) will be issued and no sale of property will take place prior to final development plan approval. 
(c)  The building official shall periodically inspect the site and review all building permits issued to ensure that the development schedule and approved plan are followed. 
(d)  The provision and construction of the open space shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same rate as the construction of the dwelling units. If the building official finds that the development schedule has not been followed, no additional permits shall be issued until the owner or developer complies with the development schedule or plan or unless a performance bond or other similar instrument has been accepted by the planning commission to guarantee that such open space will be provided at a specific date. 
(e)  The planning commission may require a bond, corporate surety, irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable financial guarantee in a form and amount sufficient to complete the development of open space. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-359; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-307. - Amendments to development plans. 
(a)  Under this division, amendments may be made to a development plan only by official action of the planning commission, except those amendments which fully meet the requirements set forth in this section may be approved when signed by the director of planning without further action by the commission. If any question arises as to compliance with this section, the director shall refer the plan to the commission for action. 
(b)  Action by the director of planning is intended to expedite approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally related to the shifting of previously approved spaces. Such amendments shall not: 
(1)  Decrease the overall land area in yards, parking or other open spaces; 
(2)  Increase building ground area coverage, floor area or height; 
(3)  Increase the number or change the location of street access points; and 
(4)  Increase the density of the district. 
(c)  Such amended plans shall also have written on them the exact change made and the director's signature, signifying his approval under this section for the amendments as noted. Any plans approved by the director shall be fully described to the commission at its next meeting and properly entered into the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. VIII, § 10; Code 1998, § 114-360; Ord. No. 6387 § III, 4-1-2014) 
Secs. 114-308-114-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (R-1MP) 

Sec. 114-316. - Intent. 
    The intent of the R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District is to permit the establishment of mobile home parks and subdivisions in areas providing a residential setting and convenient access to major traffic arteries. Because of their unusual characteristics, mobile home parks pose special problems in the application of land use control techniques and require special consideration as to their proper location and character in relation to adjacent uses and to the development of the community and as to the circumstances and conditions under which each use may be permitted. The standards contained in this division represent an attempt to provide adequate protection for and consideration of both the community and the mobile home dweller. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-391) 
Sec. 114-317. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District are single-family residential uses, both traditional and manufactured; mobile home housing; and uses and structures which are customarily accessory, clearly incidental and subordinate to a mobile home park, such as playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts and community centers. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-392) 
Sec. 114-318. - Conditional uses. 
    In the R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District, permission for the following uses, may be considered by the board of zoning appeals if the mobile home park is properly zoned and has an approved development plan carrying the notation that conditional use sites as shown on the plan may be used as such only if subsequently approved by the board of zoning appeals: 
(1)  Retail and service uses. Incidental retail uses such as barbershops and beauty shops, self-service laundries, news and novelty stands, snack bars and commissaries conducted for convenience of the residents of any mobile home park containing 150 or more mobile homes when located wholly within a main building with access only to an interior arcade or open court and having no exterior display space or identification sign visible from any adjacent public right-of-way, and provided that such uses do not exceed a total of 2,500 square feet in area. 
(2)  Child care. Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers for five or more children conducted for the convenience of the residents of the mobile home park, provided there is a fenced and screened play lot. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-393) 
Sec. 114-319. - General standards for parks. 
(a)  In the R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District, travel trailers and recreational vehicles shall not be permitted in a mobile home park as residences. 
(b)  Each mobile home shall be installed and shall be securely anchored, in the manner required in the building code adopted by the city, so as to prevent the mobile home from shifting or overturning and shall be suitably treated so as to conceal the undercarriage. 
(c)  A mobile home development may either offer subdivided recorded lots for sale for the accommodation of mobile homes or it may offer mobile home spaces for rent, but no mobile home park shall originally include both kinds of accommodations. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-394; Ord. No. 4199, § I, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-320. - Locational standards. 
(a)  Frontage and access. Mobile home developments of less than or equal to 150 spaces must be sited within 1,250 feet of a street designated by the planning commission as an arterial or collector. Those developments greater than 150 spaces shall be located adjacent to a designated arterial or collector and shall have a minimum of two accesses from a public street. Principal accesses shall be at locations where traffic congestion does not exist and the possibility of such congestion in the future shall be minimized by provision in the development plans for property entrances and exits and by internal provisions for traffic circulation and parking. 
(b)  Utilities and services. A mobile home park shall be well drained and properly graded to ensure proper drainage, shall have water service and sanitary sewer service and shall be located so as to provide for the availability of community facilities and services such as schools, parks, shopping facilities and police and fire protection. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-395; Ord. No. 4199, § II, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-321. - Minimum design standards. 
(a)  Land area. All new R-1MP, Mobile Home Park Districts shall have a minimum site area of five acres. There shall be no area limitation on additions to existing parks containing ten or more mobile home spaces. 
(b)  Space per unit and density. 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of 2,400 square feet for each mobile home space, and a maximum overall density of eight units per gross acre. 
(2)  Mobile homes on individual lots within a mobile home district shall have a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. 
(c)  Frontage, depth and building height. 
(1)  Each mobile home space within a mobile home park shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage on an improved interior access road or driveway. Mobile home spaces must have access from an interior road or driveway. The average depth of all spaces shall not be less than 40 feet, and no structure shall exceed 25 feet in height. 
(2)  Each lot within a mobile home subdivision shall have a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet on a public street, and no structure shall exceed 25 feet in height. 
(d)  Setback. Each mobile home shall observe the following setbacks at a minimum: 
(1)  Ten feet from any access road or driveway; 
(2)  18 feet from any other mobile home, except that end-to-end clearance shall not be less than 20 feet; 
(3)  20 feet from any service building or area; 
(4)  Eight feet from any common recreation area; 
(5)  Ten feet from any lake or waterway; 
(6)  15 feet from any property line or other zoning district; 
(7)  20 feet from any street or public right-of-way. 
(e)  Roads and driveways. All access roads and driveways within a mobile home park shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. Minimum paving widths for private roads and driveways are as follows: 
(1)  24 feet for residential roads with no off-street parking; 
(2)  26 feet for local roads with parking on one side; 
(3)  36 feet for local roads with parking on two sides; 
(4)  Dead-end streets shall have a maximum length of 1,250 feet measured along the centerline from the entrance street right-of-way to the center of the cul-de-sac. The diameter of the paved area for the cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 65 feet; 
(5)  Along one side of each access road or driveway, a sidewalk not less than five feet in width shall be provided for pedestrian circulation throughout the mobile home park; 
(6)  All private roads shall be lighted at night with electric lamps of no less than 100 watts each, spaced at intervals of no more than 100 feet or the equivalent as approved by the transportation department. 
(f)  Landscaping. The mobile home development shall have a buffer of shrubbery, evergreen screening or opaque fencing of wood, brick or stone, four feet in height, between it and any adjacent residential areas. The planning commission may require street trees along all roads, public or private, not exceeding one tree per 50 feet of road frontage. Planting strips and other landscaping shall be as required by the planning commission and other sections of this chapter. 
(g)  Parking. Required parking of 11/2 spaces shall be provided on the same space with the mobile home or on a designated adjacent common area. The required parking may be provided along an access road or driveway, provided that the road or driveway width is increased to a minimum of 26 feet and improved according to the requirements of the city engineer. 
(h)  Attachments. No accessory building shall be constructed as a permanent part of a mobile home or trailer nor shall any other structure be attached to a trailer other than a wooden deck, metal awning or similar temporary device. However, this shall not include upgrade to the home itself such as the addition of a room. 
(i)  Common recreation areas. In all mobile home parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more dwellings, there shall be at a minimum one recreation area which shall be easily accessible to all residents. The size of the recreation area shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each dwelling space. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally located. Suitable landscaping or fencing should be provided to demarcate the recreation area. 
(j)  Cabanas, etc. Cabanas and other similar permanent structures may be erected in conjunction with a trailer parking space and shall not be closer to any other such structure or any mobile home, other than the one it is intended to serve, than the minimum distance required between mobile homes. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-396; Ord. No. 4199, § III, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-322. - Building permit and development plan; certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued in a R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District by the building official until mobile home park zoning development plans (preliminary and final) have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and such approval certified to the building official. Plans submitted for new mobile home parks shall be designed for a minimum of 25 mobile home units. Zoning development plans shall conform to the this article, division 3 of article II of this chapter, zoning development plans, and any other applicable sections of this chapter. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a minimum of ten mobile home spaces have been completed, have sanitary sewer service available and are otherwise ready for occupancy, unless a performance bond in an amount specified by the building official has been submitted to the planning commission in order to ensure completion of all improvements for the ten spaces. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-397; Ord. No. 4199, § IV, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-323. - Mobile homes in other zones. 
    No mobile home shall be parked or maintained and used as a dwelling unit in any zone other than an R-1MP, Mobile Home Park District, except that in any industrial zone not more than one mobile home or trailer for each establishment may be occupied as sleeping quarters for a caretaker or watchman, and in an agricultural zone one mobile home may be occupied as a residence, provided that one or more of the occupants thereof is employed fulltime in agricultural activity on the property on which such mobile home is located and that any such mobile home shall be located no closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-398; Ord. No. 4199, § V, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 114-324. - Enlargement of existing parks. 
    Except as provided in section 58-2, any enlargement or extension of an existing mobile home park shall be in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. IX, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-399; Ord. No. 4199, § VI(art. IX, § 9), 5-7-1996) 
Secs. 114-325-114-351. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MIXED-USE DISTRICT (MX) 

Sec. 114-352. - Intent. 
    The intent of the MX, Mixed-Use District is to allow flexibility in the development of compatible mixed-use areas of light manufacturing, professional office and limited commercial uses and to do so by developing a self-contained, campus-like atmosphere which protects the adjacent land uses. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-426) 
Sec. 114-353. - Permitted uses. 
    Uses permitted in the MX, Mixed-Use District are as follows: 
(1)  Offices for brokers, businesses, computers, data processing, credit agencies, finance, government, law, medical, photography, real estate and travel agencies. 
(2)  Single-family, two-family and multifamily residential. 
(3)  Retail or service uses such as hotels, motels, limousine service, motor vehicle rental, restaurants, service stations, vehicle storage and day care facilities. 
(4)  Public uses such as armories, auditoriums, meeting halls, coliseums, recreational facilities, stadiums, governmental uses, public parks and public or private utilities. 
(5)  Manufacturing, assembling, processing, packaging or similar treatment of such products as: appliances, automobiles (including rebuilding and reconditioning), bolt or screw thread rolling or cutting, bottle making, box and crate assembly, bronze casting, canvas, carpets, rugs, celluloid and pyroxyline, ceramics, china or figurines, cosmetics, die casting and making, drafting instruments, electrical parts, electronic instruments, fiberglass, food products, forge, foundry, furniture, heating equipment, laboratories (experimental), medical and dental instruments, musical instruments, parcel delivery stations, pharmaceuticals, phonograph records, pottery, radios, record players, rubber and metal stamps, scientific instruments and equipment, shoes, television receivers, textiles, toiletries, tools, toys, watches, clocks and woven wire. 
(6)  Warehousing, ministorage and trucking terminals. 
(7)  On-premises and off-premises alcoholic beverage sales. 
(8)  Communication facilities. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-427; Ord. No. 4018, § V, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 4276, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 6388, § VII, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 6474, § I, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 114-354. - Accessory uses. 
    In the MX district, accessory uses shall be subordinate or incidental to the principal use or structure and may include such uses as on-site cafeterias for employees, incidental retailing of products manufactured on site, permanent caretaker residences or substantially similar uses. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-428) 
Sec. 114-355. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6474, § II, adopted Apr. 7, 2015, repealed § 114-355, which pertained to special exceptions and derived from Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 4; and Code 1998, § 114-429. 
Sec. 114-356. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses have been determined to be incompatible with the intent of the MX district: wrecking yards and junkyards; recycling; tanneries; tobacco, wax, wire, wood (as in sawmills), and yarn production. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-430) 
Sec. 114-357. - Locational standards. 
    The following standards shall apply in the MX district: 
(1)  Size. The district shall be 25 acres or greater in size. 
(2)  Frontage/access. The mixed-use district shall have frontage on and access from a street designated in the major street and road plan as a collector, arterial or expressway/freeway. 
(3)  Utilities. The provider of sewer and water services to the site proposed for rezoning to the district must be identified. A timeframe for installation of utilities shall be submitted with the rezoning request and shall include a statement by the utility provider that water and sanitary sewer service can be provided to the site within the timeframe proposed. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-431) 
Sec. 114-358. - Design standards. 
    The following dimensional standards shall apply in the MX district: 
(1)  Lot area. The minimum lot area within the mixed-use district shall be one acre. 
(2)  Periphery yard. The district shall have a 30-foot landscaped development-free buffer. Structures or parking shall not be permitted in this periphery yard. 
(3)  Building setback. The setbacks to be observed are a: 
a.  30-foot front yard; 
b.  30-foot rear yard, not required if the rear property line is a railroad right-of-way boundary; and 
c.  15-foot side yard. 
(4)  Building height. A height to side yard ratio of 2:1 shall be observed above 30 feet. 
(5)  Ground coverage. Ground coverage for each use in the mixed-use district shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot. 
(6)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be as required by article VI of this chapter. 
(7)  Lighting. All lighting shall be sufficient for the safe use of the facilities, which shall not create a traffic hazard or glare for any surrounding residential area. 
(8)  Signs. 
a.  Single tenant businesses are permitted freestanding signs provided that: 
1.  The sign surface area does not exceed 32 square feet per side or a total of 64 square feet for all sides; 
2.  Lots with multiple street frontages are allowed a total of two signs; 
3.  Height shall not exceed five feet above the ground; and 
4.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
b.  Each mixed-use park within the district shall be permitted access identification signs, provided: 
1.  Only one such sign is located at each major access point. 
2.  The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per side or a maximum of 100 square feet total of all sides. 
3.  The maximum height of such signs shall be 20 feet. 
4.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
5.  The sign shall be permitted in a grassed median within a right-of-way, provided the sign does not interfere with traffic. 
c.  Each mixed-use park within the district shall be permitted one master identification sign which shall be permitted up to 50 feet in height and 300 square feet per side with a two-side maximum. This sign may be located within a grassed median within a right-of-way. If located on a lot, the master identification sign shall not be included in the total of freestanding signs for single-tenant businesses. 
d.  Wall signs are permitted equivalent to one percent of the building ground coverage area. A business having less than 4,000 square feet of area may utilize up to 40 square feet of signage. 
(9)  Access. Access to individual lots shall be by interior streets, either private or public, which have been approved by the planning commission, subject to the following: 
a.  The roadway pavement for two-way traffic on private streets shall be at least 24 feet in width and for one-way traffic at least 14 feet in width, with no on-street parking permitted. 
b.  All private roadways, travel ways and parking areas shall be paved with a hard-surface material as required by the city engineer. 
c.  Curbs, gutters, retention facilities, paved or sodded swales or other methods to control stormwater runoff from private streets may be required if determined to be needed by the city engineer. 
d.  Private streets shall be constructed to meet the typical cross section requirements of the city for industrial streets. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-432) 
Sec. 114-359. - Master plan approval. 
    The planning commission shall grant approval of a master plan before the establishment of the mixed-use district. The contents of the master plan shall include: 
(1)  Signage; 
(2)  Ingress/egress; 
(3)  Availability and adequacy of utilities; 
(4)  Buffer strip (periphery yard); 
(5)  Adjacent transportation network; 
(6)  Internal street layout; and 
(7)  A conceptual layout of the varying types of land uses (i.e., general location of offices, multifamily residential, retail/service, public, manufacturing and warehousing). 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-433) 
Sec. 114-360. - Final development plan and building permit. 
    For the MX district, a final zoning development plan shall be submitted which conforms substantially to the master plan. No building permit for a development in a mixed-use district shall be issued by the building official until such a plan is submitted and approved by the building official and determined to be in conformance with this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. X, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-434) 
Secs. 114-361-114-378. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - BUSINESS CONFERENCE CENTER DISTRICT (BC) 

Sec. 114-379. - Intent. 
    The intent of the BC, Business Conference Center District is to provide diversity in the permitted uses and variations in the relationship of uses, structures and open space while providing coordinated growth in an urban environment. The developments are intended to be unified projects designed with land use, transportation patterns, surrounding terrain and operations functioning cohesively in a carefully planned environment. This district is designed to accommodate a range of activities such as a regional convention center, employment based offices, commercial services, recreational facilities, educational uses and cultural events. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-461) 
Sec. 114-380. - Permitted principal uses. 
    The following principal uses are permitted which will ensure compatibility between the internal operations of the Business Conference Center District and the character of the community at large and provide opportunities for employment, cultural and convention events: 
(1)  Publicly or privately owned or operated buildings and uses, such as convention centers, conference centers, civic centers, auditoriums, theaters, movie theaters, meeting centers and other public gathering places. 
(2)  Museums, art galleries and libraries. 
(3)  Corporate headquarters, business and professional offices, training centers, colleges and business/trade schools, research laboratories, research and development facilities when not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other reasons, as determined by the planning commission. 
(4)  Hotels, full-service restaurants, brewpubs, craft breweries, wineries, and distilleries, provided that drive-in or drive-through windows are excluded. 
(5)  Financial institutions, brokerages. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-462; Ord. No. 6388, § VIII, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-381. - Accessory uses. 
    In the Business Conference Center District, accessory uses will be permitted that are incidental and necessarily supportive and related to principal permitted uses and shall not exceed 15 percent of the total proposed square footage of permitted principal structures. These include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages, on-premises and off-premises sale. 
(2)  Commercial services oriented toward personal appearance and care, car rental, golf pro shops, business services such as paint shops and stationery stores. 
(3)  General and specialty shops. 
(4)  Antennas and satellite dishes (confined to rooftops or rear yards). 
(5)  Catering establishments and banquet facilities. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-463) 
Sec. 114-382. - Special exceptions. 
    Certain uses may be permitted in the Business Conference Center District upon the granting of a special exception by the board of zoning appeals: 
(1)  Elderly and child day care, nursery schools and kindergartens, elderly day care. 
(2)  Helistops and pay parking lots, when not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other reasons. 
(3)  Recreational facilities, health clubs, golf courses, golf driving ranges, stadiums and civic fairs. 
(4)  Telecommunication facilities such as cell towers. 
(5)  Outside storage yards; storage yards for vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of 15,000 pounds and construction equipment are prohibited. 
(6)  Hospital and health care centers. 
(7)  Parking structures. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-464) 
Sec. 114-383. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following principal uses have been determined to be incompatible with the intent of the Business Conference Center District: 
(1)  Outdoor markets, wrecking yards and junkyards, auto sales, mobile home sales and other retail, which includes outdoor storage of items for sale. 
(2)  Trucking terminals, warehousing, recycling facilities. 
(3)  Industrial, manufacturing, processing and assembly of any kind, except as incidental and accessory to a research and development facility or brewpubs, craft breweries, wineries, and distilleries. 
(4)  Shopping centers, department or discount stores other than those which are allowed in sections 114-380 and 114-381. 
(5)  Assembly of any kind, except as incidental and accessory to uses as enumerated in sections 114-380 and 114-381. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-465; Ord. No. 6388, § IX, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 114-384. - Locational standards. 
    The following locational standards shall apply in the Business Conference Center District: 
(1)  Size. The district shall be 50 acres or greater in size. 
(2)  Access. The district shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage and principal access from a street designated in the major street and road plan as an arterial, collector or expressway. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-466) 
Sec. 114-385. - Design standards. 
    The following dimensional standards shall apply in the Business Conference Center District: 
(1)  Multiple uses. Multiple principal uses, structures and accessory uses per lot are permitted. 
(2)  Lot area. Minimum lot area within this district shall be one acre. 
(3)  Periphery yard. The district shall have a 30-foot landscaped, development-free buffer. Structures, including parking areas, shall not be permitted within the district periphery yard. 
(4)  Setbacks. The following minimum setbacks shall be observed: 
a.  Front yard. The minimum front yard setback from a public street or right-of-way for vehicular travel shall be 30 feet. 
b.  Side yard. 
1.  The minimum side yard setback from a public street or right-of-way for vehicular travel shall be 12 feet. 
2.  Zero lot lines in lieu of the side yard setback may be permitted on one side only when complimentary joint uses are approved by the planning commission; the opposite side yard shall have a minimum setback of 24 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback from a public street or right-of-way for vehicular travel shall be 12 feet. 
d.  Loading areas. Loading docks, bays or maneuvering areas shall not be visible from abutting public streets. 
e.  Transit facilities. Transit stops and transit shelters may encroach into the setback. 
(5)  Building height. There shall be no maximum building height. However, all minimum yards are increased by five feet for each story over three stories. 
(6)  Density. Building ground coverage for each use in this district shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot or the average area of several lots when an integrated complex is developed, including all buildings and parking structures. A maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 1:3 shall be observed for buildings, including parking structures. 
(7)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading provisions for the business conference center district shall be as set out in article VI of this chapter. 
(8)  Lighting. All lighting shall be sufficient for the safe use of the facilities and shall not create a traffic hazard. Lighting facilities shall be required for all employee parking areas. 
(9)  Signs. 
a.  All signs within the district shall be reviewed by the planning commission as part of the site plan approval process. 
b.  Complex freestanding signs are permitted in the Business Conference District as follows: 
1.  A complex freestanding sign is permitted on the parcel adjacent to an interstate right-of-way, and only one such freestanding sign may be permitted per lot. 
2.  Each business on the same parcel will be allowed one sign on the complex sign supports. Signs allowed placement on the complex sign base will be classified as a primary sign or a secondary sign as follows: 
(i)  Only one primary sign will be allowed and it shall not exceed 150 square feet per side or a maximum of 300 square feet total on all sides. 
(ii)  Each additional business will be allowed one secondary sign and it shall not exceed 100 square feet per side or a maximum of 200 square feet total on all sides. 
3.  The maximum height of such sign shall be 15 feet above average ground level. 
4.  Complex freestanding signs shall not be located closer than ten feet to any public street or permanent easement. 
c.  Business identification monument signs may be located within setbacks of each individual business located on the same parcel. Each business is permitted one business identification sign and the sign shall comply with the following: 
1.  The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet per side or a maximum of 64 square feet total of all sides. 
2.  The maximum height of such sign shall be eight feet above existing grade and the sign must be a monument sign. 
3.  The sign shall not be located closer than ten feet to any public street. 
4.  Monument signs shall require landscaping around the base of the monument equal in square footage to both sign faces. 
d.  Wall-mounted signs are permitted equivalent to a maximum of one percent of the building ground coverage area per side. Uses having less than 4,000 square feet of area may utilize up to 40 square feet of signage. 
e.  One freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters, or pictures: 
1.  The maximum height of the sign is to be 35 feet above the roadway and a minimum height of 12 feet. 
2.  The maximum allowable sign surface area is to be 150 square feet per side or 300 square feet total of both sides. 
3.  The sign must be located along an interstate highway and a part of the complex freestanding sign. 
f.  Traffic/directional or location signs are allowed and shall comply with the following: 
1.  All signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
2.  Signs shall be used to identify parking areas, direct traffic movements onto the premises and within the premises, service areas, freight entrances or to a particular location on the premises. 
3.  No signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way. 
(10)  Lot frontage. Access to individual lots shall be from public streets or permanent easements which have been approved by the planning commission. Fifty feet of frontage on a public street or permanent easement shall be required for each lot. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 7(A)-(F), (H)-(J); Code 1998, § 114-467; Ord. No. 4077, §§ I, II, 7-5-1995; Ord. No. 4714, § IV, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 5065, § III, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 6186, § I(114-467), 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 114-386. - Development plans and building permits. 
(a)  Final plan required for issuance of building permit. No building permit for a Business Conference Center District shall be issued by the building official until a final zoning development plan has been approved by the planning commission and certified to the building official. Such plan shall conform to the requirements of the city subdivision standards (on file in the clerk's office), major street and road plan and local/state driveway standards. 
(b)  Preliminary plan contents. The preliminary zoning development plan shall reflect the conceptual development scheme for the district and may provide schemes for phased development. Preliminary zoning development plans shall contain the following: 
(1)  A location map sufficient in size and content to quickly relate others to the subject phase development/location within the district and community. 
(2)  Access plans showing the relationship of the site to the existing and proposed street network, either public or permanent easements. 
(3)  Internal transportation systems, both vehicle and pedestrian, shall be illustrated. 
(4)  An erosion control plan showing existing and proposed elevations, areas of cut or fill, critical areas (streams, sinkhole, etc.) and methods to be implemented to control erosion. 
(5)  Distances and dimensions at existing property lines, setbacks, driveway access, parking lot design and traffic flow, landscape areas, walkways, buildings, signage, loading and storage areas, flood areas including base floor elevations and all other proposed improvements. 
(6)  Legend information showing ownership (name and address), north arrow, scale and identification of the project contact persons. 
(7)  On-site information will include topography at five-foot intervals or less, proposed floor area ratio factors and ground coverage computations. 
(8)  The providers of sewer and water service, natural gas, power and other utilities to the site proposed for development in the district must be identified. A timeframe for installation of utilities shall be submitted with the preliminary zoning development plan and shall include a statement by the utility providers that services can be provided to the site within the timeframe proposed. All new utility facilities for electrical, gas, telephone, water and other similar services shall be placed underground. Only underground power service shall be considered for new development. Provided the owner/developer provides sufficient information to design a preliminary service plan, Kingsport Power Company would be in a position to provide a general timeframe for the installation of facilities to accompany the preliminary zoning development plan. On-site sewage disposal of any kind is prohibited. 
(c)  Final plan contents. Final zoning development plans shall provide the planning commission and building official with the information needed to make decisions concerning the scope and detail of the project. Final zoning development plans shall contain the following: 
(1)  Information required for preliminary plans, and the plans shall be stamped by an architect or engineer licensed by the state. 
(2)  Utilities plan showing existing or proposed sewer lines, water lines, power service, natural gas, outdoor lighting and other utilities. The owner/developer will have to provide sufficient electrical load information needed for reasonable service design and provide property rights for right-of-way easements for city power company facilities. 
(3)  Stormwater plan providing runoff calculations and proposed improvements. 
(4)  Landscape plan showing details for screening, landscaping and treatment of buffer areas that meet the city's landscape requirements. 
(5)  Elevation drawings of sign structures, their location, design and the dimensions of signage. 
(6)  Elevation drawings of buildings or structures for the purpose of determining scale of the project. 
(d)  Amendment to development plans. Amendments can be made to any zoning development plan for this district only by official action of the planning commission, except that amendments which fully meet the requirements of this chapter may be approved and signed by the director of planning without further action by the planning commission. If any question arises as to the compliance, however, or if the proposed use differs from the use noted on the approved zoning development plan, the director shall refer the plan to the commission for action. Action by the director of the planning department is intended to expedite approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally relate to the shifting of previously approved sites. Such amendments must meet the requirements of this chapter. Such amended plans also shall have written on them the exact changes made, and a note for the director's signature shall be added signifying his approval under this subsection for the amendments as noted. Any plans approved by the director shall be fully described to the commission at its next regular meeting and properly entered into the minutes of that meeting. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-468) 
Secs. 114-387-114-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - GATEWAY DISTRICT OVERLAY (GDO) 

Sec. 114-416. - Intent. 
(a)  The city takes pride in being a community in control of its future. The city affirms that the quality of the physical environment has a direct bearing on its livability and its economic prospects. Through the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Review Commission, referred to in this division as the "gateway review commission," the city has forged a clear consensus about the desire and character of its environment. It is the intent of this division to implement the recommended policies that are relevant to the decisions, which affect the community. These include the desire to: 
(1)  Provide for improved management of the natural and manmade resources required for the attraction, expansion and continued support of industrial and commercial development; 
(2)  Provide for the creation and expansion of employment opportunities for city citizens through the promotion of business and industrial development; 
(3)  Protect residential property from any negative impact which may result by adjoining or being in close proximity to commercial development; 
(4)  Create an attractive and efficient environment through sound land use planning and design standards; 
(5)  Ensure consistently high-quality design and harmonious relationships among the different development components, as well as design elements of MeadowView, including architecture, signage and landscaping; 
(6)  Facilitate development and minimize delay by establishing a rational basis for preparing and evaluating plans; 
(7)  Serve as a model for high quality development and surrounding properties and for other mixed-use developments in the area; 
(8)  Create a positive image of the city for visitors utilizing the gateway; and 
(9)  Maintain and preserve natural vistas. 
(b)  The city believes that design review is an important process for ensuring that these policies are carried out. In all cases, the Americans with Disability Act shall be observed and will be in effect concerning proposed developments that fall within the Gateway District Overlay of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 114-501; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-417. - District permitted. 
    Provisions to establish a special Gateway District Overlay which can be applied over any zoning district located along the designated area, referred to in this division as the "Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District," which is further referred to as the "Gateway District Overlay." 
(Code 1998, § 114-502; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-418. - Gateway review commission. 
(a)  Appointment; membership; compensation. The board of mayor and aldermen shall create a seven-member Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District Commission, referred to in this division as the "gateway review commission." The gateway review commission shall be composed of seven members: 
(1)  Five of whom shall be appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen: 
a.  One who is in private business; 
b.  One from an educational or research institution; and 
c.  One who is an architect. 
(2)  The sixth member shall be the director of planning. 
(3)  The seventh member shall be a member of the board of mayor and aldermen. 
No person, whether or not a landowner or developer, with an interest in any property within the corridor shall be appointed to serve as a commissioner. The term of office of the member appointed from the board of mayor and aldermen shall coincide with his term of office. The remaining commissioners shall serve term of five years. Commissioners appointed to the gateway review commission shall be appointed for staggered terms of five years, except as otherwise provided in this section. All commissioners shall be residents of the city. Any vacancy because of nonresidency, incapacity, resignation, or death shall be filled in like manner for the unexpired term. Subsequent commissioners shall be appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen. Commissioners may serve more than one term. 
(b)  Organization and meetings. The gateway review commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and any other officers desired, who shall continue to be voting members, and shall adopt its own bylaws and rules of procedure. A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or by a majority of the members. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, and all meetings and records shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The gateway review commission shall adopt and oversee implementation for the comprehensive development of the entire corridor overlay zones for the purpose of developing a systematic land management policy and guidance for any person in the development process in regard to all matters relating to accepting, considering, approving or denying applications for certificate of appropriateness to ensure development consistent with the policies and plans of the gateway review commission and to administer in force such development, architectural standards, regulations and related rules and procedures as the commissioners may adopt. 
(Code 1998, § 114-503; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-419. - Established. 
    The state general assembly, by Private Acts of 1995, chapter 77, created the Northeast Tennessee Corridor Overlay District in the city. 
(Code 1998, § 114-504; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-420. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  In order to accomplish the purpose of the act, corridor overlay zones shall be established by the board of mayor and aldermen within which the commission shall exercise powers described herein to effect the purposes of this act. The powers described shall be exercised in cooperation with the board of mayor and aldermen and other police powers. The board of mayor and aldermen's zoning resolution shall be amended to establish corridor overlay zones in accordance with the provision of its zoning resolution and the general laws of the state. Where design and development standards, regulations, policies, and procedures are adopted for the corridor overlay zone by the commission pursuant to this act, said standards, regulations, policies and procedures shall apply; provided that, the permitted and prohibited property uses, zoning, land management procedures and regulations applicable within the city shall also apply. These adopted design and development standards are available through the planning department of the city. 
(b)  All business, commercial, manufacturing and industrial development and changes to existing developments located in the Gateway District Overlay shall be reviewed by the gateway review commission, or their designee, except for residential structures or agricultural uses and structures. Such new and existing business, commercial, manufacturing and industrial developments shall receive the gateway review commission's approval by issuance of a certificate of appropriateness before receiving an erosion control, grading, building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1998, § 114-505; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-421. - Development guidelines. 
(a)  Generally. All businesses, commercial, manufacturing, and industrial development and changes to existing developments located in the Gateway District Overlay shall be reviewed by the gateway review commission, or their designee, except for residential structures or agricultural uses and structures. Such new and existing businesses, commercial, manufacturing and industrial developments shall receive a gateway review commission's approval by issuance of a certificate of appropriateness before receiving an erosion control, grading, building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Design strategies for development within P-1, TA, B-1, B-3, B-4P and BC districts. The following shall apply to P-1, TA, B-1, B-3, B-4P and BC zoning districts within the Gateway District Overlay: 
(1)  Grading plan. Improvements on the site should be developed to minimize changes in existing topography and the loss of existing mature vegetation. All existing trees with trunks over 12 inches in diameter measured four feet above the lowest grade should be shown on the grading plans. Incentives are provided to retain healthy existing trees. Smooth topographic transition should be provided at the edges of property. Minimum changes in topography are recommended with no slopes exceeding 1:3 ratio (one-foot rise to a three-foot run). All grading plans require approval by the engineering department. All grading plans over one-acre require approval by the state department of environment and conservation before a grading permit can be issued. See the erosion control provisions of this Code for additional requirements. 
(2)  Site plan. A building setback of a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way shall be maintained for all buildings locating adjacent to any interstate, expressway or principal arterial street. Where the need exists for retaining an open image, protecting views, creating a high quality image, and maintaining natural edges along the roadway's borders a wider setback may be requested. Developments are encouraged to be located and configures in a visually harmonious manner with surrounding developments, existing terrain, and not to impede scenic views within the corridor. Additional district setback information is in this chapter. For details regarding the required information for development plan submittals, see the zoning development plan, parking and landscaping provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Drainage plan. To minimize runoff and provide adequate green space, impervious surfaces such as roofs and pavement should not cover more than 75 percent of the site area. Undeveloped right-of-way immediately adjoining the site may be used in calculation of the impervious area, provided it is not more than 15 percent of the calculation and is maintained by the occupant. Stormwater entry and exit points must be protected to avoid erosion. An open space system of ridges, steep slopes, drainage corridors, periphery yards, buffers and landscaped areas provide natural stormwater absorption and filtration zones avoiding the need for large scale piping and retention systems. When such designs are not possible, stormwater areas will be landscaped to blend with natural features of the site. Retention or detention ponds, if needed, are encouraged to be graded gradually enough not to require fencing. Appropriate stormwater and drainage calculations shall be provided by a licensed professional, as permitted by the state, and approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  Landscape plan. Visual buffers shall be provided along interstates, expressways or major arterial streets by using a combination of opaque fencing, natural vegetation, berming, and/or informal plantings as recommended by the landscape specialist. The property owners shall maintain all plant material within the right-of-way, when used as a credit for pervious area, and on the property for the lifetime of the proposed use. For any new use, this maintenance responsibility must continue. Visual buffers used to soften the appearance of structures and parking lots from interior streets are recommended. Options for landscaping are made available for developers who create dedicated open public spaces, walkways, or other creative, resourceful, land uses in the landscape and buffer provisions of this division. For additional requirements of landscape plans, see the article VII of this chapter, landscaping. 
(5)  Architectural design. A compatible relationship for proposed developments in the Gateway District Overlay is of critical public concern for any building or site improvements. The intent of the design review is not to stifle innovative architecture but to ensure respect while reducing incompatible and adverse impacts on the visual experience from the roadways. The commission may alter corporate colors or architectural designs within the district to create a compatible visual image. To accomplish this, the gateway review commission shall exercise the following guidelines for review of such proposed developments: 
a.  Materials. Selection and use of building materials should respect the climate and heritage of the area. 
1.  Exterior building materials, which are encouraged include: brick, stone and stone veneers, plate glass, precast concrete panels, architectural block, glass block, and EIFS (commonly known as Dryvit). 
2.  Materials considered unacceptable include: plywood or plywood-based products, pre-engineered metal, painted or natural concrete block, and composite building parcels, and vinyl siding. 
Designers are encouraged to vary materials from building to building while limiting the number of different materials to three on any individual structure. 
b.  Colors. In general, neutral or muted tones should be used. A maximum of three predominant colors should be used. Painted or factory-finished metal should be used only in dark colors with a matte finish. 
c.  Accessory buildings. Metal buildings shall be an accessory to the principal structure without public access, typically used for storage and must be concealed from view. Large areas of exposed concrete are discouraged. 
d.  Architectural elements. All development designs are to be consistent or compatible within a development in terms of architectural design, exterior building materials, colors and/or arrangement of buildings. 
1.  Rooflines shall be strongly defined. Canopies and other architectural elements, such as brick or rockwork details, which define the roof, are encouraged. All mechanical/electrical equipment and rooftop- or ground-mounted equipment and protrusions are to be screened from view from entrances and pedestrian pathways as viewed from on-site ground level. Roof-mounted equipment must be screened on all sides. Sloped roofs may be used in combination with flat roofs to enliven the building profile and to provide screening. 
2.  Large blank walls shall be avoided. Recessed or articulated wall surfaces, columns and beams are encouraged to visually segment exterior wall surfaces. Windows and other openings should reflect the character and style of the building. 
3.  Service areas, including storage, special equipment, maintenance and loading area, shall be completely screened so as not to be visible from the interstate, expressway or arterial highway. 
4.  Refuse collection areas shall be visually screened using materials and colors compatible with those of the primary structure and shall be roofed if the contents are visible from any public street, interstate, expressway or arterial street. 
(6)  Signs. Although signs occupy little space, they have a major impact on the image of the Gateway District Overlay. For this reason, signage systems must be designed to create a consistent quality image throughout the district. Specific requirements can be found in article IV of this chapter, signs, additional requirements are set forth in this document that also apply within the Gateway District Overlay. The intent is to create a cohesive image and to consistently decrease the amount of clutter and visual disturbance within the district. Any appeals to the following standards must be presented to the gateway review commission: 
a.  Permanent signs will be reduced by up to 50 percent of the square footage allowed in the underlying zoning district by the gateway review commission, and are limited to one freestanding sign and one wall mounted sign. 
b.  Monument style signs are required with the signs height and square footage being in scale with the building or site. Signs are required to be internally illuminated block letters mounted on a raceway. Backlit letters and indirectly illuminated signs are acceptable. A three-color maximum is allowed for signs with up to two font styles. Ground-mounted building identification signs shall have fully enclosed solid bases of either brick or stone, mounted at the ground plane. No supporting structural members are to be exposed. Specific underlying zoning requirements for signs can be found in article IV of this chapter. 
c.  The following signs are prohibited: A-frame signs; roof-mounted signs or portico-mounted signs; bench signs; off-premises signage; captive balloon signs; inflatable signs; portable signs and portable signs converted to permanent locations; lollipop signs; paper, cloth, plastic streamers and canvas; painted signs on primary walls; pendants; traffic sign replicas; high-rise signs; permanent come-on signs (sale today, stop, look, etc.). Strings with continuous flags shall not be permitted. 
d.  Changeable copy signs are allowed for automobile service stations, theaters, and conference centers. Electronic message board signs may be considered with the review of the commission if they are allowed by the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Landscaped areas are required around the base of signs. The minimum landscaped area shall not be less than the square footage of the sign. The landscaped area must be protected from vehicular traffic and approved by the city landscape specialist. 
f.  Interim signs. While signs of a nonpermanent nature are generally not permitted, any sign that is not permanent in nature and fails to meet permanent sign requirements must meet the following respective specifications: 
1.  For sale and for lease signs shall be limited to two per parcel. The size shall be limited to one square foot of sign for every four feet of lot road frontage up to a maximum of 64 square feet for one surface, or 32 square feet per side with two faces maximum. Real estate signs shall have a maximum height of six feet, measured from the ground level (average grade). 
2.  Temporary signs for construction sites shall not exceed 64 square feet total and shall be removed upon completion of construction activity and before occupancy of the building. 
g.  Special event signs must be removed following the event and are permitted only on the premises during the event, but in no case longer than 15 days. See section 114-528(2)d for size allowances. 
(7)  Landscaping and screening. The landscape guidelines are designed to maintain overall visual continuity within the Gateway District Overlay. The intent is to reflect the traditional character of the area with informal groupings of plants amidst green lawns and woodlands. Landscape design should complement this image. 
a.  A performance bond is required for a period of one-year, with extensions granted when necessary, for landscaping not installed at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Landscaping must be maintained for the lifetime of the intended use. Landscaped areas are required around the base of signs. The minimum landscaped area shall not be less than the square footage of the sign. The landscaped area must be protected from vehicular traffic and approved by the city landscape specialist. 
b.  Healthy existing trees should be retained whenever possible and may be counted as credit (two trees for every saved tree) for other required landscaping. Grading and construction shall avoid the disturbance of such trees. Larger trees or up to double the amount of required number of trees and vegetation may be required by the commission if it is shown the site was clear cut within three years prior to submittal of a development plan. 
c.  Landscape incentives may be utilized to encourage the preservation of existing healthy vegetation and innovative site design. Existing healthy vegetation and the area of land used to maintain the vegetation may be counted towards meeting performance criteria for buffers, streetscapes, open space, and interior parking areas. 
1.  A five to 20 percent reduction in the number of parking spaces required on the site may be allowed to the extent that the reduction in the amount of pavement will preserve existing healthy trees in an undisturbed natural condition. 
2.  A ten percent reduction in the amount of pervious area is required on the site if public art/space in a compatible manner is included in the development. 
3.  A reduction in required landscaping may be considered if the development includes innovative site/building design concepts, substantial redevelopment of a site, or if natural constraints exist. 
4.  The area used for preservation of existing healthy vegetation in the interior parking area may be used as credits for other landscaping. 
5.  Substitutions for both trees and shrubbery amounts and locations may be considered by the commission with a recommendation from the landscape specialist. 
d.  Fencing and screening. Long fences (50 feet or more) should be broken up by landscaping or undulation in the fence line. Chain link and unfinished wood fences are not allowed. 
1.  Fencing and screening shall not be placed within 25 feet of any street corner. Fencing and screening shall not block access to aboveground, pad-mounted transformers and should provide 15 feet of clear access to the transformer doors. 
2.  Fencing and screening shall not impede or divert the flow of water in any drainageway. 
3.  The maximum height of fences should generally be six feet, except for tennis courts, storage screening, and similar uses which may be up to 12 feet in height. No fences over two feet six inches shall be placed in any front yard. 
4.  The Gateway District Overlay approved standard for right-of-way border fencing or frontal fencing is required along interstate, expressways or arterial highways. 
(8)  Lighting and utilities. Lighting should be used as a landscape element and for security purposes and should be designed to reduce impacts on adjacent sites. Consistency in style and design of fixtures shall be maintained throughout a site. 
a.  Lighting levels should be as even as possible. For all private roadways, parking lots and entrances, the lighting system should provide a minimum ratio of 4:1 uniformity or better, or with the current Institute of Electrical Standards (IES) recommendations for office and mixed-use developments. General parking lot lighting shall not exceed an average of 21/2 footcandles overall. All lighted canopies shall have recessed, indirect lights within the canopy. 
b.  Lights placement must avoid glare on-site or light spillage onto adjacent sites. Where necessary, cutoff boxes should be specified to reduce throw on adjacent sites. 
c.  Neon lighting is not encouraged; however, soft and/or muted colors may be allowed. 
d.  Light poles are to be neutral, preferably dark in color and not made of wood. All parking and security lights are to be cutoff luminaries. The height of light fixtures should be in proportion to the building mass, preferably no taller than the building height. Lighting for pedestrian areas should be 12 to 15 feet in height. Ground-oriented pedestrian scale lighting should be considered as an alternative to pole-mounted fixtures along pedestrian walkways at three to four feet in height. 
e.  Outside speakers shall not be permitted for use as paging or public address systems. Outside speakers may only be used under certain conditions, with the commission's approval, for special/cultural or public events. 
f.  All utility lines, including but not limited to electric, telephone and TV cable shall be placed underground. 
(9)  Parking. The desire of the gateway review committee is to visually shield parking areas from public streets and residential areas. 
a.  All parking lots and drives shall be hard surfaced with concrete or asphalt, unless an acceptable alternative is approved by the commission, and shall have concrete extruded curbs. Special paving or marking is required for accent areas such as: entrance dropoff zones and pedestrian walkways. 
b.  Innovative design concepts to improve parking area appearance are encouraged. All parking areas shall be visually screened from roadways with plantings or earth mounding (berms) 21/2- to three-feet high. Where planting material is used exclusively, 60 percent opacity must be achieved in the winter and 80 percent in the summer. 
c.  A landscaped area with a minimum of ten feet shall be provided between parking and internal roadways and entry drives. 
d.  Large parking areas shall be broken into smaller sections, using berms and landscape medians for separation. On wooded sites, preservation of groups of trees is encouraged to frame smaller parking cells and to screen the parked cars. 
e.  Outdoor display areas may require up to 50 percent greater landscape requirements as established by these provisions. 
f.  On-street parking is not permitted. 
g.  Parking lots of contiguous developments should, where possible, interconnect among the differing developments to encourage continuous movement of traffic among developments to reduce traffic flow on public streets and to minimize the need for excessive curb cuts. 
(c)  Design strategies for development within M-1, M-1R and M-2 districts. The following shall apply to all M-1, M-1R and M-2 zoning districts within the Gateway District Overlay: 
(1)  Grading plan. Improvements on the site should be developed to minimize changes in existing topography and the loss of existing mature vegetation. Smooth topographic transition should be provided at the edges of property. Sites should be located to minimize destruction of existing vegetation. All existing trees with trunks over 12 inches in diameter measured at four foot above the lowest grade should be shown on the grading plans. Incentives are provided to retain healthy existing trees. Minimum changes in topography are recommended healthy existing trees. Minimum changes in topography are recommended with no slopes exceeding 1:3 ratio (one-foot rise to a three-foot run). All grading plans require approval by the engineering department. Plans for sites over one-acre require approval by the state department of environment and conservation before a grading permit can be issued. See the erosion control provisions of this Code for additional requirements. 
(2)  Site plan. The purpose of the gateway regulations in industrial areas is to minimize impacts on adjacent properties by providing adequate green space, buffering, and screening around the area proposed for development. A combination of opaque fencing, topography, berming or informal plantings, as recommended by the landscape specialist, is encouraged to be used. The site plans must meet all city requirements for grading, erosion control, and stormwater management. 
(3)  Architectural design and materials. Permanence in quality should be evident in both the building design and construction materials. Permanence implies that buildings should age without deteriorating, given a minimum level of maintenance. This can be achieved through the use of quality building materials and methods of construction. 
a.  The building facade shall be finished with brick, precast or cast in place concrete textured panels, glass, prefinished architectural panels (without exposed fasteners), stone or other materials acceptable to the committee. 
b.  No building shall be constructed of exposed concrete block unless it is split face, fluted, or such blocks are covered with stucco, Dryvit or equivalent. 
c.  The use of metal buildings is acceptable provided the facade shall be finished with acceptable materials listed in subsection (b)(5)a of this section. 
d.  Dumpsters shall be screened or fenced. Loading docks will be permitted on the main elevation of a building that faces the street. Landscaping and screening should be provided to soften the visual impact. 
e.  All HVAC or other equipment located on the roof of any building, or other equipment affixed to, or located on the ground, shall be landscaped or screened from public view. 
(4)  Landscape plan. Plans and specifications for any building or structure to be constructed on any lot shall include a detailed landscape plan indicating the location, size, type and height of each planting. The area between the lot property line and the street curbline shall be grassed except for areas covered by pavement, sidewalks, and landscaping. All landscaping required on any lot shall be completed within 60 days of substantial completion of construction, or within schedules set forth in the approved plans. 
(5)  Parking areas. Off-street parking will be determined by the underlying zoning district with review by the commission as part of the overall site plan review process. Parking shall be provided on the lot to accommodate all parking needs of employees, visitors, and company vehicles. All parking areas will be paved, curbed and appropriately marked. 
(6)  Signage. Signage shall be determined by the underlying zoning district subject to commission review as part of the overall site plan review process. 
(7)  Lighting and utilities. Plans and specifications for any building or structure to be constructed on any lot shall include a detailed lighting plan indicating the location, type and footcandle strength of the lights. Lighting may be used as a landscape element and for security purposes. Light placement must avoid glare on site or light spillage onto adjacent sites or roadways. Where necessary, cutoff boxes should be specified to reduce throw onto adjacent sites. All utilities from the service lines to the improvements on each lot shall be underground. 
(d)  Design strategies for development within the MX district. The following shall apply within MX districts: 
(1)  Site plan. The planning commission and the gateway review commission shall approve a master site plan for the entire district. The district allows flexibility in the development of compatible mixed uses with areas of light manufacturing, professional office, and commercial uses, and to do so by developing a self-contained campus-like atmosphere that protects adjacent uses. 
(2)  Grading plan. A master-grading plan shall be submitted which incorporates design features described in this article. The plan shall be designed to meet the erosion control provisions of the subdivision regulations (on file in the clerk's office) and this chapter and shall have the approval of the state department of environment and conservation, and the city engineering department prior to being submitted to the gateway review commission. 
(3)  Landscape plan. The master plan shall address the MX district as viewed from the surrounding road network and adjacent land uses. It is important that an image be presented that complements the sites natural setting. In order to achieve a natural edge, landscape treatments should be designed within the setback buffers and the periphery yard and aimed at providing an entry statement into the park. Earth contours and landscape plantings are to be organized to shield large buildings, parking areas, and lay down yards, which may be visible from adjacent areas. 
(4)  Architectural design. Within the MX district, architectural design is not specified; however, the materials, colors, architectural elements, and treatment of accessory buildings shall be provided on the master plan. It is encouraged that previous sections of this article be used in designing these elements. 
(5)  Signs. The number and size of signs shall be as permitted with the underlying zoning ordinance. Signs within the district shall be monument style and landscaped. 
(6)  Landscaping and screening. Where land uses change within the district, a densely planted strip of 15 to 25 feet in width, depending on the use, shall be created to screen areas from each other. Interstates, expressways, or arterial highways shall be screened with landscaping or architectural elements so that service areas including special equipment, maintenance, and loading areas are obscured from view. Where landscaping is used exclusively for this purpose it must achieve 60 percent opacity in the winter and 80 percent opacity in the summer. 
(7)  Lighting and utilities. Lighting should be used as a landscape element and for security purposes and should be designed to reduce impacts on adjacent sites. Consistency in style and design of fixtures shall be maintained throughout the site. All utility lines shall be underground. 
(8)  Parking. Parking areas shall be designed and landscaped as required by the MX district parking provisions. The use of berms and landscaping is encouraged to shield parking areas from public streets and residential areas. 
(Code 1998, § 114-506; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-422. - Submission requirements and review process. 
(a)  Review of applications. Certificates of appropriateness are required for building permits and certificates of occupancy. All applications for permits for construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation or relocation of a building, structure or other improvements to real estate situated within the Gateway District shall be reviewed by the gateway review commission, and approved or disapproved, with findings of fact for the disapproval stated in writing. No building permit may be issued by the city for signage, landscaping, new or redeveloped structures, site grading, or other exterior improvements within the Gateway District without issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the Gateway District commissioners, or their designee, or by the board of mayor and aldermen on appeal, as provided in these guidelines. 
(b)  Mixed-use district. For developments within mixed-use zoning districts that receive comprehensive approval by the commission, the planning manager will have the authority to issue a certificate of appropriateness for individual uses within the park, on finding that the requirements of this division have been met. This will be reported to the commission at its next meeting. 
(c)  Plan review procedures and applications. All applications for corridor review shall be submitted and reviewed according to the following procedures: 
(1)  A complete application shall be submitted not less than 30 working days before the gateway review commission meeting with complex developments, and ten working days before the gateway review commission meeting at which the applicant wishes to be reviewed for minor external changes, signs, and previously reviewed projects. 
(2)  Gateway review commission approval shall be in effect for two years from the date of the certificate of appropriateness for small developments. If the project is not completed within the two-year timeframe, the certificate of appropriateness shall be voided. Large ongoing industrial or mixed-use developments shall have approval for a period of five years and approval shall be reinstated under the previously approved development plans, unless significant changes have taken place. 
(3)  If the gateway review commission denies granting a certificate of appropriateness, the gateway review commission will not accept a reapplication for a certificate unless significant changes have been made to the site plan. 
(4)  The planning director, or the gateway review commissions' designee, shall have the authority to amend site plans after certificates of appropriateness have been issued, provided the amendments are minor in scope. The planning director, or the designee, shall report to the gateway review commission any amendments to the plans that have received a certificate of appropriateness. 
(5)  Failure of the corridor overlay review commission to act on an application within the time required in this section shall constitute approval of the certificate, without undue circumstances, and that an extension be granted upon concurrence of the applicant. 
(6)  Applicants will be informed in writing of the outcome of their review within one week. 
(d)  Application requirements. Applicants shall submit the following information, as required, for review by the gateway review commissioners before the application shall be considered complete: 
(1)  Plans, drawings, color and material samples, photographs and or a narrative showing new development and alterations/additions as set out in this subsection (d). 
(2)  Survey (drawn at a minimum scale of one-inch equals 30 feet) of property lines, existing topography maps (with five-foot contour intervals or less), zoning boundaries, locations of adjoining properties and its uses, nearby locations of streets, utilities, the approximate location of trees (meeting the 12-inch dbh requirement) the location of bordering streets and existing and proposed access points, proposed grading as approved by a licensed engineer and other pertinent information or revisions, as may be required by the commission. 
(3)  Site plan (drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 30 feet) of property lines, existing topography maps (with five-foot contour intervals or less), zoning boundaries, locations of adjoining properties and its uses, nearby locations of streets, utilities, the approximate location of trees (meeting the 12-inch dbh requirement) the location of bordering streets and existing and proposed access points, proposed grading as approved by a licensed engineer and other pertinent information or revisions, as may be required by the commission. 
(4)  Architectural plans depicting elevation drawings including exterior building materials and colors and depictions of the front and sides that are exposed to public roads with accurate dimensions and bearings and prepared and signed (with seal) by a registered engineer or architect as licensed by state law. 
(5)  Filing fee in an amount as specified by the city. 
(6)  For minor external changes: 
a.  Photographs and/or drawings of existing development. 
b.  Site plan showing location of existing development. 
c.  Drawings, material samples and color samples of proposed changes. 
(7)  For sign applications: 
a.  Accurate color rendering of the proposed signs showing dimensions, type of lettering materials and actual color samples. 
b.  For freestanding signs, a site plan (showing the location of the signs in addition to buildings, parking, existing signs, property lines and proposed landscaping. 
c.  For wall signs, a rendering of the building depicting the proposed location and proportions of the signs. 
d.  Fixture type and wattage of lighting with light intensity in footcandles. 
e.  Filing fee in an amount as specified by the city. 
f.  In multitenant centers, project signs may be used that incorporate the overall scheme of the project. Each user with the project that stays within the approved criteria may seek approval from planning department staff, or the gateway review commission's designee, without revisiting the gateway review commission for additional signage. 
g.  All freestanding signs must be monument style with permanent bases of rock or brick, except small directional signs. 
(e)  Minor amendments. Minor changes to previously approved plans and/or projects may be submitted by the applicant to the planning manager and will be considered using the following guidelines: 
(1)  Amendments may be made to any previously approved project where a certificate of appropriateness has been issued after review and approval by a minimum of two members of the gateway review commission without submittal to the full commission. If any question arises as to compliance with the previously approved certificate, the planning director shall refer the amendment to the full commission for action. 
(2)  This action is intended to expedite approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and generally relate to minor improvements or changes. Such amendments must meet the Gateway District Overlay development guidelines. Such amended plans shall have written on them the exact changes made, and a note for the planning director's and the two gateway review commissioner's signatures, signifying their approval under this section for the amendments as noted. Any plans approved by this group shall be fully described to the full commission at its next meeting and properly entered into the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1998, § 114-507; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-423. - Gateway review commission-Appeal of actions. 
    Any interested party who is aggrieved by any action of the commission, including the approval or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, may appeal its decision to the board of mayor and aldermen for the city by filing an appeal on a designated form and paying such filing fee as may be required within 30 days of the action of the commissioners. The action that is appealed may be overruled by an affirmative majority vote of board of mayor and aldermen for the city. All appeals shall be heard within 60 days of filing of an application for appeal. Appeal from the action of the board of mayor and aldermen for the city shall be by writ of certiorari as provided in general law and shall be filed within 30 days of such action. 
(Code 1998, § 114-508; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-424. - Same-Enforcement of decisions. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained, or used, or any land is used in violation of this act or of any regulation or provisions enacted or adopted by the commission under the powers granted by this act, the board of commissioners, the attorney general, the district attorney general for the judicial circuit in which such violation occurs, or is occurring, the mayor, the city manager with approval of the board, the department of code administration and inspection, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action, actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin or abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or use. 
(Code 1998, § 114-509; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-425. - Changes to the Gateway District Overlay development guidelines. 
(a)  The gateway review commission recognizes that development is a dynamic, not static enterprise. To accommodate changes and innovations in the development process, these guidelines will need to be modified from time to time. 
(b)  The process to amend these guidelines shall require a public hearing to be held by the commission. Notification outlining the changes shall be mailed to all affected property owners within the district at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notifications will also include the time, date and location of the public hearing. 
(c)  A notice of public hearing shall also be published in the local newspaper providing the details specified in subsection (b) of this section, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(Code 1998, § 114-510; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 114-426. - Legal description of the district. 
(a)  The zoning map of the city is zoned to provide a GDO, Gateway District Overlay, to be superimposed upon the existing area in the city, described within the following boundary: 
    Beginning at a point, said point located at the intersecting centerline of Cox Hollow Road and Snapps Ferry Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119 dated 2003; thence in a westerly direction following the centerline of Snapps Ferry Road for a distance of approximately 3,350 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of Rock Springs Road and Snapps Ferry Road; thence in a southerly direction crossing the right-of-way of Interstate 81 for a distance of approximately 520 feet to a point, said point located on the southerly right-of-way of Interstate 81, said point also being the northwesterly corner of parcel 75 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119; thence following said parcel line and interstate right-of-way for a distance of approximately 500 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 75, said point also being located on the Urban Growth Boundary as approved by the State of Tennessee for the City of Kingsport; thence in an easterly direction following the southerly extent of the Urban Growth Boundary for a distance of approximately 14,780 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of parcel 40 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northeasterly direction following the southerly property line of parcels 40, 41, and 44 for a distance of approximately 1,150 feet to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction following the easterly property line of parcel 44 for a distance of approximately 1,250 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Mitchell Road; thence following the centerline of Mitchell Road in a northeasterly direction for approximately 975 feet to a point, said point being an extension of parcel 24.40 shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northwesterly direction following said property line extended for a distance of approximately 900 feet to a point, said point limits; thence in a southwesterly direction following the Kingsport City limits as shown on Sullivan County tax map 60 for a distance of approximately 1,650 feet to a point, said point located on the northerly property line of parcel 28 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 60, said point also being located 2,000 feet from the centerline of Interstate 181; thence in a southeasterly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Interstate 181 approximately 11,250 feet to a point, said point being the intersection of Reservoir Road and Jayne Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 75; thence continuing with and parallel to Interstate 181 for a distance of 1,950 feet to the intersecting centerlines of Diana Road and Hinkle Road; thence in a southerly direction following the centerline of Hinkle Road for a distance of approximately 850 feet to the centerline of Princeton Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 75; thence in a southerly direction following the westerly property line of parcel 102.02 extended for a distance of approximately 1,500 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 102.02 and the city limits as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence in a westerly direction following the southerly property line of parcel 99 and the city limits for a distance of approximately 100 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of parcel 64 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence in a southerly direction following the westerly property boundary of Gaylemont Subdivision for a distance of approximately 1,800 feet to a point, said point located on the northerly right-of-way of Sullivan Gardens Parkway; thence in a southeasterly direction crossing Sullivan Gardens Parkway for a distance of approximately 200 feet to a point, said point being the northwesterly corner of parcel 61 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 90; thence following the westerly property line of parcel 61 for a distance of approximately 300 feet to a point located on Horse Creek; thence following the northerly shore of Horse Creek for a distance of approximately 800 feet to a point, said point also being the Kingsport City limit; thence in a southeasterly direction following the westerly property line of parcel 61 and Kingsport City limits for a distance of approximately 2,000 feet to a point, said point being the northwesterly corner of parcel 12 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91; thence in a northeasterly direction following the northerly property lines of parcels 12, 11, 10 and 9 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91 for a distance of approximately 2,500 feet to a point, said point being the northeastern corner of parcel 9 and the northwestern corner of Timberidge Subdivision; thence in a southeasterly direction following the common property line of parcel 9 and Timberidge Subdivision for a distance of approximately 1,500 feet to a point located in the centerline of McCulley Lane; thence in a northeasterly direction following the centerline of McCulley Lane to its intersection with Shadyview Road, said point also being approximately 2,000 feet from the centerline of Interstate 181; thence in a southerly direction of parallel with the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 8,450 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Rock Springs Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 105; thence continuing with and parallel to Interstate 181 for a distance of 5,225 feet to a point located on the centerline of Cox Hollow Road; thence following the centerline of Cox Hollow Road for a distance of approximately 1,250 feet to a point as shown on Sullivan County tax map 105; thence following the centerline of Cox Hollow Road for a distance of 2,700 feet as shown on Sullivan County tax map 119 to the point of being the common corner of parcels 24.10/24.40 and 27.25 and the city limits as shown on Sullivan County tax map 120; thence in a northeasterly direction following the city limits for a distance of approximately 4,450 feet to a point located on the centerline of Fordtown Road as shown on Sullivan County tax map 106, dated 2003; thence following the centerline of Fordtown Road in an easterly direction and the city limits for a distance of 125 feet to a point, said point being an extension of the southwesterly property line of parcel 26 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 106 and the city limits; thence following the city limits for a distance of 4,825 feet to a point, said point located on the centerline of Interstate 81; thence following the centerline of Interstate 81 in a southwesterly direction for a distance of 650 feet to a point, said point being located 2,000 feet from the intersecting centerlines of Interstate 181 and Intestate 81; thence in a northerly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Intestate 181 for a distance of approximately 17,500 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of tax parcel 2 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 91 and the city limits; thence in a northeasterly direction crossing the right-of-way of John B. Dennis Highway for a distance of 400 feet to a point, said point being the southeasterly corner of parcel 3.2-A-76J; thence following the northerly property lines of parcels 3.2-A-76J and 3.25-A-76J for a distance of 1,500 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of parcel 17-A-76G; thence following the northerly property line of parcel 17-A-76G and the northerly boundary of Whispering Hills Addition for a distance of approximately 1,500 feet to a point located on the centerline of South Eastman Road; thence following the centerline of South Eastman Road in a northeasterly direction for a distance of approximately 2,850 feet to a point located in the center of the Sluice as shown on Sullivan County tax map 76; thence in a northwesterly direction following the center of the Sluice for a distance of approximately 2,850 feet to a point located on the centerline of Wilcox Drive; thence continuing along the center of the Sluice for a distance of approximately 1,550 feet to a point which is the confluence of the Sluice and Horse Creek as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61; thence in a southwesterly direction following the center of Horse Creek as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61 for a distance of approximately 2,550 feet to a point, said point being the northeasterly corner of tax parcel 14 as shown on Sullivan County tax map 61; thence following the northwesterly property line of said parcel for a distance approximately 1,100 feet to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of parcel 14; thence continuing in a southwesterly direction following the northwesterly property line of parcel 14 extended for a distance of approximately 550 feet to a point; thence continuing in a southwesterly direction for a direction for a distance of approximately 300 feet to a point being the intersection of the northerly property line of parcel 6.9 and Horse Creek Lane as shown on Sullivan County tax map 76, said point also being approximately 2,000 feet from the centerline of Intestate 181; thence in a northerly direction with and parallel to the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 6,500 feet to a point, said point being located on the property line of tax parcels 60-4 and 5; thence in a westerly direction for a distance of approximately 2,000 feet to a point located on the centerline of Interstate 181; thence continuing a westerly direction from the centerline of Interstate 181 for a distance of approximately 650 feet to a point, said point located on the Huntington Place Subdivision boundary and the city; beginning, and being that area proposed to be designated as the gateway area. 
(b)  All property located within the city planning region with an elevation over 1,400 feet above mean sea level shall also be subject to the provision of the Gateway Overlay District. These provisions for elevations in excess of 1,400 feet will not apply to single-family detached homes or agricultural uses. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall regulate the portion of the overlay district found within the corporate limits of the city. If the corporate limits of the city should change in the future due to annexation, the commissioners shall, upon the effective date of the annexation, regulate the new portions pursuant to the provisions of the act. 
(Code 1998, § 114-511; Ord. No. 5464, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Secs. 114-427-114-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CONSERVATION DISTRICT OVERLAY (CO) 

Sec. 114-451. - Intent. 
    Within the city there are unique and distinctive older in-town residential neighborhoods and commercial districts which contribute significantly to the overall character and identity of the city and are considered worthy of conservation and protection. Some of these areas may lack sufficient historical, architectural or cultural significance at the present time to be designated as historic districts. As a matter of public policy, the city aims to preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate the value of these residential neighborhoods or commercial districts through the establishment of a Conservation District Overlay as provided in T.C.A. § 13-7-401 et seq. The purposes of the Conservation District Overlay are as follows: 
(1)  To promote and provide for economic revitalization and/or enhancement; 
(2)  To protect and strengthen desirable and unique physical features, design characteristics, and recognized identity, charm and flavor; 
(3)  To protect and enhance the livability of the area; 
(4)  To reduce conflict and prevent blighting caused by incompatible and insensitive development, and to promote new compatible development; 
(5)  To stabilize property values; 
(6)  To stabilize housing in areas surrounding downtown; 
(7)  To provide residents and property owners with a planning bargaining tool for future development; 
(8)  To promote and retain affordable housing; 
(9)  To encourage and strengthen civic pride; and 
(10)  To encourage the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and redevelopment of the city. 
(Code 1998, § 114-520; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-452. - Authority and review. 
    The city regional planning commission is authorized to make, promulgate, alter, amend or repeal rules and regulations for the enforcement of this division and it shall administer the provisions of this division and the rules and regulations made by it and shall have and exercise the duties and powers set forth in this division. 
(Code 1998, § 114-521; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-453. - Area designation. 
    To be designated a Conservation District Overlay the area must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The area must contain a minimum of one block face (all the lots on one side of a block); 
(2)  The area must have been platted or developed at least 25 years ago; and 
(3)  The area must possess one or more of the following distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association: 
a.  Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials; 
b.  Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks; 
c.  Special natural or streetscape characteristics; 
d.  Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; or 
e.  Abuts or links designated historic landmarks and/or districts. 
(Code 1998, § 114-522; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-454. - Zoning authority. 
(a)  Guidelines for each Conservation District Overlay shall identify the designated boundaries of the Conservation District Overlay and specify the individual purposes and standards for that Conservation District Overlay. In case of conflict between this division, or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of city, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
(b)  The Conservation District Overlay is designed as an overlay to the regular zoning district. Properties designated within these districts are also designated as being within one of the established zoning districts. Authorized uses must be permitted in both the zoning district and the Conservation District Overlay. Such property shall comply with all applicable use restrictions pursuant to the individual district plan. 
(1)  The zoning designation for property located within a Conservation District Overlay shall consist of the base zone symbol and the district overlay symbol (CO) as a suffix. The Conservation District Overlay shall be designated using the letters of the initials of the district overlay plan name to distinguish among different overlay districts, i.e., R-1 (CO-DK), R-4 (CO-RS), etc. 
(2)  The designation of property within the Conservation District Overlay places such property in a new zoning district classification and all procedures and requirements for zoning/rezoning must be followed. 
(3)  Upon designation of an area as a Conservation District Overlay, the district shall be placed on the city's official zoning map. 
(Code 1998, § 114-523; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-455. - Guidelines. 
(a)  Proposals for designation as a Conservation District Overlay may be initiated as follows: 
(1)  At the direction of the city regional planning commission or the board of mayor and alderman; 
(2)  At the request of property owners representing 51 percent of the land area within the proposed district; or 
(3)  At the request of 51 percent of property owners in a proposed district. 
(b)  A district land use plan shall be approved as part of the Conservation District Overlay unless the area is an approved redevelopment district or other unique or special area as determined by the board of mayor and alderman or the city regional planning commission. 
(c)  Following a request for designation of a Conservation District Overlay, the city regional planning commission may approve an individual area plans, with maps, lines, words and figures, which shall be kept on file with the city and made part of this division as though copied herein, that may include the following: 
(1)  Maps indicating the boundaries and land uses of the proposed district; 
(2)  Maps and other graphic and written materials identifying and describing the distinctive area and building characteristics of the proposed district; and 
(3)  Design standards and guidelines for new construction, rehabilitation, additions or alterations of existing buildings or structures within the proposed district. 
(d)  All property owners within the proposed district may participate in drafting the design standards by participation in public hearings that are held for that specific purpose. 
(Code 1998, § 114-524; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-456. - Area plan standards. 
(a)  The area land use plan that may be approved as part of the process of creating an individual Conservation District Overlay shall include, but not be limited to design standards and guidelines for new construction or placement of any building, structure, foundation, sign, public art or outdoor apparatus or equipment including: 
(1)  Visible utility boxes or mechanical equipment; 
(2)  Trucks; 
(3)  Lawn or landscaping equipment; and 
(4)  Any additions, alterations, relocation or rehabilitation to the street facades of existing buildings, structures, foundations, sign, public art or outdoor apparatus or equipment. 
(b)  The area land use plan, and requisite design standards shall not apply to those activities which constitute ordinary repair and maintenance, i.e., use of the same material and design and the temporary (less than five days) storage of maintenance equipment. 
(c)  The design standards for each Conservation District Overlay shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following elements governing the physical characteristics and features of all property (public or private) within the proposed district: 
(1)  Building height, number of stories, orientation; 
(2)  Building size, massing, frontage and entrance location/features and entrance lighting; 
(3)  Lot size, lot coverage, lot setbacks, FAR, density; 
(4)  Landscaping, fences, walls, and street furniture; 
(5)  Off-street parking and loading requirements; 
(6)  Roofline and pitch, front window, dormer size and location; 
(7)  Paving, and nonpervious ground covering including driveways and sidewalks; 
(8)  General site planning of primary, ancillary structures, signage, public art; 
(9)  Architectural style, details, and building materials; 
(10)  Location of garage entrance, satellite dishes, and utility boxes. 
(Code 1998, § 114-525; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-457. - Administration. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for new construction or an alteration or addition to an existing building or structure within a designated Conservation District Overlay without the submission and approval of such design plans to the planning manager or designee. 
(b)  The planning manager or designee, shall review design plans to determine compliance with the adopted standards contained in the design standards for a particular Conservation District Overlay. 
(c)  If the planning manager or designee, determines that the design plans are in conformance with the standards adopted for the district, the zoning administrator may issue a building permit. 
(d)  If the planning manager or designee, determines that the design plans are not in conformance with the design standards adopted for the overlay district, the planning manager shall not approve the plans, and shall issue notification of noncompliance, identifying the specific standards violated and the zoning administrator shall not issue a building permit until the design plans are approved. 
(e)  Applicants may appeal the planning manager's determination of noncompliance to the city regional planning commission for a final determination. 
(Code 1998, § 114-526; Ord. No. 5501, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Secs. 114-458-114-482. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PLANNED VILLAGE DISTRICT (PVD) 

Sec. 114-483. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, pertaining to planned village district shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Civic building means a building that houses an organization that includes but is not limited to, educational, cultural, social, services and religious not-for-profit organizations. 
    Civic use means premises reserved for use by organizations considered to support the common good and therefore accorded special treatment within the Planned Village District. Civic uses include, but are not limited to, educational, cultural, social, service organizations, and religious not-for-profit organizations. 
    Conservation easement means the grant of a property right stipulating that the described land will remain in its natural or existing state and limiting further future or additional development. 
    Green means an open space, available for unstructured recreation. The green is surrounded by roadways or the fronts of buildings, has a naturalized landscape consisting of grassy areas and trees, and requires only limited maintenance. 
    Greenway means a linear open space, at least 30-feet wide, established along either a natural corridor, such as a riverfront, stream valley, or ridge line, or overland along a railroad right-of-way converted to recreational use, a scenic road, or other route designed and managed for public use including wildlife habitat. A greenway is an open space connector linking parks, nature preserves, cultural features or historic sites with each other and with populated areas. 
    Gross acreage means the total area of a development site. 
    Live/work unit means a mixed-use structure held in single ownership and containing: 
(1)  Commercial, or office use, and 
(2)  Residential use which shall include the balance of the remaining building floor area. Residential use may utilize up to 100 percent of the building floor area. 
    Meeting hall means a building designed for public assembly. 
    Net acre means the total area of a development site, excluding wetlands, slopes over 20 percent average grade that are not proposed for development and conveyance zones. 
    Open space means any publicly dedicated or privately owned area of land or water (excluding roadways, medians and rights-of-way) that is permanently preserved. Such an area may be predominantly in a natural condition or improved or modified for uses such as recreation, education, aesthetic, cultural or natural resource management or public health and safety as designated on the plan. 
    Plaza means an open space at the intersection of important streets, set aside for civic purposes and short-term incidental commercial activity such as a farmers' market or public celebrations. It is surrounded by the fronts of buildings and/or streets and its landscape consists of durable pavement, formally disposed trees and other landscape elements. 
    Square means an open space at the intersection important streets set aside for civic purposes and surrounded by the fronts of buildings, its landscape consisting of paved walks, lawns, trees and civic buildings, all formally disposed. 
    Village means a self-contained community having an identifiable boundary and containing a village edge, village general, and a village center. 
    Village center (a required component of the village) serves as the focal point and informal gathering place of the village. It is made up of higher density residential uses, village serving shops and services, civic building, and more formal open space such as plazas or squares. The village center is not required to be in the general physical center of the village; it may typically be located at a central location (roughly within a five- to ten-minute walk of most residents) and/or where it can intercept traffic coming and going from the village. 
    Village edge (a required component of the village) is made up of lower density residential uses, civic uses, and permanent open space. It provides a discernible boundary for the village and preserves sensitive natural features and ensures compatibility with the surrounding pattern of land uses. 
(Code 1998, § 114-543; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-484. - Intent. 
(a)  The PVD, Planned Village District is designed to promote diversity and integration of uses and structures in a planned traditional neighborhood development through flexible design standards. This can be accomplished by promoting a variety of land uses, housing types, and density. This district is also created to avoid negative impacts of suburban sprawl by minimizing infrastructure costs, traffic congestion, and to encourage infill development. 
(b)  The purposes of a PVD include: 
(1)  Create new communities that are livable, diverse, and sustainable in proximity to existing neighborhoods, and developments; 
(2)  Provide for a variety of housing types, density, and cost; 
(3)  Respect and reinforce existing communities by integrating new development with the existing development to ensure compatibility; 
(4)  Provide flexibility to meet changing needs, technologies, economics, and consumer preferences; 
(5)  Promote lower development and building cost by permitting smaller networks and utilities and streets and use of shared facilities; 
(6)  Promote development patterns and land uses, which reduce transportation needs, conserve energy and natural resources; 
(7)  Take advantage of existing infrastructure that is underutilized. 
(Code 1998, § 114-541; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-485. - Authority and review. 
    The city regional planning commission is authorized to make, promulgate, alter, amend or repeal rules and regulations for the enforcement of this division, and it shall administer the provisions of this division and the rules and regulations made by it, and it shall have and exercise the duties and powers set forth in this division. 
(Code 1998, § 114-542; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-486. - Area designation. 
    An applicant for establishment of a PVD should submit a prospectus for consideration by the planning commission showing the character and use or mixture of uses proposed in the requested PVD. The planning commission shall make the recommendation for a zone change according to the law. The board of mayor and aldermen may approve or reject the recommendation of any proposal, together with any conditions, requirements, or limitations thereon which the planning commission and/or the board of mayor and aldermen deems appropriate. 
(Code 1998, § 114-544; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-487. - Permitted principal and accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  The following uses are for buildings and structures that are permitted, subject to approval of the development plan: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Townhouses; 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings; 
(4)  Garage apartments having a unit size which should not exceed 1,000 square feet; 
(5)  Commercial and office uses; 
(6)  Civic and religious buildings; and 
(7)  Open space, including squares, greens and other recreational uses (as provided for in section 114-488). 
(b)  For detached single-family dwellings, the ground floor area of the accessory buildings shall not exceed 600 square feet. The accessory buildings shall not exceed the number of stories of the principal structure. Accessory buildings for boats, recreational vehicles and other large items shall be in keeping with the dimensions outlined in the building codes governing the appropriate zoning. 
(Code 1998, § 114-545; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-488. - Development guidelines and standards. 
    The village pattern consists of two distinct required components; the village edge and the village center. A master plan shall include the following components: 
(1)  Limited size. A complete village has most dwellings within roughly a five- to ten-minute walk of the village center; 
(2)  A variety of housing types which allows younger and older people, singles and families, and people with a wide range of income to have places to live. Examples include detached housing on small, standard, or large lots, duplexes, row houses, live/work units; 
(3)  A network of connected streets and walkways, which include small lots and a variety of buildings generate a cohesive pattern that allows streets to be civic places. Building heights vary with one- and two-story structures; 
(4)  Cultural resources such as historic buildings and structures, districts and landscapes are to be preserved and reused in the village; 
(5)  Designated sites for civic buildings. Building such as schools, libraries, meeting halls, places of worship and day care facilities should occupy prominent places in the village and be planned in coordination with open spaces; and 
(6)  Open space and natural features, such as significant tree stands, wetlands, streams and slopes are encouraged to be retained, linked where possible and incorporated in a village pattern. 
(Code 1998, § 114-546; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-489. - Development standards. 
    The following standards are intended for use in preparing for a master plan of the PVD: 
(1)  Size of site. A village shall not have a minimum or maximum size; however, it would generally be about 20 to 200 acres. Parcels significantly larger than 200 acres should be developed as multiple villages with each village designated and designed to integrate into an overall plan. Application for sites less than 20 acres shall be considered when adjacent to integrated with an existing or approved village. 
(2)  Density. The maximum number of residential dwelling units permitted in a village district shall be eight dwelling units per net acre. 
(3)  Village edge. The village edge is a required component and should make up 70 to 98 percent of the total acreage of the village. It can include a combination of publicly or commonly owned land such as parks and greenways, and privately owned lands such as areas that have been protected by conservation easements and residential lots. However, the specific size, location, and design of the village is intended to be flexible based on the context of the adjacent pattern of the development in the presence of sensitive natural features. Transition between adjacent land uses and the village can be achieved through a village edge containing a combination of residential lots, and permanent open space. Landscape buffers shall be provided at the village edge regardless of the type of adjacent land use; however, transition between an existing neighborhood and the village can be achieved by creating a tree line boulevard or landscape buffer. 
(4)  Village center. The village center should be compact and located roughly within a five- to ten-minute walk of most village residents. It may also be located where it can intercept traffic coming and going from the village. The location of the village center may be altered where natural features are an existing pattern and development includes such a location. A minimum of two percent but not more than 30 percent of the gross acreage in the village should be designated as village center. To ensure a mixture of uses in the village center, the following guidelines shall apply: 
a.  Some dwelling units shall be located in the village center (at least ten percent of the total number of dwelling units in the village is recommended but not required). 
b.  Retail, office and service uses should be sized in area intensity to meet the needs of the village residents. 
c.  The maximum amount of individual commercial, office and service use to be located in the village center shall be provided by the applicant; however, single retail uses with building footprint of greater than 50,000 square feet shall be discouraged. 
d.  Home occupation uses and nonresidential uses within a live/work unit shall not be included in the gross feasible area calculations when determining maximum and minimum area. 
(5)  Schedule of area regulations. The following table sets forth the area regulations for the Planned Village District: 
Area Regulations 
Single-Family Two-Family Townhouse Live/Work Unit Lodging Use Office Use Commercial Use Civic Use Minimum lot size 5,000 sq. ft. 7,000 sq. ft. 2,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. Maximum lot size None None 4,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 43,560 sq. ft. 43,560 sq. ft. 43,560 sq. ft. 43,560 sq. ft. Minimum lot width 40 feet 50 feet 20 feet 40 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 40 feet Maximum height 21/2 stories 21/2 stories 2 stories 21/2 stories 31/2 stories 31/2 stories 31/2 stories 31/2 stories Maximum front yard setback 25 feet 25 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 25 feet Minimum front yard setback 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet Minimum street side yard setback 8 feet 6 feet 6 feet 8 feet 6 feet 0 feet 0 feet 8 feet Minimum rear yard setback 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 10 feet 0 feet 0 feet 5 feet Maximum building coverage 50% 55% 70% 55% 70% 70% 70% 70% Maximum impervious cover 65% 65% 90% 65% 90% 90% 90% 65%  
;le=2;1. For privacy, the ground level of town houses should be at least 18 inches above access roadway. 
;le=2;2. Each setback on a block or street shall be the same to promote a uniformed design. 
(6)  Schedule of permitted uses. The following table lists the uses permitted within a village: 
a.  The letter P designates the use that is permitted, subject to standards of design and location. 
b.  The letter S denotes a special exception, which must be approved by the board of zoning appeals. Subsequent requests for special exception uses shall require an amendment of the master plan. 
c.  The letter X means the use is not permitted. 
Uses Village Edge Village Center Residential Single-family dwelling P P Two-family dwelling X P Townhouse X P Accessory residence P P Live/work unit X P Lodging Bed and breakfast inn S P Hotel X P Motel X P Office Home occupation P P Office X P Commercial Neighborhood X P General X P Civic Churches S P Clubs S S Colleges, schools S S Day care center S P Family day care home P P Nursing homes S S Historical buildings P P Historical grounds P P Libraries, museums S P Art galleries S P Meeting hall X P Utilities P P Government uses P P Agriculture P P  
(Code 1998, § 114-547; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-490. - Site design. 
    Site design should be regulated in order to ensure compatibility of building types regardless of use and to create a cohesive development pattern. In addition to allow maximum flexibility, site design standards are not specified for the PVD. Instead, standards compatible with the village pattern shall be provided by the applicant in the prospectus and approved by the planning commission at the time of approval of the master plan. 
(1)  Housing density, composition and location. 
a.  The overall housing density of all principal units shall not exceed eight units per net acre. The planning commission may require fewer overall residential units per acre, based on the surrounding patterns of development, adopted plans, and traffic environmental constraints. 
b.  Composition location of housing: 
1.  Detached single-family dwellings and live/work units shall comprise at least 50 percent of the total number of residential units; 
2.  The location of the various types of unit shall be depicted on the master development plan. 
Residential units, which are above commercial uses, shall not be considered as single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parking regulations. 
a.  Single-family dwelling units require two off-street parking spaces per unit. 
b.  Townhouse and multifamily dwellings require 11/2 off-street parking spaces per unit unless the planning commission finds that one of the spaces per unit can be accommodated by on-street parking. 
c.  Garage doors and carports which face the front of the property shall be placed 20 feet beyond the setback of the principal structure. The planning commission may modify this requirement for no more than 25 percent of dwelling units in a development if warranted by topographic or other environmental conditions. 
(3)  Parking provisions for nonresidential uses. 
a.  Parking lots shall be located at the rear or the side of buildings. Side parking lots shall account for no more than 25 percent of parking and shall be screened from pedestrian and vehicular travel ways, by a combination of low walls or fences and landscaping. 
b.  Parking lots shall not abut a street intersection, the front yards of multifamily, civic or religious buildings, and shall not be adjacent to squares or parks, greens or public open spaces. 
c.  The minimum required parking spaces shall be governed by section 114-564. 
(Code 1998, § 114-548; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-491. - Procedures. 
    The following procedures shall be part of the approval process before the planning commission: 
(1)  Concept review. The applicant or designee may choose to request a pre-application conference with the planning staff prior to formal application for amendment of the zoning map, to discuss the effect of the comprehensive plan, the district regulations (in this article), the subdivision regulations (on file in the clerk's office) and other land development controls would have on the proposed development. It is intended that the pre-application conference also address apparent characteristics of the site that would affect the proposed development. In addition, the pre-application conference may be used to determine what elements may be required in the required master plan. 
(2)  Requirements of the concept plan. The applicant shall prepare a concept plan demonstrating compliance with the PVD purposes and standards for review in the pre-application conference. The concept plan shall include the following: 
a.  Scale, date, north arrow and vicinity map with measurements to nearest existing streets; 
b.  Boundaries land approximate acreage of subject property; 
c.  General location and description streams, wetlands conveyance zones, regulatory floodplains, topography and woodlands; 
d.  Existing uses of the property; 
e.  Location of site plan components required in the PVD (for example, village edge, village center, streets); 
f.  Number of residential units proposed and approximate square footage of commercial, office and service uses proposed; and 
g.  General location, size and type of open space. 
(3)  Master plan review. Prior to development, the applicant shall submit a master plan. No master plan application shall be deemed accepted unless complete and containing all of the following: 
a.  Boundary. A boundary of the proposed (stamped by a surveyor) plan development shall be submitted, along with the signatures of property owners. 
b.  Existing conditions map. A map or series of maps shall be drawn to the scale as a master plan and shall include the following: 
1.  Title of the proposed development and names of the applicants; scale, date, north arrow and vicinity map with measurements to existing streets; bounded description including area and bearings and dimensions of all property lines; 
2.  Existing topography with two-foot contour lines. Sloped category analysis for areas of 20 percent slope or greater; a location and names of all existing and proposed streets; location and use of all existing buildings; and 
3.  Features on adjacent property, which might affect the design of the development. 
(4)  Master plan map. The master plan map or maps shall be drawn as submitted at a scale not less detailed than one inch equals 100 feet or a scale acceptable to the planning commission, and shall include: 
a.  Delineation of site plan components required by a PVD (for example, village edge and village center); 
b.  Layout of proposed streets, landscaping and a pedestrian plan; 
c.  The location and acreage of open space with the indication of whether it is privately owned, a common area or dedicated for public use; and 
d.  Location and acreage of civic uses. 
(5)  Master plan report. The master plan report shall be part of the master plan, and shall include: 
a.  A statement indicating the purpose and intent of the project and the applicant's statement of how the project complies with the comprehensive plan and with guidelines specified for the PVD option; 
b.  A description of land uses and factors which ensure compatibility both within a development site and with adjacent land uses; 
c.  Statistical information including: 
1.  Gross acreage of site, plus net acreage of site excluding wetlands, floodplains, and slopes in excess of 20 percent; 
2.  Maximum number of dwelling units; 
3.  Maximum amount (gross feasible area) of retail, office and service uses; 
4.  Amount of land devoted to open space; and 
5.  Amount of land devoted to civic uses. 
(6)  Schedule. A schedule of the proposed development (for each section, if the development is to be developed by sections), which schedule shall not be binding but shall be provided in order to show generally how the applicant will complete the project and containing the following information: 
a.  The order of construction by section delineated on the master plan; 
b.  The anticipated time required developer sections; 
c.  The proposed schedule for construction of improvements for open spaces; and 
d.  Proposed schedule for installation of required improvements. 
(Code 1998, § 114-549; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-492. - Development procedures after plan approval. 
(a)  Construction plans designed to meet city standards, including grading, erosion control, stormwater management, streets, and utilities must be submitted and to and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  A landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the landscape specialist and zoning administrator. 
(c)  All infrastructure indicated on the approved plans shall be installed, and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may allow the submission of a performance bond for the construction of the infrastructure improvement in lieu of the construction of the infrastructure improvements in certain situations. Performance bonds shall be partially or fully released by the planning commission only on a recommendation by the city engineer that work is completed and acceptable to the city. 
(d)  Building permits for the PVD shall be issued once the construction of the infrastructure is completed and approved or bonded, and a final plan is approved by the planning commission. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only after a final subdivision plat dedicating streets, infrastructure, and establishing property lines is approved by the planning commission and recorded in the appropriate county register of deeds' office. 
(Code 1998, § 114-550; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 114-493. - Administration. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for new construction or an alteration or addition to an existing building or structure within a designated PVD without the submission and final approval of such design plans to the planning manager or planning commission. All buildings, infrastructure, etc., will be built to the approved final plan. No employee or city official has the authority to amend the final plan without the expressed authorization of the planning commission or planning manager. 
(b)  The planning manager, shall review design plans to determine compliance with the adopted standards contained in the design standards for a particular PVD. 
(c)  If the planning manager determines that the design plans are in conformance with the standards adopted for the district, the zoning administrator may issue a building permit. 
(d)  If the planning manager determines that the design plans are not in conformance with the design standards adopted for the district, the planning manager shall not approve the plans, and shall issue a notification of noncompliance, identifying the part of the design plan not in compliance with the specific standards, and the zoning administrator shall not issue a building permit until the design plans are approved. 
(e)  Applicants may appeal the planning manager's determination of nonconformance to the city regional planning commission for a final determination. 
(f)  Any interested party who is aggrieved by any action of the city regional planning commission may appeal its decision to the chancery court in the city by filing a common law writ of certiorari within 60 days of the action of the commission. 
(Code 1998, § 114-551; Ord. No. 5554, § I, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 114-494-114-524. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGNS 

Sec. 114-525. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate all exterior signs and interior signs positioned for exterior observance, so as to protect property values and the visual character of city development and the public health, safety and welfare. Signs are deemed to be an accessory and incidental use to the land or building which they identify or advertise for a use thereon, and it is intended that such signs will be appropriate and adequate, but not excessive, in performing their identification or advertising function. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-561) 
Sec. 114-526. - Administration. 
(a)  Fees and permits. Fees shall be charged for sign permits and for annual inspections. A permit for a sign shall become null and void if the sign is not installed within six months. In the lower righthand corner of a sign shall appear the permit identification number and date installed, the name of the person or owner responsible for such sign and any other appropriate information. 
(b)  Removal or repair of signs. Any sign which is erected not in conformance with this chapter or any sign which because of improper maintenance or disrepair becomes nonconforming or unsafe shall be removed or repaired pursuant to the provisions of the building code, and all amendments thereto, as incorporated by reference in section 22-96. 
(c)  Building and electrical code compliance. Any sign authorized by this chapter shall meet city building and electrical codes. 
(d)  Maintenance. Regular maintenance shall be performed to prevent deterioration. Signs not maintained in a state of good repair shall be removed at the property owner's expense within 30 days of notification. Any abandoned sign shall be removed within 30 days after notification by the city at the property owner's expense. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 10; Code 1998, § 114-562) 
Sec. 114-527. - Permit required. 
    No sign, except as described in section 114-528, shall be erected, remodeled, relocated or expanded until an application, containing information as required, is made and a permit issued by the building official. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-563) 
Sec. 114-528. - Permit exceptions. 
    The following signs shall not require a sign permit and are allowed in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Permanent signs. Signs which generally are permanent in nature as follows: 
a.  Official signs. Signs of a constituted governmental body, including traffic signs and signals, historical markers, informational directions, official notices, governmental flags or emblems, property identification, recreational activity signs. 
b.  Directional or location signs. Small signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, to identify underground public utilities, public telephones and restrooms, parking areas, freight entrances, etc., or to direct traffic movement onto a premises, within a premises or to indicate similar directional or location signs. 
c.  Ownership. Name and address identification signs, not to exceed two square feet in area, for a property owner or occupant. 
d.  Decorations. Seasonal displays not advertising a product, service or entertainment. 
e.  Warning signs. Signs, no larger than four square feet in area, warning the public against hunting, fishing, trespassing, swimming, etc., or to advise of dangerous animals, hazardous wastes, unsafe conditions, etc., on the applicable property. 
(2)  Temporary signs. Signs which shall exist for only limited time period as follows: 
a.  Official notices and campaigns. Official notices of government, to be removed within ten calendar days of notice action date; and civic, philanthropic, educational or religious campaign signs, not to exceed three months duration. 
b.  Real estate signs. One real estate sign on premises of property for sale, lease or rental, not to exceed six square feet in a residential district or 32 square feet in any other district. Such signs shall be removed within 14 calendar days of the sale, rental or lease of such premises. 
c.  Construction signs. No more than three on-site signs identifying the owner, financiers, professional design firms and contractors associated with the construction and building or subdivision or identifying the development's character or purpose, but no product advertisement. Each permitted sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall be removed within 14 calendar days after construction completion and shall not be displayed longer than two years from the date erected. 
d.  Business announcements. Temporary signs not exceeding 32 square feet, announcing going out of business, grand opening, under new management and similar announcements, shall be allowed two times per calendar year per proprietor, for a maximum of 15 days per event. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-564; Ord. No. 5497, § I, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 114-529. - Prohibited signs. 
    Under this chapter, the following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Effect of other laws. Any sign prohibited by any other law or regulation or any level of government. When this chapter is in conflict with other local ordinances, regulations or laws, the more restrictive ordinance or law shall govern and shall be enforced by the appropriate agencies. 
(2)  Portable signs. Portable or mobile signs, as defined in this chapter, shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Roof mounted signs. Signs shall not be located upon the roof of any building. 
(4)  Animated signs. A sign of which any part is in motion, flutters, or rotates is prohibited, except for the hands of a clock or a weather vane. 
(5)  Temporary signs. Except as provided by this chapter, any sign, banner, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Other signs. Any sign not provided for in this chapter shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-565) 
Sec. 114-530. - Applicability to all zoning districts. 
    The following shall apply in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Operations. The changing of copy on an approved sign or marquee specifically designed for use of replaceable copy and the painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance, unless a structural change is made, shall not require a building permit. 
(2)  Traffic hazards. Signs are prohibited which may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic through use of improperly working graphics, location, size, shape or color and thereby interfere with traffic signals, control signs or other aspects of safe street driving conditions. No sign shall use the words "Stop," "Go," "Caution," "Yield," etc., when such would be confused with traffic signs or devices. 
(3)  Obstruction. Any sign shall be prohibited which is considered a safety hazard due to obstruction of any window, door, fire escape ladder or opening intended for light or air or for ingress to or egress from any building. 
(4)  Lighting. Neon-type signs are permitted only in B-2, B-3, and B-4P zones. Any sign or illumination shall be prohibited that causes direct glare upon an unrelated building, as determined by the zoning administrator. Signs indicating time, temperature, and barometric pressure shall be permitted if they do not interfere with public safety or create a traffic hazard. 
(5)  Trees and poles. No sign shall be attached to a tree, and no sign shall be attached to a utility pole except for official governmental notices or warning signs. 
(6)  Height clearance. All signs shall have a minimum clearance of nine feet above a walkway. 
(7)  Setback. Unless otherwise restricted, no sign shall project beyond a property line, and no part of any sign shall be closer than five feet to any street right-of-way. Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the face of the building. 
(8)  Window signs. Signs placed in windows or glass walls shall not cover more than 25 percent of the glass area to which they are attached. 
(9)  Marquees. Signs may be on the vertical face of a marquee, but shall not extend below the lower edge or the upper edge of the marquee or exceed seven feet in height. The bottom of a marquee sign shall be not less than ten feet above a walkway or grade at any point. 
(10)  Projecting signs. No projecting sign shall be erected or maintained from the front of a building a distance of more than 36 inches. 
(11)  Sign content. Signs that contain statements or words of an obscene, pornographic or immoral character; that contain advertising matter which is untruthful; or that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter are prohibited. 
(12)  Devices. Any streamer, flag, air- or gas-filled device, searchlight or any other device whose purpose is to attract the attention of the public shall be allowed two times per calendar year per proprietor, for a maximum of 15 days per event, and such devices shall require a permit issued by the building official. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-566; Ord. No. 4714, § I, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 6533, § II, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 114-531. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any lawfully erected sign, the continuance of which does not conform to this chapter, may continue to be maintained exactly as it existed on June 16, 1981. No nonconforming sign shall: 
(1)  Be changed to another nonconforming sign; 
(2)  Have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is an off-premises advertising sign or a bulletin board or substantially similar type of sign, specifically designed for periodic change of message; 
(3)  Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign; 
(4)  Be reestablished after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 30 days or longer or shall be reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction cost. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals may permit variances from subsection (a)(2) of this section or variances permitting the erection or maintenance of a nonconforming sign only upon the grounds established by law for the granting of zoning variances or upon a finding that the grant of a variance will reduce the degree of nonconformance of an existing sign or will result in the removal of one or more lawfully nonconforming signs and replacement by a sign more in keeping with the spirit, purpose and provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 6; Code 1998, § 114-567; Ord. No. 4319, § I, 12-17-1996) 
Sec. 114-532. - Off-premises signs. 
    Off-premises advertising signs advertise products or services for businesses or organizations not connected with the site at which they are located. The following shall govern the placement of all off-premises signs. 
(1)  Zoning development plan approval. Signs shall require zoning development plan approval by the regional planning commission prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  Districts where permitted. Signs shall be permitted in: 
a.  Highway Oriented Business Districts (B-3); 
b.  Light Manufacturing Districts (M-1); 
c.  Light Manufacturing Restricted Districts (M-1R); and 
d.  General Manufacturing Districts adjacent to interstate highways (M-2). 
(3)  Location. Signs shall only be permitted within 760 feet of an interstate highway as measured from the center of sign base to the interstate right-of-way line. No off-premises sign shall be located within a 2,640-foot radius of an interstate interchange as measured according to the state department of transportation definition of primary point of intersection. 
(4)  Placement. Signs shall be the principal use of a lot and shall maintain a minimum 15-foot setback from all property lines measured from the sign area. 
(5)  Height. Signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the average road level. The average road level shall be measured as a 1,320-foot radius from the center of the sign base and the average road level shall be determined from the interstate highway to which the sign is oriented. 
(6)  Surfaces. Sign surfaces shall be one per side, and the maximum total surface area shall not exceed 100 square feet per side or 200 square feet for all sides. 
(7)  Content. Signs shall only contain messages and inferences to lawful activities and shall not contain reflective materials on any portion of the sign face. 
(8)  Relation to other districts. Signs shall be no closer than 500 feet to any residential district or 1,000 feet to any historical district or historical site listed in the National Register of Historic Sites and Places. Signs shall be prohibited within the Gateway District and within 1,000 feet of the city greenbelt as measured from the center of the sign base. 
(9)  Distance from other signs. No off-premises advertising sign shall be permitted closer than 1,000 linear feet to any other off-premises advertising sign on the same side of the street or within 500 feet as measured in a radius as measured from the center of the sign base. 
(10)  Conformance with other restrictions. Signs are subject to all rules and regulations of the state department of transportation and this Code. Conflicting regulations will result in a compliance with the most restrictive regulation. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 7; Code 1998, § 114-568; Ord. No. 4520, § 1, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 114-533. - On-premises signs. 
    The following shall govern the placement of all on-premises signs: 
(1)  Agricultural District (A-1). No more than four signs shall be permitted, provided that: 
a.  Signs are to identify a farm or advertise a product grown thereon; 
b.  The surface area does not exceed 32 square feet; 
c.  The height of a freestanding sign does not exceed five feet; and 
d.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
(2)  Single-Family Residential Districts (R-1A, R-1B and R-1C). 
a.  Home occupations conducted in a dwelling are permitted one sign, provided: 
1.  The area of one side of the sign does not exceed three square feet; and 
2.  The sign shall not be illuminated by any means. 
b.  Single-family residences are permitted one garage-sale-type sign, provided: 
1.  The area of one side of the sign does not exceed three square feet; 
2.  The sign shall not be illuminated by any means; and 
3.  The sign shall be placed no more than two days prior to the day the sale is to take place. 
c.  Single-family residential subdivisions are permitted one permanent identification sign at each major street access, provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 32 square feet per side with a maximum number of two sides; 
2.  The height of the sign shall not exceed five feet; 
3.  The sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line, except that a sign may be permitted in a grassed median provided the sign does not interfere with traffic; and 
4.  The sign shall not be illuminated by any means. 
(3)  Multifamily Residential Districts (R-2, R-3 and R-4). 
a.  Signs are permitted the same as for single-family residential districts. 
b.  Multifamily developments are permitted one permanent identification sign at each major street access, provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 32 square feet per side with a maximum number of two sides; 
2.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 12 feet; 
3.  The sign shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line, except that such sign may be permitted in a grassed median provided the sign does not interfere with traffic; and 
4.  The sign shall be indirectly illuminated. 
(4)  Residential districts which permit limited commercial uses (R-5 and PD). 
a.  Signs are permitted the same as for multifamily residential districts. 
b.  Business establishments within a development are permitted one identification sign, provided: 
1.  The sign area does not exceed three square feet per side; 
2.  The sign is mounted on the face of the building; and 
3.  The sign shall be indirectly illuminated. 
(5)  Professional Office District (P-1). 
a.  Signs are permitted the same as for multifamily residential districts. 
b.  Single-tenant businesses are permitted one freestanding sign, provided: 
1.  The sign surface area shall not exceed one-half square foot per linear foot of street frontage to a maximum of 32 square feet per side or 64 square feet total of all sides; 
2.  A lot with a multiple-street frontage, including a corner lot, uses only one frontage in computing the sign surface area; 
3.  The sign shall be indirectly illuminated; and 
4.  The height of the sign shall not exceed five feet. 
c.  Multitenant centers are permitted one freestanding sign, provided: 
1.  The area of the sign does not exceed one-half square foot per foot of linear street frontage to a maximum of 50 square feet per side or a total of 100 square feet for all sides; 
2.  A lot with a multiple-street frontage, including a corner lot, uses only one frontage in computing the sign surface area; 
3.  The sign shall be indirectly illuminated; and 
4.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 12 feet. 
d.  Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted a wall sign equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 60 square feet total signage. A business having less than 2,000 square feet in area may utilize up to 20 square feet of signage. Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
(6)  Neighborhood Business District (B-1). 
a.  Signs are permitted the same as for multifamily residential districts. 
b.  Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted one freestanding sign, provided: 
1.  The sign surface area shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of street frontage to a maximum of 50 square feet per side or a total of 100 square feet for all sides; 
2.  A lot with a multiple-street frontage, including a corner lot, uses only one frontage in computing the surface area; and 
3.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 12 feet. 
c.  Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted wall signs equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 100 square feet total signage. Businesses having less than 6,000 square feet in area may utilize up to 60 square feet of signage. 
(7)  Central Business District (B-2). 
    See section 114-194. 
(8)  Highway Oriented Business District (B-3). 
a.  Single-tenant business and multitenant centers are permitted one freestanding sign, provided: 
1.  The sign surface area shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of frontage for the first 100 feet of frontage; 
2.  The maximum sign surface area shall be 100 square feet per side or 200 square feet total of all sides; 
3.  A lot with a multiple-street frontage, including a corner lot, uses only one street frontage for computing the sign surface area; and 
4.  The height of the sign shall not exceed 30 feet above the ground. 
b.  Single-tenant businesses and multitenant centers are permitted wall signs equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 300 square feet of total signage. Businesses having less than 8,000 square feet of area may utilize up to 80 square feet of signage. 
(9)  Planned Shopping Center District (B-4P). 
a.  All signs within the B-4P district shall be reviewed by the director of planning or designee as part of the site plan approval process. 
b.  Freestanding signs are permitted at major access points provided: 
1.  There are no more than two signs per center with a minimum separation of 250 feet from one sign's side to the other sign's side; 
2.  One square foot of sign area per one linear foot of road frontage, up to 200 square feet of sign area per side, with a maximum of 400 square feet of total sign area for all sides; 
3.  Lots with multiple street frontages, including corner lots, use street frontage on which sign is mounted in computing sign area; and 
4.  Maximum height of freestanding sign shall be 35 feet. 
c.  If the building ground coverage of a business is 30,000 square feet or more, the maximum wall sign area permitted is 300 square feet. If the building ground coverage of a business is 8,000 square feet or less, the maximum wall sign area permitted is 80 square feet. In all other situations, the area of wall signs shall not exceed one percent of the building ground coverage of a business. 
(10)  Light Manufacturing Restricted District (M-1R). 
a.  Single-tenant businesses are permitted freestanding signs, provided: 
1.  The sign surface area does not exceed 32 square feet per side or a total of 64 square feet for all sides; 
2.  For a lot with a multiple-street frontage, a total of two signs are permitted; 
3.  The height shall not exceed five feet above the ground; and 
4.  The signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
b.  The area of wall signs shall not exceed one percent of the business' building ground coverage area. If a business' building ground coverage is less than 4,000 square feet, the business may utilize up to 40 square feet of sign area. 
c.  Industrial parks shall be permitted signage as for single-tenant businesses and, in addition, master identification signs, provided: 
1.  Only one such sign is located at each major access point; 
2.  Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per side or a maximum of 100 square feet total of all sides; 
3.  The maximum height of such signs shall be 20 feet; and 
4.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
(11)  Light Manufacturing District (M-1) and General Manufacturing District (M-2). 
a.  M-1 and M-2 districts shall be permitted one freestanding sign for each street frontage, and at each major access point, and in an industrial park for each building located therein provided: 
1.  The individual sign surface shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of road frontage, up to 200 square feet of sign area per side, with a maximum of 400 square feet total sign area for all sides; 
2.  Maximum height shall be 35 feet. 
b.  The area of wall signs in a M-1 and M-2 districts shall not exceed one percent of the business' building ground coverage area. If a business' building ground coverage is less than 4,000 square feet, the business may utilize up to 40 square feet of sign area. 
(12)  Historic Districts (H-1, H-2). Within historic districts no sign shall be erected, altered, restored or moved within the district until a certificate of appropriateness as to the exterior architectural features has been approved by the historic zoning commission. 
(13)  Tourist Accommodation/Commerce District TA/C. 
Signage within the TA/C district as a whole shall be designed as a complete comprehensive program to tie all elements together by common infrastructure, thematic landscaping, architectural building design and colors. Those areas zoned TA/C may be located in the Gateway Overlay District and additional requirements may be required. 
a.  A complete sign package is required within the TA/C district and shall be reviewed by the planning commission as part of the zoning development plan approval process. 
b.  Types of signage allowed in the TA/C district shall be as follows: 
1.  Interstate identity. 
i.  Interstate high-rise. 
2.  Street-level identity. 
i.  Main entry. 
3.  Site wayfinding. 
i.  Directory and directional. 
4.  Single tenant and multitenant identity. 
i.  Monument signs. 
5.  Tenant identity. 
i.  Wall signs. 
ii.  Canopy/under canopy/awning-mounted. 
6.  Menu boards. 
i.  Menu boards for drive-thru restaurants. 
7.  Gasoline price. 
c.  A sign location plan indicating the location and type of each sign to be utilized at a particular location shall be required as part of the submittal process. 
d.  Interstate identity sign. 
1.  One interstate identity sign shall be allowed for the TA/C district when adjoining an interstate highway. Should the TA/C zone abut an additional interstate highway, an additional interstate identity sign may be allowed. When the district adjoins the intersection of two separate Interstate systems, an additional interstate identity sign shall be allowed at this intersection as long as it meets the minimum spacing requirement. 
2.  Minimum spacing for interstate identity signs shall be no less than 1500 feet and no more than three interstate identity signs shall be allowed. 
3.  An interstate identity sign shall be allowed a maximum of 700 square feet of sign area per side, with a maximum number of two sides. The sign must be oriented to the interstate and no portion of the sign my overhang any property line or the interstate right-of-way. The location of the sign must be designated on the preliminary plat. Sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign area. Maximum height for the interstate identity sign shall not exceed 75 feet from grade to the top of the sign. 
4.  If illuminated, all electrical service shall be underground and the concentration of illumination shall be upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
5.  When electronic message boards are used as interstate identity signs, section 114-571(4-11) shall apply as follows: 
a.  Only one freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters or still pictures shall be permitted for each development, provided that at least one parcel within the development has a minimum frontage of 150 feet and the electronic message board sign is mounted along the parcel front. 
b.  The electronic message board must be a part of the primary freestanding sign and must not exceed fifty percent of the total sign square footage permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
c.  The maximum height of the sign is as permitted in the zoning district. 
d.  Electronic message boards shall include an automatic dimmer. The maximum allowable brightness of an electronic message board shall not exceed 4,000 nits during the hours between sunrise and sunset and 1000 nits after sunset and before sunrise. 
e.  Electronic message boards shall not interfere with traffic signal devices as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
f.  Signage shall be limited to text, images and still pictures only. Video or animation of any type is prohibited. Animated signs are prohibited. 
g.  Scrolling or flashing text shall be prohibited. 
h.  Any display on an electronic message board shall be for a minimum of five seconds in duration. Any message change shall be completed within one second, shall be simultaneous, and fixed in place for a minimum five seconds. 
i.  Electronic message boards shall not be allowed in any historic district as designated by the City of Kingsport. 
e.  Street-level identity sign. 
1.  A major multi-tenant development may use a street-level monument sign at the entrance to through roads to identify the name of the development and anchor tenants. One sign is allowed per intersection. 
2.  No electronic message boards will be allowed on this sign. 
3.  One sign is allowed at the entrance of each through road to assist in directing individuals to a destination. 
4.  Maximum square footage for the sign face shall be 160 with the maximum height of the monument sign being ten feet as measured from grade to top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances. Sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign face. 
5.  If illuminated, all electrical service shall be underground and the concentration of illumination shall be upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
f.  Site wayfinding sign. 
1.  Both multitenant and singletenant developments may locate on a wayfinding sign. Wayfinding signs are to be placed along internal roads and driveways to assist individuals to a destination. 
2.  Wayfinding signs are to be monument style signs and no electronic message boards shall be allowed on this sign. 
3.  One sign is allowed at the entrance of each ingress/egress driveway off an internal roadway. 
4.  One sign is allowed along an internal roadway with a minimum spacing of 1000 feet. Should an ingress/egress driveway coincide with the spacing requirement for an internal roadway, only one sign will be allowed at that location 
5.  Maximum square footage for the sign face shall be 40 with the maximum height of the monument sign being eight feet as measured from grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances. Sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign face. 
6.  If illuminated, all electrical service shall be underground and the concentration of illumination shall be upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
g.  Single-tenant and Multitenant identity-Freestanding. 
Multitenant Identity-Freestanding. 
1.  Multitenant developments shall be allowed one freestanding monument sign to identify tenants. 
2.  Maximum square footage for a multi-tenant development monument sign is 80 square feet with a maximum height of ten feet as measured from grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances. Sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign face. 
3.  No electronic message boards shall be allowed on this sign. 
4.  If illuminated, all electrical service shall be underground and the concentration of illumination shall be upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
Single-tenant Identity-Freestanding. 
1.  Single-tenant businesses that are located on the same parcel and have not been subdivided are allowed placement on this monument sign. 
2.  Single-tenant businesses that are located on an out-parcel are allowed one freestanding monument sign on their lot. 
3.  No electronic message boards shall be allowed on this sign. 
4.  Maximum square footage for a single-tenant business monument sign is 60 square feet with the maximum height of the monument sign being eight (8) feet as measured from grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances. Sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign face. 
5.  If illuminated, all electrical service shall be underground and the concentration of illumination shall be upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
h.  Tenant identity-Single tenant/multitenant-Wall. 
1.  Single-tenant identity sign. 
a.  The single-tenant business having more than 2,000 square feet in area may utilize the equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 60 square feet of total signage for the building. 
b.  A single business having less than 2,000 square feet in building coverage may utilize up to 30 square feet of signage. 
c.  Use of a canopy or awning with text sign shall constitute a wall sign. 
d.  Wall signs with the exception of a canopy or awning shall consist of backlit reverse channel letters. No can signs are allowed. 
e.  Logo's that are trademarked or copyrighted shall be counted toward the square footage total. 
f.  Under-canopy signs shall not exceed three square feet in area and shall be mounted to the canopy ceiling perpendicular to the business public entrance. Minimum clearance from the base of the sign to grade shall be eight feet. 
g.  Under canopy signs shall not be illuminated. 
h.  If a building rear faces an interstate, it may utilize that wall space as long as the total signage does not exceed the maximum allowed. 
i.  A bonus of 40 square feet of wall signage will be given to a single-tenant if the free standing sign surface area does not exceed a maximum of 16 square feet per side or 32 square feet total of all sides and all other requirements are met. 
2.  Multitenant identity sign-Wall. 
a.  A multi-tenant business having more than 2,000 square feet in area may utilize the equivalent to one percent of the business's building ground coverage area up to 80 square feet of total signage for the businesses' building. 
b.  Use of a canopy or awning with text sign shall constitute a wall sign. 
c.  Wall signs with the exception of a canopy or awning shall consist of backlit reverse channel letters. No can signs are allowed. 
d.  Logo's that are trademarked or copyrighted shall be counted toward the square footage total. 
e.  Under-canopy signs shall not exceed three square feet in area and shall be mounted to the canopy ceiling perpendicular to the business public entrance. Minimum clearance from the base of the sign to grade shall be eight feet. 
f.  Under canopy signs shall not be illuminated. 
g.  If a building rear faces an interstate, it may utilize that space as long as the total signage does not exceed the maximum allowed. 
h.  A bonus of 40 square feet of wall signage will be given to a multi-tenant center if the free standing sign surface area does not exceed a maximum of 25 square feet per side or 50 square feet total of all sides and all other requirements are met. 
i.  Menu boards. 
1.  One menu board is allowed for drive-through restaurants per drive-through lane and must be located adjacent to the drive-thru lane. 
2.  Menu boards must be monument signs. 
3.  Menu boards if illuminated must be backlit. 
4.  Maximum Height shall be eight feet from grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances. 
j.  Gasoline price. 
1.  Gasoline price signs must be a part of the allowed monument freestanding sign. 
2.  The square footage of the gasoline price sign will count toward the total square footage allowed on the monument sign. 
3.  In no case shall the gasoline price sign exceed 50 percent of the total square footage allowed which is 64 square feet and sign copy shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign face. 
4.  Maximum height shall be six feet from existing grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of all appurtenances and if illuminated, must be internally lit. 
5.  In the case where a gas station partners with another establishment, the requirements for multitenant-Freestanding and multitenant wall signs shall apply. 
(14)  Mixed-Use District (MX). 
a.  Single tenant businesses are permitted freestanding signs, provided that: 
1.  The sign surface area does not exceed 32 square feet per side or a total of 64 square feet for all sides; 
2.  A lot with a multiple-street frontage is allowed a total of two signs; 
3.  The height shall not exceed five feet above the ground; and 
4.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
b.  Each mixed-use park within the district shall be permitted master identification signs, provided: 
1.  Only one such sign is located at each major access point; 
2.  Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per side and a maximum of 100 square feet total of all sides; 
3.  The maximum height of such signs shall be 20 feet; and 
4.  Signs shall be indirectly illuminated. 
c.  The area of wall signs shall not exceed one percent of the business' building ground coverage area. If a business' building ground coverage is less than 4,000 square feet, the business may utilize up to 40 square feet of sign area. 
(15)  Central Business Edge District B-2E. 
    See B-2E (Central Business Edge District). 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 8; Code 1998, § 114-569; Ord. No. 4470, § 1, 12-16-1997; Ord. No. 4714, §§ II, III, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 5065, §§ I, II, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 5497, § II, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 6305, § I, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 6385, § I, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 6475, § II, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 6545, § II, 2-16-2016) 
Sec. 114-534. - Computation of sign area. 
    The area of all signs permitted under this chapter shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  The supports or uprights and covering thereon on which a sign is supported shall not be included in the display surface area of a sign. 
(2)  Signs of the same shape and dimensions mounted or displayed back to back and parallel shall use only one such face in computing the total display surface area of the sign. 
(3)  Sign surface area of wall signs consisting of individual letters, each attached directly to the wall facade, shall be measured by the smallest rectangle which encloses all the letters. The total area shall be the sum of each word, logo or emblem forming the display. 
(4)  Sign surface area of a sign consisting of connected letters or letters enclosed by a box or an outline shall be the total area of the sign including the background, box or outline. 
(5)  Height of signs, except off-premises signs, shall be measured from the finished grade at the base of the sign or curb level, whichever provides the least height. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIII, § 9; Code 1998, § 114-570; Ord. No. 4714, § II, 11-16-1999) 
Sec. 114-535. - Electronic message board signs. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, electronic message boards are allowed only in the following zoning districts: B-3, General Business District, BC, Business Conference Center Districts, B-4P, Planned Business Districts, and TA, Tourist Accommodation Districts as follows: 
(1)  Only one freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters, or still pictures shall be permitted for each development, provided that at least one parcel within the development has a minimum frontage of 150 feet and the electronic message board sign is mounted along the parcel front. 
(2)  The electronic message board must be a part of the primary freestanding sign and must not exceed 50 percent of the total sign square footage permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  The maximum height of the sign is as permitted in the zoning district. 
(4)  Electronic message boards located within a Conservation or Gateway District shall conform to the Design Guidelines for that district. 
(5)  Electronic message boards shall include an automatic dimmer. The maximum allowable brightness of an electronic message board shall not exceed 4,000 nits during the hours between sunrise and sunset and 1,000 Nits after sunset and before sunrise. 
(6)  Electronic message board shall not interfere with traffic signal devices as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
(7)  Electronic message boards shall not be used for off-premises advertising. 
(8)  Signage shall be limited to text, images and still pictures only. Video or animation of any type is prohibited. Animated signs are prohibited. 
(9)  Scrolling or flashing text shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Any display on an electronic message board shall be for a minimum of five seconds in duration. Any message change shall be completed within one second, shall be simultaneous, and fixed in place for a minimum five seconds. 
(11)  Electronic message boards shall not be allowed in any historic district as designated by the city. 
(Code 1998, § 114-571; Ord. No. 5065, § IV, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 5097, § II, 4-1-2003; Ord. No. 5616, § II, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 6475, § III, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-536. - Electronic message board signs for public schools and churches. 
    Electronic message board signs are allowed in any residential district for public schools and churches as follows: 
(1)  Only one freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters, or still pictures shall be permitted for each institution provided that at least one parcel within the development has a minimum road frontage of 150 feet located on a minor arterial or above as classified by the adopted Major Street and Road Plan and the electronic message board sign is located along that road. 
(2)  The electronic message board must be a part of the primary freestanding sign with a maximum size of 50 square feet per side. The electronic message board portion of the freestanding sign must not exceed 50 percent of the total freestanding sign. 
(3)  The maximum height of the sign is as permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(4)  Electronic message boards shall include an automatic dimmer. The maximum allowable brightness of an electronic message board shall not exceed 4,000 nits during the hours between sunrise and sunset and 1,000 Nits after sunset and before sunrise. 
(5)  Hours of operation for electronic message boards located within a residential zone are from sunrise to 10:00 p.m. and must be turned off completely by 10:00 p.m. each night. 
(6)  Electronic message boards shall not interfere with traffic signal devices as determined by the city traffic engineer. 
(7)  Electronic message boards shall not be used for off-premises advertising. 
(8)  Signage shall be limited to text, images and still pictures only. Video or animation of any type is prohibited. Animated signs are prohibited. 
(9)  Scrolling or flashing text shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Any display on an electronic message board shall be for a minimum of five seconds in duration. Any message change shall be completed within one second, shall be simultaneous, and fixed in place for a minimum five seconds. 
(11)  Electronic message boards shall not be allowed in any historic district as designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6360, § I, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 114-537. - Decorative lighting. 
    Decorative Lighting is only allowed in the following zoning districts: B-2, Central Business District, B-3, Highway Oriented Business District, and B-4P, Planned Business District. In addition from November 15 th through January 5 th , which is generally recognized as the traditional retail holiday season, there is no restriction on decorative lighting. 
(1)  Decorative lighting where permitted shall be one color, preferably white, and it cannot blink, run or simulate movement or animation of any kind. Cautionary colors of blue, red, green or yellow cannot be used. If a color is other than white is used, all lights must be the same color. If decorative lighting is within 500 feet of a residential area, it must be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  If the building ground coverage of a business is 30,000 square feet or more, the maximum linear feet of decorative lighting is 150 linear feet. If the building ground coverage of a business is 8,000 square feet or less, the maximum linear feet of decorative lighting is 40 linear feet. For businesses with intermediate ground coverage, the linear feet of decorative lighting is one-half of one percent of the building ground coverage. 
(Ord. No. 6533, § III, 1-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6533, § III, adopted Jan. 19, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as § 114-536. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exits, said provisions have been redisignated as § 114-537 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 114-538-114-545. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATERSHED PROTECTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 114-546. - Property dedicated to city program. 
    Property, part of which is dedicated to the city's watershed protection program, may have a reduction in the zoning setback adjacent to the property line created by such dedication. The purpose is to allow structures to be constructed on the property in the same location after property is dedicated to the city as would be permitted prior to dedication. The building official shall make this determination based on an assessment of any negative impacts to adjacent property, or to the health, safety, and welfare to the city as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 5955, § I, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 114-547-114-561. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 114-562. - Intent and applicability. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide for on-site provision of parking, loading and unloading of those vehicles reasonably expected to be generated by or the responsibility of the use on the site. This conforms to the city's transportation needs, wherein the community's streets are intended primarily for the movement of vehicular traffic and not for vehicular storage. Thus, to ensure that streets will function efficiently and with minimum hazard, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided by all land uses as described in this article. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIV, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-601) 
Sec. 114-563. - General standards for parking. 
    Under this chapter, the following general standards shall apply for parking. 
(1)  Location of spaces on same lot. All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the structure or use to which they are accessory or on a lot contiguous thereto which has the same zoning classification and is under the same ownership. However, where there are practical difficulties or if the public safety and public convenience would be better served by the location other than on the same lot or on a contiguous lot with the use to which it is accessory, the building official, acting upon a specific application, may authorize such alternative location subject to the conditions that the required space shall be located: 
a.  On land in the same ownership as that of the land on which is located the use to which such space is accessory or, in the case of cooperative parking as provided in subsection (2) of this section, in the ownership of at least one of the participants in the combination; and 
b.  Within 500 feet walking distance of a building entrance to the use that such space serves. 
(2)  Cooperative parking. Required off-street parking facilities may be provided cooperatively for two or more uses, subject to arrangements that will ensure the permanent availability of such spaces to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Residential areas. Unless approval has been secured from the board of zoning appeals, no buses, trucks, heavy equipment or for sale vehicles shall be parked or stored in residential areas. Parking and loading requirements for business and industrial activities shall be met on land zoned for such activities, except that the board of zoning appeals may consider permitting such accessory uses on residentially zoned property if such can be effected without creating a public hazard or effectively reducing the value of adjoining residential properties. When permitted, the board shall require any necessary screening, landscaping, lighting, signing, access control or other physical design or operational restrictions that would help ensure the compatibility of the parking activities with adjoining residential activities. 
(5)  Parking in yard space. Except as may be qualified elsewhere in this chapter, off-street parking spaces that are located on the ground and are open to the sky may be located in any required yard but not nearer to any front lot line than eight feet. Except as may be qualified elsewhere in this chapter, parking structures and carports shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements applicable in the zoning district in which located, except parking structures that are completely underground may be located in any required yard, but not closer than one foot to any lot line, provided that no visible indication of the underground structure, to include entrances or ventilation stacks, shall be located closer than 25 feet to any lot line. 
(6)  Car repairs. All off-street parking facilities shall be used solely for the parking of vehicles in operating condition by patrons, occupants or employees of the use to which such parking is accessory. No motor vehicle repair work except emergency service shall be permitted in association with any required off-street parking facilities. 
(7)  Access to street. All off-street parking spaces shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street. If any such space is located contiguous to a street, the street side thereof shall be curbed, and ingress and egress shall be provided only through driveway openings of such dimension, location and construction as shall be approved by the traffic engineering department. 
_____ 
(8)  Geometric design standards. In no event shall parking area dimensions be less than the following: 
Parking 
Angle in 
Degrees Parking 
Direction Stall 
Width 
(feet) Stall Depth 
Perpendicular 
to Aisle 
(feet) Width of 
Aisle 
(feet) Width of Aisle 
Plus Two Stalls 
(feet) Stall Width 
Parallel to 
Aisle 
(feet) 30 Drive-in 9 16.8 9 42.6 18.0 45 Drive-in 9 19.1 11 49.2 12.7 60 Drive-in 9 20.0 17 57.0 10.4 90 Drive-in 9 18.0 23-27 59-63 9.0  
_____ 
(9)  Landscaping and lighting. Parking areas shall conform to any landscaping requirements and shall provide lighting sufficient for the intended purpose but not so as to create a traffic hazard, glare or to otherwise be offensive. Except for necessary security lighting, such areas shall be lighted only during activity hours of the principal use. 
(10)  Parking ratios. Parking spaces required on an employee/person basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees/persons on duty or residing or both on the premises at any one time or the occupancy load of the building, whichever is greater. Where a given use or building contains a combination of uses, parking shall be provided on the basis of the sum of the required spaces for each use. 
(11)  Uncertainty. If there is uncertainty with respect to the amount of parking space required by this chapter as a result of an indefiniteness as to the proposed use of a building or of land, the maximum requirement for the general type or use that is involved shall govern. Where the required number of parking spaces is not set forth for a particular use in section 114-564 and where there is no similar general type of use listed, the building official shall determine the basis of the number of spaces to be provided. 
(12)  Parking surface. All parking lots other than single- and two-family residential shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, permeable pavers, or other similar material recommended by the city engineer. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIV, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-602; Ord. No. 5083, § VIII, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 6475, § IV, 114-563, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-564. - Minimum required parking spaces. 
    The minimum off-street parking spaces as accessory to the uses designated in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses. Residential uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Single-family: two spaces per unit, provided that only one such space must have convenient access to a street. 
b.  Multifamily dwelling and mobile homes: 11/2 spaces per unit. 
(2)  Lodging uses. Lodging uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Tourist home, boarding house, rooming house: one space per guest accommodation. 
b.  Dormitory, fraternity, sorority: one space for each two sleeping accommodations based on maximum occupancy, plus one space for each housemother, manager or employee. 
c.  Hotel, motel: one space per rental unit plus four spaces per 50 rental units, plus spaces for any restaurant, assembly room or other facility as determined by the building official. 
d.  Nursing or convalescent facility: one space per three residents, plus one space per employee. 
(3)  Public, semipublic, cultural, recreation, similar uses. Public, semipublic, cultural, recreation and similar uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Airport, airpark: one space per employee plus one space per establishment vehicle plus sufficient space for other users as determined by the building official. 
b.  Ambulance service or rescue squad: adequate space to accommodate all motor vehicles operated in connection with such use and two additional parking spaces per each such vehicle. 
c.  Church, chapel, temple, synagogue or other place of worship: one space per four seats in the principal place of worship, provided that the number of spaces thus required may be reduced by not more than 50 percent if the place of worship is located within 500 feet of any public parking lot or any commercial parking lot where sufficient spaces are available by permission of the owner without charge, during the time of service, to make up the additional spaces required. 
d.  College or university: one space per employee plus a sufficient number of spaces to accommodate students and visitors as determined by building official. 
e.  Cultural center, museum or similar: one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
f.  Country club: one space per four members based on maximum anticipated membership. 
g.  Funeral home: one space per four seats in the main chapel or parlor plus one space per two employees, plus one space for each vehicle used in connection with the business. 
h.  Group day care: two spaces per each three employees, plus a sufficient number of spaces to accommodate all persons who may be at the establishment at any one time under normal operating conditions. 
i.  Hospital: one space per two beds, plus 1.5 spaces per each emergency room examination table or bed, plus one space per employee on the major shift other than doctors, plus one space per doctor assigned to the staff. 
j.  Intensive special medical or mental care or welfare institution: one space per two patients, based on the occupancy load, plus one space per employee or staff member on a major shift. 
k.  Library: one space per 2.5 patrons based on the occupancy load plus one space per employee on a major shift. 
l.  Private, civic, fraternal lodge or club: one space per three members based on maximum anticipated membership. 
m.  Public utility: one space per 1.5 employees on the major shift, plus one space per company vehicle. 
n.  School, elementary or intermediate: one space per employee plus four visitor spaces, plus any other space as determined by building official after reviewing total facility. 
o.  School, secondary: same as elementary plus one space per eight students based on maximum attendance. 
p.  Swimming pool: one space per employee plus one space per each six persons lawfully permitted in the pool at any one time. 
q.  Tennis club: four spaces per court plus such additional space as may be required for restaurants or other facilities. 
(4)  Business and related uses. Business and related uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Automobile service station: two spaces per bay, plus one space per employee, but never less than five spaces. 
b.  Bowling alley: four spaces per alley, plus one space per employee, plus such additional spaces as may be required in this section for affiliated uses such as restaurants. 
c.  Business service and supply service establishment: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Carwash: four stacking spaces per bay/stall plus one parking space per employee for self-service establishment. 
e.  Convenience center: 51/2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or in proportion thereto. 
f.  Eating establishment: one space per four seats plus one space per two employees where seating is at tables, or one space per two seats plus one space per two employees where seating is at the counter. 
g.  Eating establishment, drive-in with no seating facilities: one parking space per 60 square feet of floor area; a minimum of four stacking spaces. 
h.  Financial institution: one space per 500 square feet of net floor area. 
i.  Financial institution with drive-in lanes: one parking space per 500 square feet of floor area; sufficient area for five stacking spaces if there is only one drive-in-lane, or three stacking spaces for the first drive-in lane and two stacking spaces for each additional lane. 
j.  Furniture or carpet store: one space per 500 square feet of net floor area plus one space per each employee. 
k.  Medical, dental practitioner's office: three spaces per practitioner plus one space for each employee. 
l.  Office: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of net floor area plus one space per company vehicle. 
m.  Outdoor sales/display area other than vehicle sale, rental and service establishment: one space per 500 square feet of open sales/display area plus one space per employee. 
n.  Personal service establishment: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
o.  Recreational facility other than theater, auditorium, stadium, bowling alley or swimming pool: one space per three seats or three persons based on the occupancy load plus one space per employee. 
p.  Repair service establishment: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
q.  Retail sales establishment except furniture or carpet store: one space per 200 square feet of net floor area for the first 1,000 square feet, plus six spaces per each additional 1,000 square feet. 
r.  Shopping center, planned: Four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of building ground coverage (BGC) for all shopping centers. 
s.  Theater, auditorium or stadium: one space per four seats or similar vantage accommodation provided, plus one space per two employees. 
t.  Vehicle sale, rental and service establishment: one space per 500 square feet of enclosed sales/rental floor area, plus one space per 2,500 square feet of open sales/rental display lot area, plus two spaces per service bay, plus one space per employee, but never less than five spaces. 
u.  Wholesale trade establishment: one space per 1.5 employees, plus one space per company vehicle, but with a minimum of one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Manufacturing, industry and related uses. Manufacturing, industry and related uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Manufacturing establishment or establishment for production, processing, assembly, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products, and business offices accessory thereto: one space per 1.5 employees on major shift, plus one space per company vehicle and piece of mobile equipment. 
b.  Scientific research and development establishment: one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  Warehousing, heavy equipment storage yard, lumberyard and building material yard, motor freight terminal or junkyard: one space per 1.5 employees on major shift plus one per company vehicle, plus sufficient space to accommodate the largest number of visitors that may be expected at any one time, but with a minimum of one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Manufacturing, industry, and related uses: Within these districts the board of zoning appeals may waive the requirements for on-site or contiguous parking and loading providing it finds that sufficient space is provided in the immediate area, under public or private ownership, or other compelling reasons exist. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIV, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-603; Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 4-18-1995; Ord. No. 5083, §§ IX-XI, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 6008, § I, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 114-565. - General standards for off-street loading. 
    Under this chapter, all structures built or expanded and all uses established shall provide accessory off-street loading spaces in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Location of spaces on same lot. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served, except that required off-street loading spaces may be provided cooperatively for two or more uses, subject to arrangements that will ensure the permanent availability of such spaces to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(2)  Location. No loading space or berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of intersection of the edges of the travel way or the curbs of any two streets or located in a required front yard. If located in a required rear yard the loading space or berth shall be either underground or open to the sky. 
(3)  Relation to parking. No required off-street loading area shall be used to satisfy the space requirement for any off-street parking facilities, and no loading area shall be so located as to interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in any off-street parking area. 
(4)  Vehicle repair work. No motor vehicle repair work, except emergency service, shall be permitted in association with any required off-street loading facility. 
(5)  Street access. All off-street loading space shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street. If any such space is located contiguous to a street, the street side thereof shall be curbed, and ingress and egress shall be provided only through driveway openings through the curb at such dimension, location and construction as may be approved by the building official. 
(6)  Loading area dimensions. All off-street loading areas shall be no less than 15 feet wide, 25 feet long and 15 feet high, except that where one such loading space has been provided, any additional loading space lying alongside, contiguous to and not separated from such first loading space need not be wider than 12 feet. 
(7)  Lighting and landscaping. All lighting and lighting fixtures used to illuminate off-street loading areas shall be sufficient for the purpose intended and shall not present glare or traffic safety hazards, and any landscaping requirements shall be complied with fully and designed for protection from vehicle maneuvering. 
(8)  Combination of uses or uncertainty. Loading facilities shall be provided on the basis of the sum of spaces required for each use where a given use contains a combination of uses as set forth in section 114-566. Where uncertainty exists, the building official shall impose the maximum requirement for the general type of use involved. 
(9)  Maximum spaces. Notwithstanding the standards set forth in this section, in no instance shall more than five off-street loading spaces be required for a given use or building except as may be determined by the building official. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIV, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-604) 
Sec. 114-566. - Minimum required loading spaces. 
(a)  Conformance to loading space schedule. The minimum off-street loading spaces shall conform to the standards in the following schedule: 
Uses Standard (1) Bowling alley and other similar commercial recreational establishment F (2) Business service and supply service establishment C (3) College or university F (4) Dwelling, multiple-family G (5) Eating establishment D (6) Financial institution C (7) Funeral chapel, funeral home F (8) Hospital F (9) Hotel, motel F (10) Manufacturing establishment or establishment for production, processing, assembly, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products, and business offices accessory thereto A (11) Nursing or convalescent facility F (12) Office C (13) Personal service establishment B (14) Repair service establishment C (15) Retail sales establishment B (16) School F (17) Scientific research and development establishment C (18) Vehicle sale, rental and service establishment A (19) Warehousing establishment A (20) Wholesale trade establishment E  
(b)  Standards. Loading spaces for the standards noted in the table in subsection (a) of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Standard A. One space for the first 5,000 square feet of gloss floor area, plus one space for each additional 30,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(2)  Standard B. One space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 15,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(3)  Standard C. One space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(4)  Standard D. One space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 25,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(5)  Standard E. One space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 30,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(6)  Standard F. One space for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 100,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(7)  Standard G. One space for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each additional 100,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XIV, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-605) 
Sec. 114-567. - Parking and loading in Business Conference Center District. 
(a)  Parking and loading provisions for the BC, Business Conference Center District shall be as set out in this article and shall also include the minimum off-street parking spaces following: 
(1)  Art galleries: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Child day care, elderly care, nursery school, kindergarten: one space per employee plus one off-street passenger loading space for every eight clients. 
(3)  Convention/conference centers: one space per 200 square feet of net meeting space plus one space per employee at peak levels and sufficient loading space to accommodate the largest anticipated event as determined by the planning commission. 
(4)  Golf courses, other than golf courses operated as part of or in conjunction with a country club: three spaces per golf hole plus one space per two employees. 
(5)  Headquarters, corporate: 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(6)  Health clubs: one space per each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(7)  Meeting centers: one space per four seats or one space per 30 feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
(8)  Telecommunications facilities: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(9)  Training centers: one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Park-and-ride, bus and shuttle service facilities, including bus lanes, shelters and special parking areas, may be required by the planning commission. 
(c)  Required parking and loading areas shall be paved with a hard-surface material. Vehicular access areas shall be paved with a hard surface material. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XI, § 7(G); Code 1998, § 114-606) 
Sec 114-568. - Required bicycle parking. 
(a)  Short-term bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for all new structures built for business and related uses as set in subsections 114-564 (4), b,c,e-s, and inside a parcel contained within a 500 foot buffer of the streets identified in section 114-569. 
(1)  The minimum number of bicycle parking spaces required shall be equal to five percent of the number of automobile parking spaces required, provided, however, in no event shall the minimum number of bicycle parking spaces be less than two spaces. 
(2)  Standards. Required bicycle parking shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least two feet by six feet; 
b.  An aisle 5 feet in width shall be provided between rows of bicycle parking spaces; 
c.  Spaces shall be at the same grade as the sidewalk or at a location that can be reached by an accessible route; and 
d.  Spaces shall be located outside a building, with a minimum of 8 feet vertical clearance, and within the following distances of the main entrance: 
(1)  A building with one entrance shall have spaces within 50 feet of the main entrance as measured from the most direct pedestrian access route (figure A). 
(2)  A building with more than one main entrance shall have spaces along all facades with a main entrance, and within 50 feet of a main entrance as measured from the most direct pedestrian access route (figure B). An alternative to bicycle parking for a building with more than one main entrance is to cluster the required bicycle parking spaces every 150 feet along each façade with a main entrance. This alternative may only be applied to building facades with a minimum length of 500 feet. 
(3)  Design criteria. 
a.  Bicycle racks shall be capable of supporting the bicycle in an upright position and enable the user to lock the bicycle. 
b.  A hard surfaced parking area is required. Racks shall be securely anchored to this hard surface. 
c.  Unless otherwise specified by overlay or other aesthetic districts, steel, galvanized finish, inverted "U" shaped bicycle racks conform to minimum standards (figure C). Bicycle racks designed to park multiple bicycles are encouraged when necessary to meet the required bicycle parking. 
(4)  Automobile parking space bonus. Automobile parking requirements may be reduced pursuant to the following formula: one automobile parking space for one bicycle parking space, provided the reduction for automobile parking does not exceed ten percent of the required total of automobile parking spaces. The automobile parking space bonus is available to all new structures whether bicycle parking spaces are required or not required. 

Figure C 

(Ord. No. 6451, § II, 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 114-569. - Streets requiring bicycle parking. 
    For parcels that are within 500 feet of the centerline of the greenbelt and streets listed in this section, the entire parcel is included, not just that portion within the 500 feet of the centerline: 
(1)  Streets in the central business district area bounded by Clinchfield Street, Main Street, and Sullivan Street. 
(2)  Barton Street (Greenbelt connector). 
(3)  Boone Street. 
(4)  Cleek Road. 
(5)  Clinchfield Street. 
(6)  East Center Street. 
(7)  East Ravine Road (Broad Street to Watauga Street). 
(8)  East Sevier Avenue (Tennessee Street to North Wilcox Drive). 
(9)  East Stone Drive. 
(10)  East Sullivan Court. 
(11)  East Sullivan Street. 
(12)  Eastman Road. 
(13)  Fort Henry Drive (East Center Street to John B. Dennis Highway). 
(14)  Holston Valley Drive. 
(15)  Indian Trail Drive. 
(16)  Industry Drive. 
(17)  Keller Street (Greenbelt connector). 
(18)  Konnarock Road. 
(19)  Lincoln Street (Konnarock Road to John B. Dennis Highway). 
(20)  Lynn Garden Drive. 
(21)  Main Street. 
(22)  Meadowview Parkway (I-26 to South Wilcox Drive). 
(23)  Memorial Boulevard (Fort Henry Drive to Briarwood Road). 
(24)  Netherland Inn Road (Ridgefields Road to Gilliam Street). 
(25)  Netherland Inn Road (West Stone Drive to east end of Holston River Bridge). 
(26)  North Wilcox Drive. 
(27)  Orebank Road (Exchange Place to Cleek Road). 
(28)  South Wilcox Drive (East Sullivan Street to Old Wilcox Drive/South Wilcox Drive intersection). 
(29)  Warpath Drive. 
(30)  West Center Street. 
(31)  West Ravine Road (Holston Valley Drive to Broad Street). 
(32)  West Stone Drive. 
(33)  West Sullivan Street. 
(Ord. No. 6451, § III, 12-2-2014) 
Secs. 114-570-114-597. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LANDSCAPING AND LAND USE BUFFERS 

Sec. 114-598. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Landscape means the planting and retention of live plants, including trees, shrubs, ground cover and low-growing plants that are native species or species adaptable to local climatic conditions. Landscape materials will include a mix of trees, shrubs and ground covers and may consist of both deciduous and evergreen plants for yearround effectiveness. The functions of these landscape materials may include screening of adjacent properties, erosion control, pollution control, glare and temperature moderation and aesthetic appeal. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XV, § 2; Code 1998, § 114-646) 
Sec. 114-599. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to improve the appearance of public rights-of-way, certain commercial developments and multifamily dwellings, and public property through regulations of the planting, protection and maintenance of trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials; to regulate the preservation, replacement and indiscriminate removal of trees on private property and new developments; and to specify policies and procedures for fulfillment of these purposes. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XV, § 1; Code 1998, § 114-647) 
Sec. 114-600. - Landscape requirements. 
(a)  Lists of acceptable materials. The city landscape specialist will prepare and maintain lists of landscape materials which are acceptable for planting on public and private properties, including rights-of-way and parking areas. The lists will be specific for this geographic area and will detail growth patterns, maturity height, rate of growth, disease resistance, site planting requirements and maintenance requirements. No landscape material shall be planted on public or private property as set forth in this section unless it appears on this list or is approved by the landscape specialist. The lists will be available from the building official, planning director and the landscape specialist. 
(b)  Public property. Public property is defined as any street, park or other land or building owned by the city. The city will control the planting, maintenance and removal of all landscape materials on public property. Work will be performed by municipal personnel or by contract with licensed and insured private companies. Any person or company working on public property or private property adjoining or affecting public property is responsible for the protection of any landscape materials located on public property and for restitution of any materials damaged during or as a result of construction or other work. 
(c)  Private property. A complete landscape plan will be submitted to the city manager, or his designee, after the issuance of a building permit; if not, the permit is subject to be revoked in zoning areas R-3, R-4, R-5, R-1MP, P-1, TA, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-1R and B-4P. 
(1)  The plan shall be drawn to scale, including the: 
a.  Location, size and shape of any buildings; 
b.  Existing or proposed parking spaces or other vehicular use areas; 
c.  Pedestrian areas; and 
d.  All sections to be landscaped. 
(2)  The plan shall specify: 
a.  The number, size (designated by guidelines of the American Standards for Nursery Stock), and species and cultivar of trees, shrubs, ground covers and other plants; 
b.  Planting locations; and 
c.  Size of existing trees that will be saved. 
A certification of completion of landscaping must be obtained from the city manager before a certif-icate of occupancy is issued by the building official. A waiver of the installation of landscape materials may be granted by the city manager if installation is hindered due to adverse weather conditions. The waiver will not exceed a 180-day period. 
(d)  Parking areas. 
(1)  Applicability. This subsection (d) applies to all new parking areas for developments requiring a landscape plan and for existing lots that are enlarged or expanded by more than ten parking spaces, provided that the zoning administrator, assisted by a landscape specialist, does not waive specific landscaping requirements. The zoning administrator may waive this requirement where the requirement can be satisfied by alternative measures. 
(2)  Perimeter. Landscaping for the perimeter of new parking areas requires a planting strip of a minimum width of ten feet abutting public streets excluding access driveways or alleys. This planting strip will include a minimum of one deciduous tree for each 50 linear feet of perimeter and for any fraction of footage over 25 linear feet. These trees may be grouped or placed at intervals appropriate to the species for aesthetic purposes, so long as the total number of trees equals or is greater than the minimum specified by the linear-foot method of determination of trees required. Location of types of landscaping materials is to be compatible with utility lines, sidewalks and the safe use of streets. When a building permit is requested for redevelopment or additions to a previously developed site, where the required perimeter strip does not exist, the required trees may be planted in pavement cutouts of sufficient size for tree survival and growth. 
(3)  Interior. 
a.  Properties with 5,000 or more square feet of paved area must also have interior tree planting areas. These planting areas must total at least five percent of the total paved area. One tree must be planted for each 600 square feet of interior landscape area or fraction of additional area over 300 square feet. 
b.  Landscape areas should be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving and to guide traffic flow. The use of terminal islands for rows of parking spaces is encouraged. Landscape islands between parking spaces shall be no less than five feet in width and no less than half the length of parking spaces. Parking area islands containing trees require a minimum width of eight feet. Landscaping must be located in islands or planting strips within ten feet of the paved areas where requirements otherwise would hinder the functioning of the completed development. 
c.  Of the required landscaping area, a minimum of 20 percent will be building perimeter plantings for any building side fronting an access street. Building perimeter islands will have a minimum width of 2.5 feet. Building perimeter islands will be positioned to be free of vehicle overhang from any adjacent parking areas. 
d.  Reduction of required new landscaping may be granted by the landscape specialist for sections within the paved areas which are used to provide a protected location for an existing tree which has a caliper measurement of at least three inches. The landscape specialist's decision will be based on criteria such as age, size, type and condition of the tree. 
e.  When a building permit is requested for redevelopment or additions to a previously developed site, building perimeter plantings are required for any building side fronting an access street. Building perimeter islands will be positioned to be free of vehicular overhang from any adjacent parking sites. 
f.  Parking lots that are enlarged or expanded by more than ten spaces shall be subject to the same landscape requirements as new developments; provided, however, that the board of zoning appeals may waive specific landscaping requirements for the existing portions of such parking lots when the requirement can be satisfied through alternative measures. 
(4)  Property adjoining a residential or agricultural zone. 
a.  A planting strip boundary shall be placed between the property and a residential or agricultural zone or public parks or the greenbelt pathways. The planting strip shall have a minimum width equal to the abutting setback requirement of the more restrictive zone; in the absence of a setback requirement, the minimum width shall be 30 feet. The planting zone shall contain one large-maturing deciduous tree for each 50 linear feet of boundary and for any fraction of additional footage over 25 linear feet. The remainder of the planting area shall be landscaped with ground cover, shrubs or other landscape materials specified in section 114-601. However, this shall not apply to any part of the subject property line that abuts a public right-of-way, which is at least 40 feet in width and open to public use. 
b.  The planning commission or board of zoning appeals may require a continuous, opaque wood fence with a minimum height of six feet for complete screening. However, this screening may be provided by planting a row of evergreen shrubs or trees that will provide at least a six-foot complete screen at maturity or before maturity. 
(5)  Driveway and street intersections. At all locations where driveways or alleyways intersect with streets, a sight triangle is to be maintained. No landscape materials other than low growing grass or other ground cover will be planted within the sight triangle. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XV, § 3; Code 1998, § 114-648; Ord. No. 4959, § I, 10-2-2001) 
Sec. 114-601. - Landscaping materials. 
(a)  Earth mounds. Under this chapter, earth mounds may be used as physical barriers which block or screen a view for purposes similar to those of hedges or fences. Mounds are to be landscaped sufficiently with ground covers or other live materials to prevent erosion. 
(b)  Fences. Fences may be used as confining or screening barriers. Fences are to be continuous and opaque and constructed of natural materials such as stone, wood or brick. 
(c)  Live plants. All plant material will be planted in accordance with accepted horticultural practices. Plant materials will meet current specifications of the American Standard for Nursery Stock and shall have passed any inspections required under state regulations; information on these standards will be available from the landscape specialist. 
(1)  Deciduous trees (shed their leaves in the fall). Deciduous trees to be planted must meet or exceed the American Standards for Nursery Stock. 
a.  Trees planted in perimeter areas should be species or cultivars that are listed in the street planting plan of the city. If the site is not included in the planting plan, a tree species will be selected from the list of approved trees provided by the landscape specialist. 
b.  Trees having an average age mature spread or crown of less than 15 feet may be grouped to achieve a larger crown size. 
(2)  Ground cover. Ground cover shall be planted in such a manner as to provide a finished appearance and 75 percent coverage after two growing seasons. All ground cover should be properly mulched at installation. 
(3)  Grass. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be placed for immediate protection until complete coverage is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. 
(4)  Shrubs. Shrubs shall have a minimum installation height of two feet or a minimum spread of 12 inches or a three-gallon pot size, depending upon the shrub species. Shrubs used as ground cover shall follow the specifications for ground covers. 
(5)  Vines. At the time of planting, vines should have at least a 12-inch spread. Most vines will need support to reach maturity. 
(d)  Nonliving materials. No more than 50 percent of each landscape area shall include nonliving materials such as bark and wood chips, marble chips, river rock, pebbles, lava rock and pine needles. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XV, § 4; Code 1998, § 114-649) 
Sec. 114-602. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Under this chapter, all landscape construction and installation shall be conducted according to standard nursery practices and specifications. Landscaping shall be installed as shown on the approved landscape plan. Landscaping shall be installed and completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless an extension is granted by the landscape specialist of up to 180 days because of adverse planting conditions. Plants in or adjacent to parking areas are to be protected from vehicular damage by the use of curbs, wheel stops or other barriers. Existing saved trees in construction areas or near other work sites are to be protected through the use of a sturdy fence of framework at least four feet in height during the construction period. Whenever possible, drainage from paved impervious parking surfaces should be channeled into planted areas. 
(b)  All required landscape plant material shall be maintained in a healthy condition in accordance with guidelines specified in American Standards for Nursery Stock. The property owner will be responsible for the continuing maintenance of all landscaped areas. Dead, seriously diseased or damaged plants or dying ones shall be removed and replaced with materials approved by the city's landscape specialist and in accordance with guidelines set forth in American Standards for Nursery Stock. Such replanting will take place at the next planting season appropriate for the landscape materials or within six months, at the owner's expense. 
(c)  The landscape specialist will make unscheduled inspections of landscaped areas to ensure continuing compliance in the maintenance and protection of landscape plants. The landscape specialist will notify property owners concerning required replacement of plants and other needed maintenance. 
(Code 1981, app. A, art. XV, § 5; Code 1998, § 114-650) 
Secs. 114-603-114-649. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT 

Sec. 114-650. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any occupied or vacant walled or roofed structure or part thereof used for human occupation or intended to be so used and includes any garages, outbuildings, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    Commission means the historic zoning commission established pursuant to section 114-240. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing an historic landmark in an historic district that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the landmark, or the loss of the structural integrity of the landmark, including the existence of any defect listed in section 114-654. The term "demolition by neglect" also includes any act or process which destroys, in part or in whole, any historic landmark. 
    Historic designation means the formal recognition as an historic landmark. 
    Historic landmark means any structure in an historic district of this city, at least 50 years old, either publicly or privately owned, including buildings, homes, replicas, structures, objects, properties, cultural landscapes or sites that have importance in the history, architecture, archaeology, or culture of this city, state or nation, as determined by the commission and having received an historic designation. 
    Maintenance and repair means any work, for which a building permit is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration, decay of, or damage to a structure or any architecturally significant part thereof and to restore or replace, as nearly as may be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means all individuals, associations, or corporations who have interests of record in a building, or parcel of land or who have actual possession thereof. 
    Premises means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any buildings thereon. 
    Preservation means the act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of an historic landmark. 
    Undue economic hardship means the inability of the owner and parties in interest to obtain a reasonable return or a reasonably beneficial use from the historic landmark that is the subject of demolition by neglect, or the inability of the owner and parties in interest to finance the required repairs to the historic landmark. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-700), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-651. - Declaration of findings, policy and purpose. 
(a)  The board of mayor and aldermen find that some buildings in the historic districts in the city are or may be allowed to be essentially demolished by neglecting repair to such buildings and that such neglect is detrimental to the protection, preservation, and enhancement of historic sites and buildings in such districts, to property values in the districts, and to the health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. It is further found that, to prevent such demolition by neglect, T.C.A. § 13-7-407(b) authorizes the governing body of a municipality to enact an ordinance governing demolition by neglect of any building within an established historic district. The board further finds that population growth and development may result in the destruction, impairment or drastic alteration of the buildings, structures and areas important to the city's cultural, historic and architectural heritage. It is further found that the prevention of needless destruction and impairment and the attendant preservation of the city's cultural, historic and architectural heritage are essential to the public health, safety and welfare. The intent of this article is to create a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving the city's historic character and culture. It is also the intent of this chapter not to preserve every old building in the city, but rather to prevent the destruction of historic and architecturally significant sites, buildings, and structures in established historic districts. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through: 
(1)  The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings, structures, sites and areas that are reminders of past eras, events and persons important in local, state or national history, or that provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past, or that are unique and irreplaceable assets to the city and its neighborhoods, or that provide for this and future generations examples of the physical surroundings in which past generations lived; 
(2)  The development and maintenance of appropriate settings and environments for such buildings and structures, and in such sites and areas; 
(3)  The enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods in historic districts, the increase of economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants, and the promotion of tourist trade and interest; 
(4)  The preservation and enhancement of varied architectural styles, reflecting the distinct phases of the city's history; and 
(5)  The provision of educational opportunities and to increase the appreciation of the city's history. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-701), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-652. - Enforcing official. 
    The building official is designated as the public officer who shall exercise the powers prescribed in this article, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-702), 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 5596, § I, 9-4-2007) 
Sec. 114-653. - Powers of building official. 
    The building official is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and requirements of this article, including the following powers, in addition to others granted in this article: 
(1)  Investigate conditions in the historic districts of the city in order to determine which buildings are subject to demolition by neglect, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations, provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to persons in possession. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-703), 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 5596, § II, 9-4-2007) 
Sec. 114-654. - Prevention of demolition by neglect. 
(a)  The exterior features of any historic landmark located in any historic district shall be preserved against decay and deterioration, and kept free from structural defects by the owner thereof or parties in interest and shall not be permitted to suffer demolition by neglect. It shall be unlawful and an offense for owners or parties in interest of historic landmarks to allow any of the following defects to exist and the owner or parties in interest shall repair such exterior features if they are found to be deteriorating, or if their condition is contributing to deterioration, including but not limited to the following defects: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports rendering such components incapable of carrying imposed load, or that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling. 
(2)  Deterioration of roofs, roof supports, joists or other horizontal components rendering such components incapable of carrying imposed loads, or that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling. 
(3)  Deterioration, leaning or settling of chimneys. 
(4)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco, mortar or masonry surfaces. 
(5)  Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings and architectural details that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling. 
(6)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(7)  Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, with apparent evidence of deterioration. 
(8)  Rotting, holes, and other forms of decay. 
(9)  Unsafe electrical or mechanical conditions constituting a fire or safety hazard. 
(10)  Deterioration of any component so as to create a hazardous condition that could lead to a claim that demolition is necessary for public safety. 
(11)  Deterioration of any exterior features so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition to life, health, or other property. 
(b)  The preventive measures outlined in subsection (a) of this section are for structural conditions leading to dilapidation of the structure only. This shall not be construed to include cosmetic repair or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-704), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-655. - Institution of action and notification of hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a writing is filed with the building official by either the historic zoning commission, by at least five residents of the city, or by a city building inspector charging that an historic landmark in any historic district is threatened with demolition by neglect as set out in section 114-654, or whenever it appears to the building official that any historic landmark is threatened by demolition by neglect such charge shall be referred to the review committee. The review committee shall make a preliminary investigation of the charge applying the standards set forth in section 114-654. If such preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charge, the review committee shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest of such historic landmark, as the same may be determined by reasonable diligence, a complaint stating the charges the committee finds have a basis for demolition by neglect and a notice that a hearing will be held before the building official at a time and place therein fixed. The review committee shall consist of the building official and two individuals appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of mayor and aldermen for a term of not more than three years, one of whom shall be a member of the historic zoning commission and the other of whom shall be a licensed engineer familiar with structural engineering, if such individual is reasonable available. 
(b)  The complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the building official at a time and place therein fixed, not less than ten days or more than 30 days after the service of the complaint. The notice shall also state that the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint, appear in person, or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building official. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-705), 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 5596, § III, 9-4-2007) 
Sec. 114-656. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  A record of the entire hearing shall be made by tape recording or by other means of permanent recording determined appropriate by the building official. A recording of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of a fee established by the board of mayor and aldermen. 
(b)  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(c)  Hearsay evidence is admissible and may be used to support a finding. 
(d)  Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction of this state. 
(e)  Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(f)  Each party shall have the following rights, among others: 
(1)  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(2)  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
(3)  To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issue of the hearing; 
(4)  To refute the evidence against the party; and 
(5)  To representation by counsel. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-706), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-657. - Determination of and further notice by building official. 
(a)  If, after such notice and hearing as provided for in section 114-655, the building official determines that the historic landmark in question has suffered demolition by neglect, the building official shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner, and/or parties in interest, an order requiring repairs, improvements, and/or correction of defects, within the time specified, of those elements of the historic landmark that are deteriorating, contributing to deterioration, or deteriorated. Any repairs, improvements, and/or correction of defects instituted in compliance with this section shall be made in conformance with the zoning and building codes. 
(b)  In the event the owner, and/or other parties in interest desire to petition for a claim of undue economic hardship, the order of the building official shall be stayed until after a determination in accordance with the procedures of section 114-658. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-707), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-658. - Undue economic hardship. 
(a)  The building official may exempt an historic landmark from a demolition by neglect order if the building official finds that the owner and parties in interest have proven the order to repair creates undue economic hardship on the owner and parties in interest. An application for a determination of undue economic hardship by the owner and parties at interest shall be made, on a form prepared by the building official, not more than 30 days after delivery of the order finding demolition by neglect. The application must include photographs of the building, information pertaining to the historic significance of the site, if any, and all information required by the building official. All owners and parties in interest must submit the application under oath. The burden of proof of the undue economic hardship is on the owner and parties in interest. 
(b)  The application shall include the information specified in subsection (a) of this section, and the building official may require that an owner and parties in interest furnish such additional information the building official deems relevant to a determination of undue economic hardship. 
(c)  In the event any of the required information is not reasonably available to the owner and parties in interest, and cannot be readily obtained, the owner and parties in interest shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained. 
(d)  The building official shall hold a hearing on the application within 30 days of the timely receipt of such application. Notice will be given and hearing procedures followed in the same manner as set forth in sections 114-655(b) and 114-656. The owner and parties in interest may submit such relevant information they deem appropriate to prove undue economic hardship, but at a minimum shall submit to the building official for his review at least the following information: 
(1)  Nature of ownership, legal possession, custody, and control; 
(2)  Financial resources of the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  Cost of the repair or correction with supporting documentation from licensed contractors; 
(4)  Valuation of the land and improvements; 
(5)  Real property taxes for each of the previous two years and the appraised value of the property for those years established by the property assessor for property tax purposes; 
(6)  Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of any relationship between the grantor and grantee, or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance; 
(7)  Annual debt service on the property, if any, for previous two years; 
(8)  The marketability of the property for sale or lease, considered in relation to any listing of the property for sale or lease, and price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. This should include testimony and relevant documents regarding: 
a.  Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property; 
b.  Reasonableness of the price or rent sought by the applicant; and 
c.  Any advertisements placed for the sale or lease of the property; 
(9)  If the property is commercial or income producing property, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years as claimed as deductions on United States tax returns; and debt service, if any on the property, if not including as an operating or maintenance expense; 
(10)  Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed; 
(11)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or parties in interest or others in connection with the purchase, financing, attempted sale, or ownership of the property; 
(12)  Any federal income tax returns on or relating to the property for the previous two years; and 
(13)  Any other information the building official deems relevant to the determination of undue economic hardship. 
(e)  Undue economic hardship does not include self-created hardships, willful or negligent acts of the owner or parties in interest, purchase of the property for substantially more than the market value, failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants, or failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
(f)  Within 30 days of the hearing on the application, the building official shall make a written finding of whether undue economic hardship exists, and shall enter the reasons for such finding into the record. In the event of a finding of no undue economic hardship, the building official shall issue an order for repair, improvements, or correction of defects within the time specified. In the event of a finding of undue economic hardship, the finding shall be accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve the economic hardship. This plan may include, but not be limited to loans or grants from the city, county, state, or other public, private, or non-profit sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, changes in applicable zoning regulations, or relaxation of the provisions of this article sufficient to mitigate the undue economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-708), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-659. - Service of complaints or orders. 
    Complaints or orders issued by the building official under this article shall be served upon persons, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaints or orders upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaints or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. In addition, a copy of such complaints or orders shall also be filed for record in the register's office of the county in which the building is located, and such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-709), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-660. - Remedies. 
    If the owner, and/or parties in interest, fail or refuse to comply with the order of the building official within the time specified, the city may apply for appropriate equitable remedies to enforce the provisions of this article, including an order directing that improvements or repairs be made, or that other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property in compliance with this article, and if the city shall make the repairs it shall have a lien as set out in section 114-661. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-710), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-661. - Creation of lien and payment into court. 
    The amount of the cost of such repairs or corrections ordered by the court and made or procured by the building official shall upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property lies, be a lien in favor of the city against the real property on which such cost was incurred, second only to liens of the state, county and city for taxes; any lien of the city for special assessments; and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. The city tax collector shall collect these costs at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected and shall include penalties and interest calculated as if it were overdue property taxes. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-711), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-662. - Appeals from decision of building official. 
(a)  The aggrieved party, against whom the decision of the building official is made, may have a review of the decision by petition for a common law writ of certiorari, addressed to either the city law court or chancery court. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date the decision or order of the building official is made and written notice thereof given the aggrieved party. 
(b)  Immediately upon the grant of the common law writ of certiorari and service thereof, the building official shall cause to be made, certified, and forwarded to such court a complete transcript of the proceedings in the cause by the building official. 
(c)  The action may be reviewed by the court in which the petition for certiorari is filed and shall be heard solely upon the transcript of the proceedings before the building official, and neither party shall be entitled to introduce new evidence in such court. 
(d)  Any party dissatisfied with the decree of the court hearing the cause may, upon giving bond as required by law, take an appeal, as is made and provided by law, where the case shall be heard upon the transcript of the record from the court in which the cause is heard. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-712), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-663. - Procedures for designation of historic landmarks with the owner's consent. 
(a)  Any completed application for designation filed by the owner with the planning department, once reviewed by the planning manager or designee, shall be promptly referred to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application not less than 30 days, or more than 60 days after the filing of the application to consider the approval of the historic designation. In determining whether to approve the designation the commission shall consider the criteria contained in section 114-665, and must find the application meets at least one of the criteria listed therein. 
(b)  A notice of the hearing shall be served as provided in section 114-659 by the planning manager or designee. The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing and a brief summary of the proposed action. 
(c)  The planning manager or designee shall review the proposed designation with respect to its relationship to the land use plan; the effect of the designation on the surrounding neighborhood; and such other planning considerations as may be relevant to the proposed designation. The planning manager or designee shall provide written comments and recommendations regarding the proposed designation to the commission no less than seven days before the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted using the procedure set out in section 114-656. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-713), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-664. - Procedures for designation of historic landmarks without the owner's consent. 
(a)  Any completed application for designation is filed by one other than the owner with the planning department, once reviewed by the planning manager or designee, shall be promptly referred to the commission and if the owner or owners of the property nominated for designation does not consent to the designation the commission shall hold a public hearing on the application not less than 30 days, nor more than 60 days after the filing of the application to consider the approval of the historic designation, unless the commission grants a continuance in the matter. In determining whether to approve the designation the commission shall consider the criteria contained in section 114-665 and must find the application meets at least three of the criteria listed therein. 
(b)  A notice of the hearing shall be served as provided in section 114-659 by the planning manager or designee. The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing and a brief summary of the proposed action. 
(c)  The planning manager or designee shall review the proposed designation with respect to its relationship to the land use plan; the effect of the designation on the surrounding neighborhood; and such other planning considerations as may be relevant to the proposed designation. The planning manager or designee shall provide written comments and recommendations regarding the proposed designation to the commission at the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted using the procedure set out in section 114-656. 
(e)  At least four of seven members of the commission must be present at the hearing in order to establish a quorum. In the event of vacancies on the commission, then two-thirds of commission members shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is missing then the chairperson of the commission may set a new date for a special hearing or the matter may be heard on the next regularly scheduled meeting date of the commission. 
(f)  The decision of the commission shall be made by a majority roll call vote after the commission has heard all interested parties and relevant evidence. The board may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary to gather all relevant evidence to make its recommendation. The board shall consider the conformance or lack of conformance of the proposed designation with the purposes, standards and criteria of this article. The commission board shall either approve or disapprove the proposed designation after considering the criteria set forth in section 114-665. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-714), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-665. - Criteria for designation. 
    To be eligible for designation as an historic landmark a structure shall be located in an historic district, shall be at least 50 years old and possess architectural, social, or geographical/environmental importance by meeting one or more of the following: 
(1)  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
(2)  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally, or locally; 
(3)  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
(4)  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design; 
(5)  Represents a style particularly associated with the historic district or the city; 
(6)  Represents a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria; 
(7)  Has undergone significant historic remodel; 
(8)  Is the site of historic event that had an effect upon society; 
(9)  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; 
(10)  Represents an association with a notable person or the work of a notable person; 
(11)  Represents a typical example/association with a particular ethnic group; 
(12)  Represents a unique example of an event in the city's history; 
(13)  Enhances sense of identity of the community; 
(14)  Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community; 
(15)  Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places or is designated by the state historic preservation office as an historic designation or landmark. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-715), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-666. - Appeal from decision of the commission. 
(a)  The aggrieved party, against whom the decision of the commission is made, may have a review of the decision by petition for a common law writ of certiorari, addressed to either the city law court or chancery court. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date the decision of the commission is made. 
(b)  Immediately upon the grant of the common law writ of certiorari and service thereof, the commission shall cause to be made, certified, and forwarded to such court a complete transcript of the proceedings in the cause by the commission. 
(c)  The action may be reviewed by the court in which the petition for certiorari is filed and shall be heard solely upon the transcript of the proceedings before the commission, and neither party shall be entitled to introduce new evidence in such court. 
(d)  Any party dissatisfied with the decree of the court hearing the cause may, upon giving bond as required by law, take an appeal, as is made and provided by law, where the case shall be heard upon the transcript of the record from the court in which the cause is heard. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-716), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-667. - Procedure for nomination of historic landmarks. 
(a)  The commission, board of mayor and aldermen or owners may nominate a property or structure for designation as an historic landmark. 
(b)  Upon inquiry for nomination, the planning manager or designee and at least one member of the commission shall contact the owner or owners of the property outlining the reasons and effects of designation as an historic property and, if possible, shall secure the consent of the owner or owners to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. 
(c)  If the property is found to have a potential for designation, an application shall be filed with the planning manager or designee on forms prescribed by the commission, and shall include the names of all owners of property included in the proposed designation, and shall be accompanied by all data required by the commission. The planning manager or designee shall transmit copies of the application to relevant city departments. The planning manager or designee shall in all cases notify, in writing, all owners of property included in the proposed designation, other than applicants, that the designation proceedings have been initiated. 
(d)  Each such nomination shall include a description of the characteristics of the proposed historic landmark which justify its designation, a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the property. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-717), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-668. - Legal protection for nominated properties. 
    For a property which has been nominated but not yet designated as an historic landmark, permits to alter or remodel the exterior of the property or properties to build, relocate, or raze shall not be issued during the 90-day period following the date nomination is received by the planning manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-718), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-669. - Resubmission for approval of designation as an historic landmark. 
    Whenever the commission denies the approval of a proposed designation, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least one year from the effective date of the final action on the original proposal. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-719), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-670. - Rules. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may make rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-720), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-671. - Penalty and enforcement. 
    Any person violating any section of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be penalized not less than $1.00 and not more than $50.00 for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a penalty under this section shall be supplemental to any other action or penalty and shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license, the taking of any remedial or injunctive action, or seeking any other legal or equitable relief or enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-721), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-672. - Powers conferred are supplemental. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the enforcement of the provisions of its Charter or any other ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Charter and other laws. Nothing contained within this article shall diminish the power of the city to declare a building unsafe or a violation of any building or housing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-722), 5-17-2005) 
Appendix A - TABLE OF ANNEXATION ORDINANCES 
    This table lists amendments to the corporate limits of the city. The text of such amendments is not set out in the Charter or the Code as published in this volume, but is available in the office of the city clerk. 
1095 12-16-1949 Fairacres Addition 1116  3-31-1950 Litz Manor Area (by referendum) 1428  6- 7-1955 5.5 acres-Part of Sevier Terrace 1429  6- 7-1955 11.7 acres-Nursery tract on Lamont 1482  5- 1-1956 Part of Highpark Addition 1576  2-18-1958 130.4 acres-part of Sevier Terrace 1642  1-19-1960 Hillcrest/Bridwell Heights 1678 11- 1-1960 Truxton Addition 1721 12-19-1961 653 acres-North of Stone Drive 1738  5- 1-1962 2,200 acres-Fort Robinson area 1762 10-16-1962 2,245 acres-Study Area 4-Preston Forest, City View, Holston Hills 1763 10-16-1962 15 acres-Tranbarger Drive 1786  6-27-1963 Cabana Apartments area North of Stone Drive 1796  8-20-1963 13 acres-Chestnut Ridge, Laguardia et al. 1808 12-17-1963 10 acres-A.V. Cole Subdivision on Chestnut Ridge 1823  3- 3-1964 61 acres-East and Barker property near Lynn Garden Drive 1826  4- 7-1964 78 acres-Beechcliff on Orebank Road 1834  6-16-1964 17 acre-Sevier Terrace 1881  7- 6-1965 Narrow strip along railroad in Ridgefields 1900  2-15-1966 Malabar Heights 1934 11-15-1966 33 acres-Near Rotherwood Hills 1939  2-21-1967 27 acres-Stone Drive (Waterman, Groseclose, Kilgore) 1977  4- 2-1968 6 acres-Cabana Apartments area 1986  6- 4-1968 Amersham/Huntington Hills area 1998  9- 3-1968 15 acres-Country Garden Apartments area 2024  6-17-1969 40 acres-Near Preston Forest 2058  4- 7-1970 105.1 acres-Preston Forest 2063  4-21-1970 129.04 acres-Brookside Drive area 2147  4- 4-1972 Bays Mountain Park 2178 10- 3-1972 Trammel Apartment site near Westview Addition 2239  5- 7-1974 Granby Road School site 2269 12- 3-1974 Rotherwood Heights-Lewis Lane area 2326  3- 2-1976 806 acres-East Stone Drive, Mason Dixon 2328  4- 6-1976 1,600 acres-Bays Mountain Park 2399 12- 6-1977 Sevier Terrace Area 2404  2- 7-1978 180 acres-Rotherwood Farms area 2430  8-15-1978 Southside area 2476  9-18-1979 12 acres-Brookside Drive 2498  4- 1-1980 33.9 acres-Bays Mountain Park 2534  1-20-1981 322 acres-Regional Service Park 2612 11-30-1982 Section 1, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2618 12-21-1982 22 acres-Tranbarger Drive area 2627  2-15-1983 1.5 acres-Demik property on Old Stage Road 2657  8-16-1983 1.8 acres-Tranbarger Drive area 2674 11-15-1983 104 acres-Ed Leeper property on East Stone Road 2675 11-15-1983 Section 2, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2677 11-15-1983 Clinchfield Railroad property near Eastman 2683  1-17-1984 70 acres-Brookside Drive area 2685  1-17-1984 Accepting deeds and easements from various parties-Brookside Drive area annexation 2717 10- 2-1984 63 acres-James D. Hendrickson property near Glenbrook & Harbor Drive 2720 11-20-1984 167.82 acres-Section 3, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2726 12- 6-1984 Joyner property-Harbor Chapel Road 2729  2- 5-1985 Miller Park 2730  2- 5-1985 Childress property 2755  7-16-1985 River Mountain Village Subdivision 2771 10-15-1985 Five residences-June Drive 2774 10-15-1985 Cox property-Dennis Highway 2806  6-17-1986 Gage property-Memorial Boulevard and Old Stage Road 2808  6-17-1986 12.55 acres-Bisceglia property, River Mountain Village 2834 10-21-1986 Dougherty property-June Drive 2844  1-20-1987 Study Area I-Colonial Heights (repealed by Ord. No. 2938) 2845  1-20-1987 Study Area II 2846  1-20-1987 Study Area III 2847  1-20-1987 Study Area IV 2848  1-20-1987 Study Area V 2849  1-20-1987 Study Area VI 2850  1-20-1987 Study Area VII 2851  1-20-1987 Study Area VIII 2852  1-20-1987 Study Area IX (repealed by Ord. No. 2875) 2856  2-17-1987 Fain Avenue area 2862  3- 2-1987 Boyd and Cox property-Ambleside 2872  4-21-1987 Racetrac Petroleum property-J.B. Dennis and I-81 2875  5- 7-1987 Repeal of Ord. No. 2852-Study Area IX 2876  5-19-1987 Study Area X-Sam's 2884  8- 4-1987 Clyde Bowers property-Lewis Lane, Hawkins County 2887  7-21-1987 Vaughn Chambers property-4220 Rustic Way 2893  9- 1-1987 Mike And Linda Freeman property-4174 Triangle Circle 2897  9- 1-1987 4174 Triangle Circle (amending Ord. No. 2893) 2905 10-20-1987 Joe Wimberly property-Bloomingdale Pike and Gravely Road 2917 11-14-1987 City property near Kendricks Creek Road 2922 10-20-1987 Rock Springs Road/I-181 2923 10-20-1987 Dennis Coffey property-326 Iris Drive 2933  1- 5-1988 Garland Farm near Cox Hollow Road and I-181, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County 2938  2- 2-1988 (Repealed by Ords. No. 2844-2850) 2941  2-16-1988 Rustic Way/Harbor Drive area in Cook's Valley, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 2943  2-16-1988 105 Patterson Road-part of 11th Civil District 2945  2-16-1988 Triangle Circle area in Cook's Valley 2949  2-16-1988 Triangle Circle area in Cook's Valley 2954  4-19-1988 Steadman Farm near airport, 18th Civil District, Sullivan County 2966  4-19-1988 316 Mullins Street 2967  4-19-1988 Virgil Street, Lynn Street, Lynn Garden Drive area 2968  4-19-1988 120 Virginia Street area near Lynn Garden Drive and Virginia Street 2970  5-17-1988 1300-1308 Lynn Garden Drive-201 Glen Avenue Area 2972  5-17-1988 104-464 Lynn Garden Drive 2973  5-17-1988 Bert Street/Frank Street area in Lynn Garden 2982  8- 2-1988 Part of Briarwood Acres Subdivision 2983  8- 2-1988 1500-1506 Lynn Garden Drive 3003  9-20-1988 4608 Sterling Lane, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3007  9-20-1988 Part of Hickory Hills Subdivision on Ronald Drive; 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3008  9-20-1988 J. R. Pierce property, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County on John B. Dennis Highway 3010  9-20-1988 1075 Lynn Garden Drive, 12th Civil District, Sullivan County 3013  9-20-1988 920 South Wilcox Drive, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County 3015 10- 4-1988 John B. Dennis-Brookside, 10th Civil District 3024 10-18-1988 Willmary Drive, June Drive, Cook's Valley Road, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3030 11-15-1988 4570-4574 Ronald Drive, 7th Civil District, Cooks Valley 3032 11-15-1988 Jericho Shriner's Temple, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3046 12-14-1988 Moody Farm, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3047 11-15-1988 1613 Lynn Garden Drive, 12th Civil District, Sullivan County 3051 12-20-1988 Addition to Roy Bailey area near Brookside Road and Dennis Highway-10th Civil District, Sullivan County 3061  7- 5-1988 Mercer, Carr, Fleenor property on Airport Access Road 3079 12-20-1988 4548 Matilda Place in Cooks Valley 3082 12-20-1988 Cooks Valley Road, Merrywood Avenue, Stillwood Avenue area in Cooks Valley 3083 12-20-1988 General Shale-Holston Mental Health Center area near Bowater Drive 3087  1-17-1989 4500-4517 Merrywood Avenue area in Cooks Valley 3090  2-21-1989 4507 Harbor Drive 3093  3- 7-1989 Lynn Garden Drive to state line 3094  3- 7-1989 I-181 Eastern Star Road to Washington County line 3096  3-21-1989 Eagles View Row in Lynn Garden 3107  4-18-1989 Pannell 3109  5-16-1989 Southwest Lynn Garden Area 3112  5-16-1989 Cracker Barrel area on Airport Rd 3135  6-20-1989 Andy Brooks property-Fort Henry Drive 3137  6-20-1989 Raintree area of Lynn Garden 3139  6-20-1989 Fairview-Virgil Area in Lynn Garden 3141  6-20-1989 Cooks Valley-4620 Matilda Place 3145  7- 6-1989 Allen Drive Area-Lynn Garden 3157  8- 1-1989 Northeast Lynn Garden 3159  8- 1-1989 Southeast Lynn Garden 3161  8- 1-1989 East Lynn Garden 3163  8- 1-1989 Echo/Northwest Lynn Garden 3167  8-15-1989 J. R. Pierce Property 3169  8-15-1989 Elks Property 3171  8-15-1989 1005 Fairview Avenue 3173  8-15-1989 1216 Bloomingdale Pike 3186 10-17-1989 Bradley Brothers property-John B. Dennis Highway 3197 11-21-1989 A&M Express and Central Transport 3199 11-21-1989 Eastern Concrete 3206 12-19-1989 Cooks Valley-Briarwood West 3208 12-19-1989 Cooks Valley-Cedarwood 3210 12-19-1989 Slipnot Belting-1171 Shipp Street 3212 12-19-1989 1103 Ambleside Drive 3218  1-16-1990 Harbor-Talbert-Matilda 322  1-16-1990 Matilda-June 3222  1-16-1990 West View 3224  1-16-1990 Oak Hill 3233  2-20-1990 Duke Properties-104108 Ferrell Avenue 3235  2-20-1990 Colonial Manor Condominiums-Ferrell Avenue 3237  2-20-1990 Cook's Valley-Dickson Meadows 3239  2-20-1990 Willmary West and Mowdy-Merrywood 3241  2-20-1990 Colonial Walk Shoppes-Fort Henry Drive 3243  2-20-1990 Waterman Farm 3250  3-20-1990 Stapleton Drive 3252  3-20-1990 Cook's Valley-Ronald, June and Briarwood East 3254  3-20-1990 Willowbrook 3263  4- 3-1990 Kingsport Demolition Landfill 3274  5- 1-1990 300 Blakley Drive 3276  5- 1-1990 Rock Springs-Moreland 3280  5-15-1990 Deneen Lane, Granby Road, Williams Road 3282  5-15-1990 West Cook's Valley 3284  5-15-1990 Dr. Ralph White property-Fort Henry Drive 3296  6-19-1990 Midfields 3298  6-19-1990 Beartown 3300  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-Sterling Place 3302  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-East 3304  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-Harbor Chapel 3306  6-19-1990 McCann Property 3308  6-19-1990 4516 Fort Henry Drive 3310  6-19-1990 Antiques Etc-Airport Parkway 3322  7-17-1990 Days Inn, 10150 Airport Parkway 3324  7-17-1990 4598 Fort Henry Drive-Fire Station No. 6 3332  8-21-1990 Perkins Restaurant 3334  8-21-1990 Averitt Express 3358 11- 6-1990 Holston River Mountain 3367 11-20-1990 Colonial Heights And Springdale-Long Island (amended by Ord. No. 3620) 3370 11-20-1990 Ratliff Farm 3372 11-20-1990 Brooks Property 3419  4-16-1991 Tri-City Motor Lodge-9980 Airport Parkway 3424  5- 7-1991 Crown Colony/East Stone Drive (amended by Ord. No. 3493) 3433  5-21-1991 Bowater Drive 3434  5-21-1991 Yellow Freight System 3493 11- 5-1991 East Stone Drive (amending Ord. No. 3424) 3498 11-19-1991 Vernon Heights 3506 11-19-1991 1167 and 11671/2 Bloomingdale Pike 3519  1-21-1992 Pierce property near Airport Parkway 3521  1-21-1992 Lots 5, 6, 7 and the outlot of Northeast Tennessee Business Park 3527  3-17-1992 C. F. Netherland 3529  3-17-1992 Saltwater Willy's Seafood Restaurant 3542  4-21-1992 Saltwater Willy's Addition 3554  5-19-1992 McCray Mobile Home Park 3558  5-19-1992 Walkey-Preston Forest, Section 12 3565  6-18-1992 Flagship Commercial Park Phase I 3576  7-21-1992 Rock Springs 3602  9-15-1992 Grubb property-2325 Princeton Road 3604  9-15-1992 Slemp property near Airport Parkway 3620 10- 6-1992 Meadowview Golf Course (amending Ord. No. 3367) 3623 10-26-1992 Conference And Civic Center site-Meadowview Golf Course 3626 11- 3-1992 Bloomington Heights Addition 3630 11-17-1992 L. B .Franklin area 3632 11-17-1992 Mullins/Ridgecrest area 3648 12-15-1992 Interstate 81/Exit 66 area 3661  2- 2-1993 Wendy's near Flagship Drive and Airport Parkway 3666  2-16-1993 Horse Creek Village (repealed by Ord. No. 4176) 3686  4-20-1993 Jobe 3696  5-18-1993 Gravely/Ridgecrest 3698  5-18-1993 Wimberly Area 3732  8-17-1993 Aurawood Heights area 3734  8-17-1993 Walkey-Moreland Drive 3748  9-21-1993 Bowen Property 3765 10-19-1993 Aurawood Hills 3778 11-16-1993 Mayfield Avenue/Dickerson Street 3780 11-16-1993 Rose Tree Lane/Ward Avenue 3799  1-18-1994 Taff Property 3801  1-18-1994 Idle Hour Road 3807  2- 1-1994 608 Mayfield Avenue 3809  2- 1-1994 Moccasin Street Area 3815  2-15-1994 Diana Road/Diana Avenue 3823  3-15-1994 243 West Carters Valley 3825  3-15-1994 Dora Street/Austin Street 3827  3-15-1994 4624-4628 Fairlane Drive (Patel property) 3835  4-19-1994 11421/2 Bloomingdale Pike (and some others) 3852  5-17-1994 Donihe Graphics, Phase I 3854  5-17-1994 Rocky Branch (Shekinah) 3877  6-22-1994 Harrison Avenue/Allgood Drive 3879  6-22-1994 Fort Henry Drive/Summerville Road 3900  8- 2-1994 1417 Childress Ferry Road 3902  8- 2-1994 4234-4250 Fort Henry Drive 3904  8- 2-1994 Clinic Drive-Dutch Maid Laundry area 3908  8-16-1994 133-145 Shipp Springs 3910  8-16-1994 489 Roan Street 3912  8-16-1994 Shipp Street 3929  9-20-1994 Ferrell Avenue Phase II 3940 10-18-1994 368 Old Kinkead Road 3942 10-18-1994 413 Arlington Court 3944 10-18-1994 Sherry Street 3946 10-18-1994 Princeton Road 3954 11-15-1994 212 Lakecrest Drive Area 3956 11-15-1994 Reservoir Road/New Moore Road area 3963 12- 6-1994 888-896 Cooks Valley Road 3975  1- 3-1995 504 New Beason Well Road 3977  1- 3-1995 1605-1805 Harrison Avenue 3979  1- 3-1995 Flanders Street 3981  1- 3-1995 Hurd Road/Welk Road 4000  2-21-1995 Fort Henry Drive/Fairlane Drive area 4003  2-21-1995 605 Bell Ridge Road 4005  2-21-1995 Southgate Shopping Center area 4019  3-21-1995 1448 Bell Ridge Drive 4029  4-18-1995 Mayfield Avenue 4041  5-16-1995 Factory Stores of America (Carolina Pottery) 4043  5-16-1995 Bowater Drive-General Shale-Panay area 4045  5-16-1995 South Wilcox-South John B Dennis area 4075  7- 5-1995 Reservoir Road Section II 4086  8- 1-1995 4222-4226 Fort Henry Drive-Arby's, Pal's 4088  8- 1-1995 Jersey Street 4090  8- 1-1995 Gravely Road 4092  8- 1-1995 1154 Bloomingdale Pike 4127 10-17-1995 Edens Ridge 4129 10-17-1995 Orebank Road 4131 10-17-1995 1334-1336 Ridgecrest Avenue 4152 12-19-1995 200-204 Lakecrest Drive 4160  1-16-1996 4200-4214 Fort Henry Drive 4162  1-16-1996 1320-1332 Ridgecrest Avenue 4164  1-16-1996 374 and 389 Ridgeway Road 4176  6- 5-1996 Horse Creek (Repealing Ords. No. 3666 and 3667) 4177  3- 5-1996 Bays Mountain Recreation Area 4187  3-19-1996 Bramblewood Drive 4211  5-21-1996 Copperfield Addition 4214  5-21-1996 4301-4313 Fort Henry Drive 4216  5-21-1996 4209 Fort Henry Drive 4220  6- 4-1996 Mack Carr-Airport Parkway Area 4230  6-18-1996 400 West Carters Valley Road 4292 11- 5-1996 1441 Ridgecrest Avenue 4297 11- 5-1996 Glen Alpine/Bailey Farm (Potato Hill) 4300 11-19-1996 Princeton Road area (amended by Ord. No. 4686) 4308 12- 3-1996 Reservoir Road 4332  2- 4-1997 Tidewater Court 4334  2- 4-1997 2225 Diana Avenue 4355  3-18-1997 South Wilcox Drive, Phase I 4371  5-20-1997 Exxon/Taco Bell/Baskin-Robbins 4374  5-20-1997 Enterprise Place 4382  6- 3-1997 1419 Ridgecrest Avenue-Bishop 4405  7- 1-1997 1453-1457 Ridgecrest Avenue 4450 11- 4-1997 2413-2421 Little Valley Road 4452 11- 4-1997 Northeast Tennessee Business Park 4473  1- 6-1998 Anco Place/Moreland Drive 4482  2- 3-1998 South Highway 93 4515  5- 5-1998 738 Rocky Branch Road 4533  6-16-1998 2219 Diana Avenue 4550  7-12-1998 Fort Henry Drive/Lebanon Road 4570  8-18-1998 Edens Ridge 4593 10-20-1998 Eastman Credit Union/Wendover Drive 4595 10-20-1998 Jett Road 4610 12- 1-1998 Breckenridge Addition 4623  1-19-1999 General Development Corporation 4681  7-20-1999 Bill Milton/Orbin Drive 4686  7-20-1999 4300 Princeton Road area (amending Ord. No. 4300) 4687  8- 3-1999 Millennium Business Park 4716 11-16-1999 Fort Henry Drive/Hemlock Road 4788  7-18-2000 219 West Carters Valley Road 4794  8- 1-2000 214 West Carters Valley Road 4847  1-16-2001 1938 Tenneva Drive, 410 West Carters Valley Road, corner of West Carters Valley Road and Harrison Avenue and 714 West Carters Valley Road 4947  8- 7-2001 Boones Creek Properties and Charter Communications Property 4969 11-20-2001 Long Island, Phase I 4990  3- 5-2002 Conventry Wynde 4997  4-16-2002 Holston Business Development Center Subdivision 5026  7-16-2002 Hunt Property 5030  8- 6-2002 Sumner Property 5045  9-17-2002 Crossroads 5093  3-18-2003 Springdale Park Addition 5100  4-15-2003 Bachman Property 5171  1-20-2004 Broyles Property 5226 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 1 5228 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 2 5230 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 3 5232 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 4 5234 10- 5-2004 Dave Clark 5236 10- 5-2004 Three parcels near intersection of Bloomingdale Pike and Gibson Mill Road 5242 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 5 5244 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 6 5246 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 8 5248 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 1 5250 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 2 5252 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 3 5254 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 4 5256 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 5 5274  2- 1-2005 Fort Henry Drive-Phase 1, Area 7 5324  8- 2-2005 Gaylemont, Lot 1, Block B 5335  9-20-2005 Bell Ridge and Harrison Road 5349 11- 1-2005 Bell Ridge Road and Bell Ridge Drive 5351 11- 1-2005 Rock Springs Road South-Area 1 5362 11-17-2005 Rock Springs Road-Area 1 (amending Ord. No. 5351) 5395  5- 2-2006 Bridwell and Rock Springs Road 5397  5- 2-2006 McKee 5406  5-16-2006 Bell Ridge-Area 3 5445  8-15-2006 Saratoga Road 5475 12- 5-2006 Bays Mountain Park Eastman Donation 5502  2-20-2007 Peach Orchard 5535  5-15-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 2 5542  6- 5-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 3 5544  6- 5-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 5589  8-21-2007 Old Island 5599 10- 2-2007 213 Colonial Heights 5606 10-16-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 1 5620 11-20-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 3 (South Side) 5632 12-18-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 (South Side) 5636  1-15-2008 Kendrick 5641  2- 5-2008 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 (North Side) 5643  2- 5-2008 Meadows 5651  2-19-2008 Preston Park-Lot 9 5653  2-19-2008 Taylor 5691  6- 3-2008 Owner Petitioned Areas of Rock Springs South Area 5857  7-21-2009 Eastern Star 5859  7-21-2009 RS2 5861  7-21-2009 Flanders Street 5869  8- 4-2009 RS3 5871  8- 4-2009 RS4 5873  8- 4-2009 Parker Lane 5878  9- 1-2009 RS5 5880  9- 1-2009 RS6 5894 10-20-2009 RS7 5896 10-20-2009 RS8 5904 11- 3-2009 Stonetree A 5906 11- 3-2009 Stonetree B 5908 11- 3-2009 Stonetree C 5910 11- 3-2009 Stonetree D 5917 12- 1-2009 Colonial Heights United Methodist Church 5929  2- 2-2010 New Beasonwell 5956  5- 4-2010 Rock Springs North-Area 1 5958  5- 4-2010 Lebanon Road 5982  7- 6-2010 Eagle Pointe 5986  7-20-2010 Kendrick Creek 5997  8-17-2010 Diana Road 6013 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part A 6015 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part B 6017 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part C 6019 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part D 6021 10-26-2010 Edinburgh Addition 6035 12- 7-2010 Warrior Falls 2010-Sec. A 6037 12- 7-2010 Warrior Falls 2010-Sec. B 6039 12- 7-2010 State Line Baptist 6041 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part A 6043 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part B 6045 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part C 6049 12-21-2010 VFW 6063  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part A 6065  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part B 6067  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part C 6071  4- 5-2011 Montvue Road 6147 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part A 6149 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part B 6151 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part C 6153 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part D 6166  1-24-2012 Kendrick Creek, Part B 6169  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 1 6171  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 2 6173  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 3 6176  2-21-2012 Old Mill 6188  3-20-2012 Cleek Road, Part 2 6190  3-20-2012 Eastern Star Road, Part 2 6192  3-20-2012 Kingsport South 6202  6-15-2012 Emory Church 6204  6-15-2012 Grandview  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1981 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1981 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-5 1-17 1-6 1-5 1-7 1-12 1-8 1-14 1-8.1 1-15 1-9 1-16 2-1 2-298 2-2 2-1 2-4, 2-5 2-631, 2-632 2-17-2-19 2-54-2-56 2-31-2-35 2-87-2-91 2-36 2-86 2-45-2-48 2-21-2-24 2-56 2-113 2-57(a)-2-57(g) 2-591-2-597 2-57(h) 2-601 2-57(i)- 
2-57(k) 2-598-2-600 2-57(l)- 
2-57(o) 2-602-2-605 2-58 2-114 2-66-2-68 2-144-2-146 2-74-2-76 2-176-2-178 2-83-2-85 22-48-22-50 2-92-2-94 2-210-2-212 2-111, 2-112 2-233, 2-234 2-124 66-42 2-134-2-137 2-474-2-477 2-138 2-545 2-141-2-143 2-569-2-571 2-144 2-511 2-145 2-510 2-146, 2-147 2-512, 2-513 2-147.1- 
2-147.4 2-514-2-517 2-148-2-151 30-19-30-22 2-153, 2-154 30-23, 30-24 2-156, 2-157 30-26, 30-27 2-163-2-165 30-49-30-51 2-213-2-217 2-349-2-353 2-221-2-226 2-262-2-267 2-236-2-244 2-382-2-390 2-250-2-252 34-54-34-56 3-21 18-19 3-22 18-22 3-23 18-21 3-24 18-20 4-1 6-2 4-33, 4-34 6-169, 6-170 4-35 6-172 4-37-4-39 6-206-6-208 4-41 6-209 4-43, 4-44 6-211, 6-212 4-45, 4-46 6-215, 6-216 4-47 6-173 4-48 6-213 4-50 6-218 4-52 6-174 4-53 6-219 4-54 6-175 4-55 6-214 4-56 6-171 4-69 6-1 4-70 6-5 4-71 6-8 4-72 6-102 4-73 6-39 4-75 6-150 4-76 6-6 4-77 6-9 4-78 6-4 4-79 6-10 4-80 6-7 4-88-4-91 6-67-6-70 4-92, 4-93 6-78, 6-79 4-107 6-72 4-108 6-103 4-109 6-75 4-110 6-73 4-111 6-71 4-112, 4-113 6-76, 6-77 4-114 6-74 4-122-4-131 6-135-6-144 4-133-4-137 6-145-6-149 5-1 14-1, 14-2 5-2, 5-3 14-3, 14-4 5-5 14-5 5-8, 5-9 14-6, 14-7 5-20-5-22 14-33-14-35 5-35-5-37 14-59-14-61 5-46 14-81 5-47-5-49 14-83-14-85 5-50 14-82 6-1 22-2 6-16 22-96 6-17 22-1 6-29-6-31 22-121- 
22-123 6-39 22-145 6-40-6-43 22-148- 
22-151 6-44, 6-45 22-146, 
22-147 6-46-6-48 22-152- 
22-154 6-56 22-177 6-57-6-59 22-197- 
22-199 6-60-6-62 22-222- 
22-224 6-63-6-66 22-226- 
22-229 6-68 22-225 6-69, 6-70 22-178, 
22-179 6-78-6-86 22-252- 
22-260 6-98-6-100 22-74-22-76 6-112 22-284 6-120-6-122 22-302- 
22-304 6-123-6-130 22-306- 
22-313 6-131 22-305 6-132, 6-133 22-314, 
22-315 6-141-6-143 22-359- 
22-361 6-144-6-147 22-363- 
22-366 6-149 22-362 6-150, 6-151 22-334, 
22-335 6-163 22-391 6-175-6-178 22-411- 
22-414 6-186 22-442 6-187-6-189 22-445- 
22-447 6-190, 6-191 22-443, 
22-444 6-192, 6-193 22-448, 
22-449 6-201 22-467 6-202-6-204 22-492- 
22-494 6-205-6-208 22-496- 
22-499 6-209 22-495 6-210, 6-211 22-468, 
22-469 6-223 22-522 6-224 22-526 6-225, 6-226 22-524, 
22-525 6-227, 6-228 22-527, 
22-528 6-229 22-523 6-230 10-19 6-301, 6-302 22-551, 
22-552 6-303 22-555 6-310 22-550 6-311 22-558 6-312, 6-313 22-553, 
22-554 6-314, 6-315 22-556, 
22-557 6-320 22-581 6-321 22-580 6-321.1 22-582 6-322-6-326 22-585- 
22-589 6-327 22-584 6-328, 6-329 22-590, 
22-591 6-330 22-583 6-340-6-343 22-617- 
22-620 6-344 22-616 7-31 34-19 7-32-7-36 34-21-34-25 7-37 34-20 8-1-8-4 42-80-42-83 8-16-8-18 42-19-42-21 8-31-8-38 42-46-42-53 8-41-8-45 98-300- 
98-304 8-55-8-57 42-145- 
42-147 8-58 42-144 11-1, 11-2 94-1, 94-2 11-13-11-15 94-27-94-29 11-16, 11-17 94-47, 94-48 11-36, 11-37 10-42, 10-43 11-46 10-75 11-54 10-94 11-81 26-19 11-82, 11-83 26-21, 26-22 11-84 26-20 11-85 94-70 11-86 94-72 11-87-11-92 94-74-94-79 11-93 94-71 11-94, 11-95 94-80, 94-81 11-95.1 94-73 11-156 26-48 11-157- 
11-159 26-82-26-84 11-160 26-50 11-161, 11-162 26-88, 26-89 11-163- 
11-165 26-51-26-53 11-166 26-85 11-167 26-54 11-168, 11-169 26-86, 26-87 12-1 38-19 12-2-12-4 38-22-38-24 12-6 38-25 12-7-12-12 38-27-38-32 12-13-12-17 38-59-38-63 12-18-12-20 38-33-38-35 12-21 38-26 12-22 38-21 12-23 38-20 13-1 58-1 13-3, 13-4 58-2, 58-3 13-16, 13-17 58-25, 58-26 13-18 58-29 13-19, 13-20 58-27, 58-28 13-31-13-36 58-47-58-52 13-44-13-48 58-78-58-82 13-58-13-61 58-109- 
58-112 13-66(g) 58-108 14-1-14-5 98-1-98-5 14-6 98-84 14-7 98-6 14-8 98-85 14-9 98-7 14-10, 14-11 98-35, 98-36 14-36-14-44 98-468- 
98-476 14-44.1 98-477 14-45, 14-46 98-478, 
98-479 14-61-14-65 98-120- 
98-124 14-81-14-84 98-147- 
98-150 14-101- 
14-109 98-63-98-71 14-110 98-73 14-111 98-72 14-112- 
14-118 98-151- 
98-157 14-120- 
14-128 98-75-98-83 14-141- 
14-146 98-369- 
98-374 14-181 98-184 14-184- 
14-187 98-185- 
98-188 14-201- 
14-204 98-392- 
98-395 14-205- 
14-207 98-396 14-208, 
14-209 98-397, 
98-398 14-210 98-396 14-211, 
14-212 98-399, 
98-400 14-214- 
14-222 98-401- 
98-409 14-251- 
14-260 98-327- 
98-336 14-262- 
14-265 98-337- 
98-340 14-281- 
14-285 98-215- 
98-219 14-285.1 98-220 14-286- 
14-292 98-221- 
98-227 14-293 98-227 14-294 98-229 14-297 98-233 14-341- 
14-347 98-262- 
98-268 14-361- 
14-369 98-434- 
98-442 14-386 98-530 14-387- 
14-389 98-532- 
98-534 14-390 98-596 14-391- 
14-393 98-562- 
98-564 14-395 98-565 14-397- 
14-400 98-597- 
98-600 14-400.1 98-566 14-400.2 98-531 14-401 98-8 14-402- 
14-404 98-86-98-88 14-421- 
14-428 98-37-98-44 14-432 98-620 14-433 98-619 14-434- 
14-438 98-622- 
98-626 14-439 98-621 16-1-16-4 62-72-62-75 16-5-16-7 62-23-62-25 16-10 62-22 16-14 62-26 16-16 62-47 16-19, 16-20 62-48, 62-49 16-24 62-189 16-26(b) 62-21 16-27 62-27 16-29 62-28 16-30 62-20 16-41 34-86 16-44-16-46 34-87-34-89 16-48 34-90 16-50, 16-51 34-91, 34-92 16-60, 16-61 62-125, 
62-126 16-62 62-128 16-63 106-49- 
106-54 16-66 62-127 17-1-17-4 46-19-46-22 17-7, 17-8 46-23, 46-24 18-2-18-6 66-73-66-77 18-7-18-20 66-98-66-111 18-40, 18-41 66-154, 
66-155 18-42 66-158 18-43, 18-44 66-156, 
66-157 18-45, 18-46 66-159, 
66-160 18-58 66-189 18-60 66-190 18-62, 18-63 66-191, 
66-192 19-16-19-21 74-19-74-24 20-1, 20-2 50-19, 50-20 20-4-20-9 50-21-50-26 20-11 50-27 20-21, 20-22 50-58, 50-59 20-24-20-28 50-60-50-64 20-29 50-66 21-1-21-4 54-1-54-4 21-16-21-24 54-27-54-35 21-40-21-47 54-59-54-66 22-9 62-19 23-1 82-1 23-2 82-3 23-5 82-4 23-6 82-2 23-18, 23-19 82-27, 82-28 24-1-24-3 90-47-90-49 24-5 90-50 24-7, 24-8 90-1, 90-2 24-11 90-3 24-13 90-4 24-14, 24-15 90-27, 90-28 24-16, 24-17 90-28, 90-29 24-18(a)-24-18(d) 90-248- 
90-251 24-18(e), 
24-18(f) 90-223, 
90-224 24-18(g) 90-226 24-18(i) 90-252 24-18(j) 90-225 24-29-24-38 22-644- 
22-653 24-50-24-53 90-375- 
90-378 24-65-24-68 90-162- 
90-165 24-69, 24-70 90-160, 
90-161 24-71 90-159 24-82 90-284 24-83 90-283 24-84-24-88 90-285- 
90-289 24-100, 
24-101 90-312, 
90-313 24-102- 
24-104 90-315- 
90-317 24-105 90-314 24-106- 
24-108 90-318- 
90-320 24-121 90-400 24-122, 
24-123 90-403, 
90-404 24-124 90-402 24-125 90-401 24-134- 
24-140 90-422- 
90-428 24-141 90-431 24-142, 
24-143 90-429, 
90-430 26-16-26-20 102-19- 
102-23 26-21 102-25 26-41-26-46 102-55- 
102-60 26-46.1 102-61 26-47-26-54 102-62- 
102-69 26-61 102-144 26-62 102-143 26-63 102-142 26-64-26-68 102-145- 
102-149 26-69 102-167 26-72-26-80 102-221- 
102-229 26-81-26-84 102-252- 
102-255 26-85-26-88 102-274- 
102-277 26-89 102-305 26-90-26-92 102-309- 
102-311 26-93-26-95 102-306- 
102-308 26-96 102-312 26-97-26-100 102-316- 
102-319 26-101 102-313 26-102 102-320 26-103 102-315 26-104 102-314 26-105, 
26-106 102-321, 
102-322 26-107- 
26-114 102-348- 
102-355 26-114.5 102-356 26-115- 
26-118 102-357- 
102-360 26-119- 
26-121 102-379- 
102-381 26-141, 
26-142 102-190, 
102-191 26-143- 
26-147 102-406- 
102-410 111-134 70-1 app. A, art. I, § 1- 
app. A, art. I, § 4 114-2-114-5 app. A, art. I, § 6- 
app. A, art. I, § 8 114-6-114-8 app. A, art. I, § 9 114-1 app. A, art. II, § 1 114-35 app. A, art. II, § 1(A), (B) 114-36 app. A, art. II, § 1(C) 114-37 app. A, art. II, § 2 114-38 app. A, art. II, § 3(A), 
app. A, art. II, § 3(B) 114-65, 
114-66 app. A, art. II, § 3(C) 114-68 app. A, art. II, § 3(D) 114-67 app. A, art. II, § 3(E)- 
app. A, art. II, § 3(G) 114-69- 
114-71 app. A, art. III, § 1 114-129 app. A, art. III, § 2- 
app. A, art. III, § 13 114-131- 
114-142 app. A, art. IV, § 1- 
app. A, art. IV, § 9 114-172- 
114-180 app. A, art. IV, § 9 114-181- 
114-200 app. A, art. V, § 1- 
app. A, art. V, § 7 114-224- 
114-230 app. A, art. VI, § 1- 
app. A, art. VI, § 6 114-238- 
114-243 app. A, art. VIII, § 1- 
app. A, art. VIII, § 10 114-298- 
114-307 app. A, art. IX, § 1- 
app. A, art. IX, § 9 114-316- 
114-324 app. A, art. X, § 1- 
app. A, art. X, § 9 114-352- 
114-360 app. A, art. XI, § 1- 
app. A, art. XI, § 6 114-379- 
114-384 app. A, art. XI, § 7(A)-(F) 114-385 app. A, art. XI, § 7(G) 114-567 app. A, art. XI, § 7(H)-(J) 114-385 app. A, art. XI, § 8 114-386 app. A, art. XII, § 1- 
app. A, art. XII, § 7 114-101- 
114-107 app. A, art. XIII, § 1 114-525 app. A, art. XIII, § 2- 
app. A, art. XIII, § 9 114-527- 
114-534 app. A, art. XIII, § 10 114-526 app. A, art. XIV, § 1- 
app. A, art. XIV, § 5 114-562- 
114-566 app. A, art. XV, § 1 114-599 app. A, art. XV, § 2 114-598 app. A, art. XV, § 3- 
app. A, art. XV, § 5 114-600- 
114-602 app. A, art. XVII, § 1 114-38  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1998 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented through August 7, 2007, that are included herein. Sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1998 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-4, 1-5 1-3, 1-4 1-6 1-17 1-7 1-5 1-8 1-12 1-9-1-11 1-14-1-16 1-12-1-14 1-6-1-8 2-1 2-298 2-2 2-1 2-3, 2-4 2-631, 2-632 2-5 2-92 2-6 2-330 2-31-2-35 2-21-2-25 2-61-2-63 2-54-2-56 2-91-2-96 2-86-2-91 2-97 2-655 2-98 2-653 2-99-2-105 2-656-2-662 2-106 2-654 2-126 2-113 2-127 2-591-2-605 2-128 2-114 2-129 2-606 2-156-2-158 2-144-2-146 2-186-2-188 2-176-2-178 2-216-2-218 2-210-2-212 2-276, 2-277 2-233, 2-234 2-346-2-351 2-349-2-354 2-381-2-389 2-382-2-390 2-396-2-400 2-409-2-413 2-431-2-434 2-474-2-477 2-435 2-545 2-461-2-463 2-569-2-571 2-491-2-498 2-510-2-517 2-571-2-576 2-262-2-267 6-1, 6-2 6-2, 6-3 6-31 6-1 6-32-6-36 6-4-6-8 6-37 6-102 6-38 6-39 6-39 6-150 6-40, 6-41 6-9, 6-10 6-71-6-74 6-67-6-70 6-75, 6-76 6-78, 6-79 6-101 6-72 6-102 6-74 6-103 6-103 6-104 6-75 6-105 6-73 6-106 6-71 6-107, 6-108 6-76, 6-77 6-136-6-150 6-135-6-149 6-181-6-188 6-169-6-176 6-216-6-229 6-206-6-219 10-26 10-19 10-56, 10-57 10-42, 10-43 10-86 10-75 10-116 10-94 14-1-14-4 14-1-14-4 14-6 14-5 14-9, 14-10 14-6, 14-7 14-36-14-38 14-33-14-35 14-66-14-68 14-59-14-61 14-96-14-100 14-81-14-85 18-26 18-19 18-28-18-30 18-20-18-22 22-1 22-2 22-51-22-53 22-48-22-50 22-81-22-83 22-74-22-76 22-111 22-96 22-112 22-1 22-141- 
22-143 22-121- 
22-123 22-171- 
22-180 22-145- 
22-154 22-206- 
22-208 22-177- 
22-179 22-236- 
22-238 22-197- 
22-199 22-266- 
22-273 22-222- 
22-229 22-301- 
22-309 22-252- 
22-260 22-336 22-284 22-366- 
22-379 22-302- 
22-315 22-406, 
22-407 22-334, 
22-335 22-436- 
22-443 22-359- 
22-366 22-471 22-391 22-501- 
22-504 22-411- 
22-414 22-531- 
22-538 22-442- 
22-449 22-566- 
22-568 22-467- 
22-469 22-596- 
22-603 22-492- 
22-499 22-631- 
22-637 22-522- 
22-528 22-666, 
22-667 22-551, 
22-552 22-668 22-555 22-696 22-550 22-697, 
22-698 22-553, 
22-554 22-699- 
22-701 22-556- 
22-558 22-731- 
22-742 22-580- 
22-591 22-771- 
22-775 22-616- 
22-620 22-801- 
22-810 22-644- 
22-653 26-26-26-29 26-19-26-22 26-56 26-48 26-57-26-61 26-50-26-54 26-91-26-98 26-82-26-89 26-121- 
26-129 26-107- 
26-115 30-1-30-7 34-19-34-25 34-26-34-29 30-19-30-22 34-31-34-38 30-23-30-30 34-61-34-63 30-49-30-51 38-26-38-28 34-54-34-56 38-56-38-62 34-86-34-92 42-26-42-42 38-19-38-35 42-71-42-75 38-59-38-63 46-1-46-4 42-80-42-83 46-31-46-33 42-19-42-21 46-61-46-68 42-46-42-53 46-96-46-99 42-144- 
42-147 50-26-50-29 46-19-46-22 50-32, 50-33 46-23, 46-24 54-26-54-34 50-19-50-27 54-61-54-69 50-58-50-66 54-96-54-100 50-91-50-95 54-126- 
54-128 50-119- 
50-121 58-1-58-4 54-1-54-4 58-31-58-39 54-27-54-35 58-66-58-73 54-59-54-66 62-1-62-3 58-1-58-3 62-31-62-35 58-25-58-29 62-61-62-66 58-47-58-52 62-91-62-95 58-78-58-82 62-121- 
62-125 58-108- 
58-112 66-1-66-4 62-72-62-75 66-5 62-19 66-6-66-8 62-23-62-25 66-10 62-22 66-13 62-26 66-15 62-47 66-17, 66-18 62-48, 62-49 66-21 62-189 66-23 62-21 66-24, 66-25 62-27, 62-28 66-26 62-20 66-27 62-29 66-56-66-59 62-125- 
62-128 66-61(a), 
66-61(b) 106-50, 
106-51 66-61(c), 
66-61(d) 106-53, 
106-54 66-61(e) 106-52 66-61(f) 106-49 66-70-66-75 62-155- 
62-160 70-26 66-19 70-51 66-42 70-76-70-80 66-73-66-77 70-106- 
70-119 66-98-66-111 70-171- 
70-177 66-154- 
66-160 70-206- 
70-209 66-189- 
66-192 74-1 70-1 74-26 70-23 74-27 70-21 74-28-74-36 70-24-70-32 74-37 70-22 78-26-78-31 74-19-74-24 82-26-82-31 78-19-78-24 86-1-86-4 82-1-82-4 86-31, 86-32 82-27, 82-28 90-1 86-1 90-2 86-5 90-3 86-2 90-4-90-6 86-39-86-41 90-7 86-33 90-8, 90-9 86-3, 86-4 90-36 86-30 90-37 86-34 90-38 86-29 90-39-90-41 86-35-86-37 90-42, 90-43 86-31, 86-32 90-44 86-38 90-71 86-71 90-72 86-97 90-73-90-76 86-72-86-75 90-101- 
90-103 86-94-86-96 90-104- 
90-108 86-98-86-102 94-1-94-4 90-47-90-50 94-6-94-8 90-1-90-3 94-10 90-4 94-11-94-13 90-27-90-29 94-66-94-69 90-375- 
90-378 94-96-94-99 90-223- 
90-226 94-126- 
94-130 90-248- 
90-252 94-156- 
94-162 90-159- 
90-165 94-191- 
94-197 90-283- 
90-289 94-226- 
94-234 90-312- 
90-320 94-261 90-400 94-262 90-402 94-263 90-401 94-264, 
94-265 90-403, 
90-404 94-291- 
94-300 90-422- 
90-431 94-401 106-21 94-402 106-19 94-403- 
94-411 106-22- 
106-30 94-412 106-20 98-1-98-4 94-1-94-4 98-31-98-33 94-27-94-29 98-61, 98-62 94-47, 94-48 98-91-98-102 94-70-94-81 102-1-102-5 98-1-98-5 102-6 98-84 102-7 98-6 102-8 98-85 102-9 98-7 102-10, 
102-11 98-35, 98-36 102-12 98-8 102-13- 
102-15 98-86-98-88 102-46- 
102-53 98-37-98-44 102-81- 
102-89 98-63-98-71 102-90 98-73 102-91 98-72 102-92- 
102-98 98-151- 
98-157 102-100- 
102-108 98-75-98-83 102-136- 
102-140 98-120- 
98-124 102-166- 
102-169 98-147- 
98-150 102-198 98-62 98-74 102-226 98-184 102-228- 
102-231 98-185- 
98-188 102-261- 
102-273 98-215- 
98-227 102-274 98-227 102-275, 
102-276 98-229, 
98-230 102-276.5 98-231 102-277- 
102-279 98-232- 
98-234 102-306- 
102-312 98-262- 
98-268 102-341- 
102-345 98-300- 
98-304 102-376- 
102-385 98-327- 
98-336 102-387- 
102-390 98-337- 
98-340 102-421- 
102-426 98-369- 
98-374 102-456- 
102-474 98-392- 
98-410 102-501- 
102-509 98-434- 
98-442 102-541- 
102-552 98-468- 
98-479 102-553(a) 98-497 102-553(b) 98-499 102-553(c)(1)- 
102-553(c)(4) 98-500- 
98-503 102-553(d) 98-498 102-581 98-530 102-582- 
102-584 98-532- 
98-534 102-585 98-596 102-586- 
102-588 98-562- 
98-564 102-590 98-565 102-592- 
102-595 98-597- 
98-600 102-596 98-566 102-597 98-531 102-631 98-619 102-633- 
102-640 98-620- 
98-627 106-26- 
106-32 102-19- 
102-25 106-61 102-98 106-62 102-100 106-64 102-99 106-65- 
106-78 102-101- 
102-114 106-105- 
106-120 102-54- 
102-69 106-151- 
106-158 102-142- 
102-149 106-186 102-167 106-209, 
106-210 102-190, 
102-191 106-236- 
106-244 102-221- 
102-229 106-271- 
106-274 102-252- 
102-255 106-301- 
106-305 102-274- 
102-278 106-331- 
106-348 102-305- 
102-322 106-376- 
106-388 102-348- 
102-360 106-416- 
106-418 102-379- 
102-381 106-446- 
106-450 102-406- 
102-410 110-1 110-1 114-1-114-8 114-1-114-8 114-36- 
114-39 114-35- 
114-38 114-66- 
114-72 114-65- 
114-71 114-101- 
114-108 114-101- 
114-108 114-136 114-129 114-137- 
114-150 114-131- 
114-144 114-181- 
114-209 114-172- 
114-200 114-246- 
114-253 114-224- 
114-231 114-281- 
114-286 114-238- 
114-243 114-316- 
114-319 114-252- 
114-255 114-320 114-251 114-326- 
114-333 114-257- 
114-264 114-341- 
114-343 114-271- 
114-273 114-350.1- 
114-350.8 114-283- 
114-290 114-350.16, 
114-350.17 114-274 114-350.26 114-256 114-351- 
114-360 114-298- 
114-307 114-391- 
114-399 114-316- 
114-324 114-426- 
114-434 114-352- 
114-360 114-461- 
114-468 114-379- 
114-386 114-501- 
114-511 114-416- 
114-426 114-520- 
114-526 114-451- 
114-457 114-541, 
114-542 114-484, 
114-485 114-543 114-483 114-544- 
114-551 114-486- 
114-493 114-561- 
114-571 114-525- 
114-535 114-601- 
114-606 114-562- 
114-567 114-646- 
114-650 114-598- 
114-602  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances that are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 3998  2- 7-1995 I 2-354 4012  3- 7-1995 II(9-1) 86-1 II(9-2) 86-5 II(9-3)-II(9-5) 86-39-86-41 II(9-6) 86-38 II(9-7) 86-2 II(9-8) 86-33 II(9-11) 86-34 II(9-12) 86-29 II(9-13)-II(9-15) 86-35-86-37 II(9-16), II(9-17) 86-31, 86-32 II(9-20) 86-94 II(9-21) 86-102 II(9-22) 86-95 II(9-23) 86-98 II(9-24) 86-96 II(9-25) 86-99 II(9-26) 86-74 II(9-27) 86-97 II(9-28) 86-75 II(9-29) 86-100 II(9-30), II(9-31) 86-72, 86-73 II(9-32) 86-71 II(9-33) 86-101 III, IV 2-263, 2-264 4014  3- 7-1995 II(4-1), II(4-2) 6-2, 6-3 4018  3-21-1995 I 114-1 II(art. III, § 14) 114-143 IV(9)-IV(28) 114-180-114-199 IV(29) 114-179 IV(30) 114-200 V 114-353 4021  3-21-1995 I 2-477 4031  4-18-1995 1 114-564 4037  5- 2-1995 I 42-48 4059  6-20-1995 I 2-591-2-605 II 2-510 4062  6-20-1995 I, II 6-207 4077  7- 5-1995 I, II 114-385 4080  7- 5-1995 II, III 102-409, 102-410 4081  7-18-1995 II(2-155) 30-25 4083  7-18-1995 I 114-1 II 114-131 4099  8- 1-1995 I 1-14 III 22-523 IV 38-20 V 98-220 VI 98-37 VII 50-64 VIII 114-38 4122 10- 3-1995 I 110-1 4185  3- 5-1996 I(11-3), I(11-4) 94-3, 94-4 96-097  3-19-1996(Res.) 94-72 4199  5- 7-1996 I-V 114-319-114-323 VI(art. IX, § 9) 114-324 VII, VIII 114-105, 114-106 4223  6- 4-1996 I 90-50 II 98-84 4224  6- 4-1996 II(16-80) 78-19 II(16-81) 78-21 II(16-82) 78-19, 78-20 II(16-83)-II(16-85) 78-22-78-24 4258  7-16-1996 I, II 6-208 III(4-40) 6-217 IV(4-41) 6-209 V(4-42) 6-210 VI 6-213 4276  9- 3-1996 I 114-181 114-186-114-188 114-191-114-195 114-197-114-200 114-225 114-353 I(art. I) 114-1 I(art. III, § 14) 114-144 4369 10- 3-1996 1(i) 26-115 1(f), 1(g) 26-112, 26-113 4289 10-15-1996 I 102-359 4295 11- 5-1996 II 22-96 4296 11- 5-1996 I(26-15) 102-24 III(26-22) 102-98 III(26-23), III(26-24) 102-101, 102-102 III(26-25) 102-100 III(26-26)-III(26-37) 102-103-102-114 III(26-39) 102-99 4302 11-19-1996 I(20-40) 50-119 I(20-41) 50-121 I(20-42) 50-120 4303 11-19-1996 I 42-48 4312 12- 3-1996 II(20-21)-II(20-29) 50-58-50-66 III(20-40)-III(20-44) 50-91-50-95 4318 12-17-1996 I 114-3 4319 12-17-1996 I 114-531 4337  2- 4-1997 1 6-216 4338  2- 4-1997 1 6-176 4339  2- 4-1997 1 62-155-62-160 4347  2-18-1997 1 2-477 4369  5- 6-1997 1(a)-1(d) 26-107-26-110 1(h) 26-114  5- 7-1997 1(e) 26-111 4422  9- 2-1997 1 114-191 4441 10- 7-1997 1 22-96 2 22-121 3 22-284 4 22-391 5 22-411 7 22-522 4454 11- 4-1997 1 114-192 4456 11-18-1997 1 114-1 4457 11-18-1997 1 6-213 4470 12-16-1997 1 114-533 4497  4- 7-1998 1 114-1 4498  4- 7-1998 1 114-176 2 114-195 3 114-224-114-231 4501  4- 7-1998 1 62-72 4508  4-21-1998 1 6-174 4512  4-21-1998 1, 2 98-227 4517  5- 5-1998 1 114-1 4518  5- 5-1998 1 114-1 4519  5- 5-1998 1 114-108 4520  5- 5-1998 1 114-532 4573  9- 1-1998 I 102-278 II 102-356 IV 102-357 4598 10-20-1998 II 98-408 4602 11- 3-1998 I 62-20 4607 11-17-1998 I 106-49-106-54 4618 12-15-1998 I 102-59 4619 12-15-1998 I 102-54 4620 12-15-1998 I 86-3, 86-4 4629  2- 2-1999 1 114-195 4714 11-16-1999 I 114-530 II 114-533, 114-534 III 114-533 IV 114-385 4736  2-15-2000 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 4775  6- 6-2000 I 66-73 4825 10-17-2000 I 2-477 4945  8- 7-2001 I 2-25 4946  8- 7-2001 I 2-570 4953  8-21-2001 I 62-73 4959 10- 2-2001 I 114-600 5039  8- 6-2002 I 98-234 5050 10- 1-2002 I, II 114-195 5057 10-15-2002 I, II 98-35 III 98-227 V-VII 98-230-98-232 VIII 98-234 5065 11- 5-2002 I, II 114-533 III 114-385 IV 114-535 5075 12- 3-2002 I 98-530 5083  2- 4-2003 I 114-133 III-V 114-182-114-184 VI, VII 114-186, 114-187 VIII 114-563 IX-XI 114-564 5087  2- 4-2003 II 70-21-70-32 5097  4- 1-2003 I 114-195 II 114-535 5128  7- 1-2003 I 2-591-2-605 5171  1-20-2004 II(94-401) 106-21 II(94-402) 106-19 II(94-403)- 
II(94-411) 106-22-106-30 II(94-412) 106-20 5219  8-17-2004 I-IV 2-606 5265 12- 7-2004 I 34-55 5272  1-18-2005 I 62-29 98-627 5291  4- 5-2005 I, II 30-29, 30-30 5298  5-17-2005 I(114-700)- 
I(114-722) 114-650-114-672 5318  6-21-2005 I 86-29 5343 10- 4-2005 I 106-49-106-54 5372  1-17-2006 I 2-477 5383  3- 7-2006 I-III 2-92 5392  4-18-2006 I 86-30 5399  5- 2-2006 I-III 2-409-2-411 IV, V 2-411, 2-412 VI, VII 2-412, 2-413 5400  5- 2-2006 I 2-330 5401  5- 2-2006 I, II 6-2, 6-3 III, IV 6-170, 6-171 V 6-213 5404  5-16-2006 I 98-410 II 98-497-98-503 5414  6-20-2006 I(A)-I(D) 114-252-114-255 II 114-251 III(A)-III(H) 114-257-114-264 IV(A)-IV(C) 114-271-114-273 V(A)-V(H) 114-283-114-290 VI(A), VI(B) 114-274 VII(A) 114-256 5434  8- 1-2006 I 86-1 II 86-4 III 86-30 IV 86-29 V 86-32 5435  8- 1-2006 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 V 22-391 VI 22-411 5464 11- 7-2006 I 114-416-114-426 5493  1-16-2007 I 30-29 5497  2- 6-2007 I 114-528 II 114-533 5501  2- 6-2007 I 114-451-114-457 5523  4-17-2007 I 30-28 5526  4-17-2007 I, II 1-15 5527  4-17-2007 I 98-497-98-503 II 98-497-98-503 5528  4-17-2007 I 98-470 5554  6-19-2007 I 114-483-114-493 5558  6-19-2007 I 2-653-2-662 5567  6-19-2007 I 2-632 II 2-178 5572  7- 3-2007 I 94-72 5583  8- 7-2007 I 2-591-2-605 5584  8- 7-2007 I 2-606 5596  9- 4-2007 I, II 114-652, 114-653 III 114-655 5610 10-16-2007 1(2-616) 2-544 5613 11- 6-2007 I 114-1 II 114-195 5616 11- 6-2007 I 114-1 II 114-535 5656  2-19-2008 I 2-569 II 2-571 5663  3- 4-2008 I(42-75), I(42-76) 38-85, 38-86 I(42-77) 38-374 I(42-78)-I(42-80) 38-118-38-120 I(42-81)-I(42-86) 38-139-38-144 I(42-87) 38-172 I(42-88)-I(42-95) 38-198-38-205 I(42-96) 38-234 I(42-97), I(42-98) 38-262, 38-263 I(42-99) 38-290 I(42-100)-I(42-104) 38-314-38-318 I(42-106) 38-87 I(42-107)-I(42-117) 38-340-38-350 5669  4- 1-2008 I 50-61 5684  5- 6-2008 I 2-412 5746  9-16-2008 I(110-2) 110-21 5747  9-16-2008 I 14-33 5810  2-17-2009 I(94-14(a)) 90-76, 90-77 I(94-14(b)), 
I(94-14(c)) 90-74, 90-75 I(94-14(d)) 90-98 I(94-14(e)(1))- 
I(94-14(e)(4)) 90-98-90-103 I(94-14(e)(4)), 
I(94-14(e)(5)) 90-131, 90-132 I(94-14(e)(6)) 90-103 I(94-14(e)(7)) 90-127, 90-128 I(94-14(e)(8)) 90-130 I(94-14(e)(9)) 90-128 I(94-14(e)(10)) 90-130 I(94-14(e)(11)) 90-104 I(94-14(e)(12)) 90-133 I(94-14(e)(13)) 90-135 I(94-14(e)(14)), 
I(94-14(e)(15)) 90-129, 90-130 I(94-14(e)(16)) 90-136 I(94-14(e)(17)) 90-77 I(94-14(e)(18)) 90-126 I(94-14(e)(19)) 90-134 I(94-14(e)(20)) 90-105, 90-106 90-129 II, III 6-2, 6-3 IV, V 6-213 5827  4- 7-2009 I 14-4 5856  7- 2-2009 I 2-477 5868  8- 4-2009 I, II 114-67 5949  4- 6-2010 I, II 102-142, 102-143 III(106-187)-III(106-208) 102-168-102-189 IV 102-190 V, VI 102-225, 102-226 VII 102-274 VIII 102-307 IX(106-341) 102-315 IX(106-376) 102-348 X, XI 102-350, 102-351 XII 102-354 XIII 102-356 XIV, XV 102-359, 102-360 5955  5- 4-2010 I 114-546 5992  8- 3-2010 I(art. I, § A)- 114-252-114-255 I(art. I, § D) I(art. II) 114-251 I(art. III, § A)- 114-257-114-264 I(art. III, § H) I(art. IV, § A)- 114-271-114-273 I(art. IV, § C) I(art. V, § A)- 114-283-114-290 I(art. V, § H) I(art. VI, § A, B) 114-274 I(art. VII, § A) 114-256 6001  9- 7-2010 I 114-1 II 114-199 6006  9-21-2010 I(94-501) 90-157 I(94-502) 90-156 I(94-503) 90-158 I(94-504)-I(94-512) 90-184-90-192 6008 10- 5-2010 I 114-564 6009 10- 5-2010 I 114-231 6024 10-26-2010 I(405)-I(410) 2-440-2-445 6080  5-17-2011 1 42-48 6092  6-21-2011 I 30-25 6101  8- 2-2011 I 114-191 6102  8- 2-2011 I(46-5(a)) 42-110 I(46-5(b))-I(46-5(e)) 42-112-42-115 I(46-5(f)) 42-111 6146 11- 1-2011 I 38-375-38-386 I(42-77) 38-374 6181  3- 6-2012 I 114-175 II, III 114-201 6186  3-20-2012 I(114-467) 114-385 6187  3-20-2012 I 114-1 6231  7-24-2012 I 58-110(e) II, III 86-1 6242  9- 4-2012 I 98-81 6245  9-18-2012 I 114-192 (tit.) 114-192 6248 10-16-2012 I Adopt. Ord. II 66-102 6268 11-20-2012 I 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-144, 38-172, 38-198-38-205, 38-234, 38-262, 38-263, 38-290, 38-314-38-318, 38-340-38-350 6305  5- 7-2013 I 114-533(13) 6306  5- 7-2013 I 114-1 6322  6-18-2013 I 30-29 6343  8-20-2013 I 98-231 6354 10-15-2013 I 114-1 II 114-103 III 114-131(4) 6360 11-19-2013 I       Added 114-536 6367 12- 3-2013 I 6-173(e) II       Added 6-213(d)       Rnbd 6-213(d)-(g)       as 6-213(e)-(h) 6373  1- 7-2014 I 98-215-98-234 II-IV       Added 98-235-98-237 V 98-264 6374  1- 7-2014 I       Added 2-479 6383  3- 4-2014 I-III 114-186-114-188 6385  4- 1-2014 I 114-533(9)a. 6386  4- 1-2014 I 114-133(2) 6387  4- 1-2014 I, II 114-1 III 114-298-114-307 6388  4- 1-2014 I 114-1 II 114-192(a)(9) III 114-194(a)(4) IV 114-195(a)(1) V 114-197(b)(3) VI 114-225 VII 114-353(5) VIII 114-380(4) IX 114-383(3) 6405  6-17-2014 I       Added 114-175(10) II       Added 114-202 6430  8-19-2014 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 IV 22-391 V 22-411 VI 22-522 VII 42-46 VIII       Rpld 42-48 6432  9- 2-2014 I 2-569 II 2-570 6440 10- 7-2014 I 30-29 6451 12- 2-2014 I 114-1 II       Added 114-568 III       Added 114-569 6456 12-16-2014 I 114-106(tit.) 114-106 II 114-305(tit.) 114-305 6463  1- 6-2015 I 6-169 II 6-173(e) III 6-207 IV 6-208 V 6-211 VI 6-213 6469  4- 7-2016 I 114-104(3) 6474  4- 7-2015 I 114-353 II       Rpld 114-355 6475  4-21-2016 I 114-194 II 114-533(7) III 114-535 IV       Dltd 114-563(3) 6526 10-20-2015 I 2-263 II 2-264 III 98-534 6533  1-19-2016 I 114-1 II 114-530(4) III       Added 114-537 6544  2-16-2016 I       Added 114-242(3)d. 6545  2-16-2016 I       Added 114-203 II       Added 114-533(15) 6547  2-16-2016 I 114-194 6559  4- 5-2016 I 22-96(e) 6569  6- 7-2016 I       Added 114-193(a)(6) 6586  6-21-2016 I       Added 62-212 6587  6-21-2016 I       Added 62-233 6589  7- 5-2016 I       Added 86-6 6602  9-20-2016 I 114-143 6604  9-20-2016 I 22-616(tit.) 22-616 22-617(tit.) 22-617 22-618-620 II 22-621 6632 12-20-2016 I       Rpld 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-144, 38-172, 38-198, 38-200-38-205, 38-234, 38-262, 38-263, 38-290, 38-314-38-318, 38-340-38-350 I       Added 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-145, 38-168-38-173, 38-199, 38-225 38-253, 38-254, 38-281, 38-305-38-309, 38-331-38-341 6648  2-21-2017 I 102-142 II 102-226 III 102-359  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Tennessee statutory law. 
T.C.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-102 1-2 1-3-104 1-2 1-3-104(a) 1-2 1-3-104(c) 1-2 1-3-105 1-2 1-3-105(12) 1-2 1-3-105(19)- 
1-3-105(21) 1-2 1-3-105(24), 
1-3-105(25) 1-2 1-3-105(27) 1-2 1-3-105(32) 1-2 1-3-106 1-2 2-3-101- 
2-3-108 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-3-201- 
2-3-205 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-5-208(j) Char. Art. II, § 4 2-8-117 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-10-101(a) 6-213 2-13-101 6-213 2-301-2-326 Char. Art. II, § 4 4-7-301 et seq. Ch. 38 4-21-101 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-401 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-501 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-601 et seq. Ch. 46 5-19-101 et seq. Ch. 86 6-2-201(22) 62-189 6-4-301 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 6-19-101(22) 62-189 6-19-101(33) 62-189 6-21-703 42-20 6-33-101 62-189 6-51-101 et seq. Ch. 1 6-51-120 Ch. 66 6-53-102 Char. Art. II, § 3 6-54-101 et seq. Ch. 2 6-54-104 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IV 6-54-107, 6-54-108 Char. Art. XX, § 3 6-54-112 Ch. 2, Art. II 6-54-113 22-616 22-618 6-54-119 Ch. 22 6-54-120 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 6-54-123 Ch. 2, Art. III 6-54-137 2-1 6-54-305 98-37 6-54-306 1-14 6-54-401 Ch. 30 6-54-402 Ch. 50 6-54-501 et seq. Ch. 1 42-46 6-54-502 Ch. 22 6-54-508, 6-54-509 1-1 6-54-509 Ch. 1 6-54-512 Ch. 1 2-54 6-54-513 2-479 6-55-102 Ch. 94 94-47 6-55-201 et seq. Ch. 94 94-2 6-56-101 2-474 7-31-101 et seq. Ch. 90 7-31-105 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-31-114 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-31-1206 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-32-101 Ch. 66 Ch. 90, Art. V 7-32-101 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 3 Char. Art. IA, § 1 7-33-101 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 Char. Art. IA, § 1 7-34-104 Ch. 102 Ch. 102, Art. III 7-34-114 Ch. 102 102-55 7-35-414 Ch. 102 102-55 7-51-1401 et seq. Ch. 10 7-62-103, 
7-62-104 Ch. 22 7-86-101 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 7-86-104 34-54 8-1-101 et seq. Ch. 2 8-17-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX 8-17-102 2-653 2-655 8-17-103 Ch. 2, Art. IX 2-655 8-35-201 et seq. 34-56 8-38-101 2-90 8-47-101 et seq. Char. Art. III, § 15 8-50-107 Ch. 2, Art. III Char. Art. III, § 3 8-50-601- 
8-50-604 Char. Art. II, § 6 9-4-111 et seq. 2-477 9-4-704 Char. Art. XX, § 1 9-21-101 et seq. Char. Art. XIII 38-377 10-1-101 et seq. Ch. 54 10-3-101 et seq. Ch. 54 10-3-103 Ch. 54 54-28 10-7-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 10-7-503 2-631 10-7-503 et seq. 102-145 10-7-504 2-631 10-7-701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII Ch. 54 11-3-106 Ch. 66 11-24-101 et seq. Ch. 66 12-4-101 Char. Art. XX, § 3 R.L. Art. II, § 6 12-4-102 Char. Art. XX, § 3 R.L. Art. II, § 6 12-9-103 102-149 tit. 13 Ch. 74 13-3-101 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. II 13-3-101- 
13-3-105 74-24 13-3-201- 
13-3-203 74-24 13-3-301- 
13-3-303 74-24 13-3-310 114-106 114-305 13-3-401- 
13-3-411 74-24 13-3-413 114-106 114-305 13-4-101 74-19, 74-20 13-4-101- 
13-4-105 74-24 13-4-102 74-21, 74-22 13-4-301- 
13-4-309 74-24 13-7-101 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-105 114-7 13-7-106 et seq. 114-65 13-7-201 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-201- 
13-7-210 74-24 114-3 114-252 13-7-205 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. II, 
Div. 2 13-7-207 et seq. 114-67 13-7-301 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-401 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. III, 
Div. 4 114-451 13-7-407(b) 114-651 13-10-101 et seq. Ch. 110 13-10-108 Ch. 110 13-21-101 22-550 13-21-101 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IX 22-581 13-21-102 Ch. 22, Art. IX 22-556 22-584 22-586 13-21-104 22-584 13-21-105 22-590 13-21-107 22-583 16-1-101 et seq. Ch. 30 16-3-101 Char. Art. II, § 4 16-18-101 Ch. 30 16-18-101 et seq. Ch. 30 16-18-301 et seq. Ch. 30 30-29, 30-30 26-1-101- 
26-3-117 30-27 27-8-101 102-189 27-8-101 et seq. 38-350 27-9-101 et seq. 86-101 29-3-101 62-125 29-3-101 et seq. Ch. 62 29-20-205 50-65 50-95 38-1-101 et seq. 50-59 38-3-101 62-23 38-8-101 50-58 38-8-101 et seq. Ch. 50 38-8-105 Ch. 50 38-9-103 62-189 39-6-1701 et seq. 62-72 39-11-101 et seq. Ch. 62 39-13-511 62-157 39-14-405 62-47 39-14-408 62-48 39-14-502 et seq. Ch. 86 39-16-301 50-64 39-16-602 Ch. 50 50-26 39-17-108 Ch. 90 39-17-302, 
39-17-303 62-23 39-17-305 62-25 39-17-307 Ch. 90 39-17-310 Ch. 6 98-337 39-17-401- 
39-17-432 46-21 39-17-502 62-22 39-17-708 6-8 39-17-1301 et seq. 62-75 39-17-1302 66-102 39-17-1307 62-72 39-17-1311 Ch. 66 66-102 39-17-1315 50-61 39-17-1351 66-102 40-1-101 et seq. Ch. 62 40-7-101 Ch. 50 50-24 40-7-108 Ch. 50 50-26 40-24-105 2-479 42-3-101 et seq. Ch. 18 42-3-119 Ch. 18 42-5-102 Ch. 18 42-8-101 et seq. Ch. 18 42-8-102 Ch. 18 43-6-101 et seq. Ch. 106 43-14-101 et seq. Ch. 38 43-21-101 et seq. Ch. 10 44-8-101 et seq. Ch. 14 44-8-401 et seq. Ch. 14 44-8-408 Ch. 14 14-33 44-8-410 Ch. 14 14-33 44-15-101 et seq. 114-202 44-17-101 et seq. Ch. 14 44-17-301 et seq. Ch. 14 14-85 44-17-304 14-83 45-6-201 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 45-6-219 Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 47-25-1601 et seq. Ch. 78 49-2-116 2-354 50-1-201 et seq. 62-27 50-3-101 et seq. 2-91 50-3-103 2-91 50-6-101 et seq. 50-58 51-51-101 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. VI 54-5-133 Ch. 106 54-10-110 62-49 54-20-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 54-20-113 Ch. 78 55-1-101 et seq. Ch. 98 98-530 55-1-102 et seq. 98-1 55-1-105 98-530 55-4-113 98-1 55-4-401 et seq. Ch. 58 55-4-402 58-1 55-4-413 Ch. 58 55-5-129 98-532 55-7-201 98-437, 
98-438 55-8-101- 
55-8-103 98-1-98-3 55-8-104 98-5 55-8-106, 
55-8-107 98-6, 98-7 55-8-108 98-85 55-8-109 98-35 98-470 55-8-109(b) 98-471 55-8-110 98-473 55-8-110 et seq. 98-35 55-8-110(a)(3) 98-500 55-8-111- 
55-8-113 98-474- 
98-476 55-8-114 98-478 55-8-115- 
55-8-125 98-63-98-73 55-8-128 98-151 55-8-130, 
55-8-131 98-152, 
98-153 55-8-133(a) 98-327 55-8-134, 
55-8-135 98-328, 
98-329 55-8-136 98-62 98-74 98-336 55-8-137- 
55-8-139 98-331- 
98-333 55-8-140 98-155 55-8-142 98-156, 
98-157 55-8-144 98-156 55-8-145 98-77 55-8-149 98-152 55-8-151 98-78 55-8-152 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. III, 
Div. 2 55-8-158 98-217, 
98-218 55-8-160 42-82 98-216 55-8-160(a)(15) 98-227 55-8-162, 
55-8-163 98-79, 98-80 55-8-164 Ch. 98, Art. VI 98-87 98-370 55-8-165 98-82 98-87 55-8-168, 
55-8-169 98-75, 98-76 55-8-170 98-8 55-8-180 98-338 55-8-182 98-371 55-8-183 98-86 55-8-189 98-87 55-8-193 62-29 Ch. 98, Art. X 55-8-198 30-25 98-497- 
98-500 55-9-201 98-400 55-9-201(c) 98-396 55-9-203, 
55-9-204 98-402, 
98-403 55-9-212 98-404 55-9-215 98-405 55-9-302 98-374 55-9-304 98-374 55-9-305 98-373 55-9-401 98-395 55-9-401(a) 98-393 55-9-402 98-396 55-9-405(d) 98-399 55-9-407 98-398 55-9-413 98-395 55-9-414 Ch. 50 55-9-602 98-408 55-9-603 98-406 55-9-603(h) 98-406 55-10-106 98-185 55-10-110 98-186 55-10-113, 
55-10-114 98-187, 
98-188 55-10-207(e) 30-29 55-10-307 et seq. Ch. 98 55-10-416(a)-(c) 6-2 55-21-101 et seq. 98-228 55-21-102 98-228 55-21-104 98-228 55-50-801, 
55-50-802 98-43 55-53-101 66-101 tit. 57 Char. Art. I, § 2 6-78 57-1-101 et seq. Ch. 6 57-3-101 6-1 57-3-101 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 6-67 57-3-102 6-39 57-3-106 Char. Art. I, § 2 6-69 57-3-201 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 57-3-208 6-1 57-3-210(i) 6-140 57-3-210(g), 
57-3-210(h) 6-141, 6-142 57-3-214 6-78 57-3-404(f) 6-139 57-3-405 6-145 57-3-406 6-137 6-149 57-3-501, 
57-3-502 6-72, 6-73 57-3-502 6-74, 6-75 57-4-101 et seq. 6-146 57-4-203 6-144 6-149, 6-150 57-4-203(f) 6-143 57-4-204 62-156- 
62-158 57-5-101 et seq. Ch. 6 57-5-101(c)Tc>6-208 Tc>6-213 57-5-101(c)(1)Tc>6-213 57-5-106 6-170 57-5-108 Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Art. III 57-5-301 6-174 6-218 58-1-601 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. VIII 58-2-101 34-19 58-2-101 et seq. Ch. 34 58-2-110 Ch. 34 34-24 58-2-110(3)(A)(vi) 34-21 58-8-101 et seq. Ch. 34 62-6-101 et seq. Ch. 22 62-7-101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 62-9-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 62-30-101 et seq. Ch. 70 62-32-101 et seq. Ch. 42 63-18-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-49 63-18-102 26-48 65-15-101 et seq. Ch. 110 66-29-101 et seq. 2-545 67-1-101 et seq. Ch. 94 94-71 67-1-707 94-80 67-1-911 94-80 67-4-501 Ch. 26 Ch. 94 94-47 67-4-701 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. III 67-4-704 Ch. 94 94-47 67-4-710 Ch. 70 67-4-1401 94-70 67-4-1401 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. IV 67-4-1403 94-81 67-4-1404 94-76 67-4-1408, 
67-4-1409 94-78, 94-79 67-4-1701 et seq. Ch. 26 67-4-2201 et seq. Ch. 10 67-5-101 et seq. Ch. 94 67-5-2005 et seq. Ch. 94 94-2 67-6-101 et seq. Ch. 94 94-27 67-6-102(8) 94-27 67-6-102(12) 94-27 67-6-207 38-382 67-6-212 Ch. 10 67-6-213 Ch. 70 67-6-516 94-27 67-6-701 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. II 94-27 67-6-702 94-27, 94-28 68-8-102 Ch. 14 14-59 68-8-104 Ch. 14 14-59 68-14-101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 68-14-305 Ch. 26 68-101-101 et seq. Ch. 38 68-102-101 et seq. Ch. 42 68-102-117 Ch. 22, Art. IX 68-102-148 42-83 68-102-149 Ch. 42 62-72 68-102-151 Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 68-104-101 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 68-120-101 Ch. 22 68-120-101 et seq. Ch. 22 68-120-101(a)(8)(A) 22-96 68-120-101(a)(C)(i)(a) 22-96 68-120-111 Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 68-120-113 Ch. 22 68-121-116 et seq. Ch. 10 68-126-101 et seq. Ch. 58 68-126-201 et seq. Ch. 58 68-126-202 58-1 98-530 68-126-202(4) 58-1 114-1 68-126-202(6), 
68-126-202(7) 114-1 68-126-401 et seq. Ch. 58 68-201-101 et seq. Ch. 38 68-211-101 et seq. Ch. 86 68-211-835 Ch. 86 68-211-851 et seq. Ch. 86 68-211-1002(8) 86-1 68-212-104 86-1 68-221-101 et seq. Ch. 102 102-101 68-221-701 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 102 68-221-711 Ch. 102 102-105 68-221-1101 et seq. Ch. 38 38-376 68-221-1105 38-86 68-221-1106 et seq. 38-119 68-221-1106(a) 38-335 68-221-1112 38-385 69-3-10(40)Tc>38-85 69-3-123 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 102 102-167 102-185 69-3-124 102-186, 
102-187 102-189 70-4-403(3)Tc>114-202  
Sec. 114-658. - Undue economic hardship. 
(a)  The building official may exempt an historic landmark from a demolition by neglect order if the building official finds that the owner and parties in interest have proven the order to repair creates undue economic hardship on the owner and parties in interest. An application for a determination of undue economic hardship by the owner and parties at interest shall be made, on a form prepared by the building official, not more than 30 days after delivery of the order finding demolition by neglect. The application must include photographs of the building, information pertaining to the historic significance of the site, if any, and all information required by the building official. All owners and parties in interest must submit the application under oath. The burden of proof of the undue economic hardship is on the owner and parties in interest. 
(b)  The application shall include the information specified in subsection (a) of this section, and the building official may require that an owner and parties in interest furnish such additional information the building official deems relevant to a determination of undue economic hardship. 
(c)  In the event any of the required information is not reasonably available to the owner and parties in interest, and cannot be readily obtained, the owner and parties in interest shall describe the reasons why such information cannot be obtained. 
(d)  The building official shall hold a hearing on the application within 30 days of the timely receipt of such application. Notice will be given and hearing procedures followed in the same manner as set forth in sections 114-655(b) and 114-656. The owner and parties in interest may submit such relevant information they deem appropriate to prove undue economic hardship, but at a minimum shall submit to the building official for his review at least the following information: 
(1)  Nature of ownership, legal possession, custody, and control; 
(2)  Financial resources of the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  Cost of the repair or correction with supporting documentation from licensed contractors; 
(4)  Valuation of the land and improvements; 
(5)  Real property taxes for each of the previous two years and the appraised value of the property for those years established by the property assessor for property tax purposes; 
(6)  Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of any relationship between the grantor and grantee, or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance; 
(7)  Annual debt service on the property, if any, for previous two years; 
(8)  The marketability of the property for sale or lease, considered in relation to any listing of the property for sale or lease, and price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years. This should include testimony and relevant documents regarding: 
a.  Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property; 
b.  Reasonableness of the price or rent sought by the applicant; and 
c.  Any advertisements placed for the sale or lease of the property; 
(9)  If the property is commercial or income producing property, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years as claimed as deductions on United States tax returns; and debt service, if any on the property, if not including as an operating or maintenance expense; 
(10)  Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed; 
(11)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or parties in interest or others in connection with the purchase, financing, attempted sale, or ownership of the property; 
(12)  Any federal income tax returns on or relating to the property for the previous two years; and 
(13)  Any other information the building official deems relevant to the determination of undue economic hardship. 
(e)  Undue economic hardship does not include self-created hardships, willful or negligent acts of the owner or parties in interest, purchase of the property for substantially more than the market value, failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants, or failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
(f)  Within 30 days of the hearing on the application, the building official shall make a written finding of whether undue economic hardship exists, and shall enter the reasons for such finding into the record. In the event of a finding of no undue economic hardship, the building official shall issue an order for repair, improvements, or correction of defects within the time specified. In the event of a finding of undue economic hardship, the finding shall be accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve the economic hardship. This plan may include, but not be limited to loans or grants from the city, county, state, or other public, private, or non-profit sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, changes in applicable zoning regulations, or relaxation of the provisions of this article sufficient to mitigate the undue economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-708), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-659. - Service of complaints or orders. 
    Complaints or orders issued by the building official under this article shall be served upon persons, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaints or orders upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaints or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. In addition, a copy of such complaints or orders shall also be filed for record in the register's office of the county in which the building is located, and such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-709), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-660. - Remedies. 
    If the owner, and/or parties in interest, fail or refuse to comply with the order of the building official within the time specified, the city may apply for appropriate equitable remedies to enforce the provisions of this article, including an order directing that improvements or repairs be made, or that other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property in compliance with this article, and if the city shall make the repairs it shall have a lien as set out in section 114-661. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-710), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-661. - Creation of lien and payment into court. 
    The amount of the cost of such repairs or corrections ordered by the court and made or procured by the building official shall upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county in which the property lies, be a lien in favor of the city against the real property on which such cost was incurred, second only to liens of the state, county and city for taxes; any lien of the city for special assessments; and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. The city tax collector shall collect these costs at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected and shall include penalties and interest calculated as if it were overdue property taxes. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-711), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-662. - Appeals from decision of building official. 
(a)  The aggrieved party, against whom the decision of the building official is made, may have a review of the decision by petition for a common law writ of certiorari, addressed to either the city law court or chancery court. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date the decision or order of the building official is made and written notice thereof given the aggrieved party. 
(b)  Immediately upon the grant of the common law writ of certiorari and service thereof, the building official shall cause to be made, certified, and forwarded to such court a complete transcript of the proceedings in the cause by the building official. 
(c)  The action may be reviewed by the court in which the petition for certiorari is filed and shall be heard solely upon the transcript of the proceedings before the building official, and neither party shall be entitled to introduce new evidence in such court. 
(d)  Any party dissatisfied with the decree of the court hearing the cause may, upon giving bond as required by law, take an appeal, as is made and provided by law, where the case shall be heard upon the transcript of the record from the court in which the cause is heard. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-712), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-663. - Procedures for designation of historic landmarks with the owner's consent. 
(a)  Any completed application for designation filed by the owner with the planning department, once reviewed by the planning manager or designee, shall be promptly referred to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application not less than 30 days, or more than 60 days after the filing of the application to consider the approval of the historic designation. In determining whether to approve the designation the commission shall consider the criteria contained in section 114-665, and must find the application meets at least one of the criteria listed therein. 
(b)  A notice of the hearing shall be served as provided in section 114-659 by the planning manager or designee. The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing and a brief summary of the proposed action. 
(c)  The planning manager or designee shall review the proposed designation with respect to its relationship to the land use plan; the effect of the designation on the surrounding neighborhood; and such other planning considerations as may be relevant to the proposed designation. The planning manager or designee shall provide written comments and recommendations regarding the proposed designation to the commission no less than seven days before the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted using the procedure set out in section 114-656. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-713), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-664. - Procedures for designation of historic landmarks without the owner's consent. 
(a)  Any completed application for designation is filed by one other than the owner with the planning department, once reviewed by the planning manager or designee, shall be promptly referred to the commission and if the owner or owners of the property nominated for designation does not consent to the designation the commission shall hold a public hearing on the application not less than 30 days, nor more than 60 days after the filing of the application to consider the approval of the historic designation, unless the commission grants a continuance in the matter. In determining whether to approve the designation the commission shall consider the criteria contained in section 114-665 and must find the application meets at least three of the criteria listed therein. 
(b)  A notice of the hearing shall be served as provided in section 114-659 by the planning manager or designee. The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing and a brief summary of the proposed action. 
(c)  The planning manager or designee shall review the proposed designation with respect to its relationship to the land use plan; the effect of the designation on the surrounding neighborhood; and such other planning considerations as may be relevant to the proposed designation. The planning manager or designee shall provide written comments and recommendations regarding the proposed designation to the commission at the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted using the procedure set out in section 114-656. 
(e)  At least four of seven members of the commission must be present at the hearing in order to establish a quorum. In the event of vacancies on the commission, then two-thirds of commission members shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is missing then the chairperson of the commission may set a new date for a special hearing or the matter may be heard on the next regularly scheduled meeting date of the commission. 
(f)  The decision of the commission shall be made by a majority roll call vote after the commission has heard all interested parties and relevant evidence. The board may continue the hearing from time to time as necessary to gather all relevant evidence to make its recommendation. The board shall consider the conformance or lack of conformance of the proposed designation with the purposes, standards and criteria of this article. The commission board shall either approve or disapprove the proposed designation after considering the criteria set forth in section 114-665. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-714), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-665. - Criteria for designation. 
    To be eligible for designation as an historic landmark a structure shall be located in an historic district, shall be at least 50 years old and possess architectural, social, or geographical/environmental importance by meeting one or more of the following: 
(1)  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
(2)  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally, or locally; 
(3)  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
(4)  Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design; 
(5)  Represents a style particularly associated with the historic district or the city; 
(6)  Represents a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria; 
(7)  Has undergone significant historic remodel; 
(8)  Is the site of historic event that had an effect upon society; 
(9)  Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; 
(10)  Represents an association with a notable person or the work of a notable person; 
(11)  Represents a typical example/association with a particular ethnic group; 
(12)  Represents a unique example of an event in the city's history; 
(13)  Enhances sense of identity of the community; 
(14)  Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community; 
(15)  Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places or is designated by the state historic preservation office as an historic designation or landmark. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-715), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-666. - Appeal from decision of the commission. 
(a)  The aggrieved party, against whom the decision of the commission is made, may have a review of the decision by petition for a common law writ of certiorari, addressed to either the city law court or chancery court. Such petition shall be filed within 60 days from the date the decision of the commission is made. 
(b)  Immediately upon the grant of the common law writ of certiorari and service thereof, the commission shall cause to be made, certified, and forwarded to such court a complete transcript of the proceedings in the cause by the commission. 
(c)  The action may be reviewed by the court in which the petition for certiorari is filed and shall be heard solely upon the transcript of the proceedings before the commission, and neither party shall be entitled to introduce new evidence in such court. 
(d)  Any party dissatisfied with the decree of the court hearing the cause may, upon giving bond as required by law, take an appeal, as is made and provided by law, where the case shall be heard upon the transcript of the record from the court in which the cause is heard. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-716), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-667. - Procedure for nomination of historic landmarks. 
(a)  The commission, board of mayor and aldermen or owners may nominate a property or structure for designation as an historic landmark. 
(b)  Upon inquiry for nomination, the planning manager or designee and at least one member of the commission shall contact the owner or owners of the property outlining the reasons and effects of designation as an historic property and, if possible, shall secure the consent of the owner or owners to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. 
(c)  If the property is found to have a potential for designation, an application shall be filed with the planning manager or designee on forms prescribed by the commission, and shall include the names of all owners of property included in the proposed designation, and shall be accompanied by all data required by the commission. The planning manager or designee shall transmit copies of the application to relevant city departments. The planning manager or designee shall in all cases notify, in writing, all owners of property included in the proposed designation, other than applicants, that the designation proceedings have been initiated. 
(d)  Each such nomination shall include a description of the characteristics of the proposed historic landmark which justify its designation, a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the property. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-717), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-668. - Legal protection for nominated properties. 
    For a property which has been nominated but not yet designated as an historic landmark, permits to alter or remodel the exterior of the property or properties to build, relocate, or raze shall not be issued during the 90-day period following the date nomination is received by the planning manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-718), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-669. - Resubmission for approval of designation as an historic landmark. 
    Whenever the commission denies the approval of a proposed designation, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least one year from the effective date of the final action on the original proposal. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-719), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-670. - Rules. 
    The board of mayor and aldermen may make rules and regulations necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-720), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-671. - Penalty and enforcement. 
    Any person violating any section of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be penalized not less than $1.00 and not more than $50.00 for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a penalty under this section shall be supplemental to any other action or penalty and shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license, the taking of any remedial or injunctive action, or seeking any other legal or equitable relief or enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-721), 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 114-672. - Powers conferred are supplemental. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the enforcement of the provisions of its Charter or any other ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Charter and other laws. Nothing contained within this article shall diminish the power of the city to declare a building unsafe or a violation of any building or housing code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5298, § I(114-722), 5-17-2005) 
Appendix A - TABLE OF ANNEXATION ORDINANCES 
    This table lists amendments to the corporate limits of the city. The text of such amendments is not set out in the Charter or the Code as published in this volume, but is available in the office of the city clerk. 
1095 12-16-1949 Fairacres Addition 1116  3-31-1950 Litz Manor Area (by referendum) 1428  6- 7-1955 5.5 acres-Part of Sevier Terrace 1429  6- 7-1955 11.7 acres-Nursery tract on Lamont 1482  5- 1-1956 Part of Highpark Addition 1576  2-18-1958 130.4 acres-part of Sevier Terrace 1642  1-19-1960 Hillcrest/Bridwell Heights 1678 11- 1-1960 Truxton Addition 1721 12-19-1961 653 acres-North of Stone Drive 1738  5- 1-1962 2,200 acres-Fort Robinson area 1762 10-16-1962 2,245 acres-Study Area 4-Preston Forest, City View, Holston Hills 1763 10-16-1962 15 acres-Tranbarger Drive 1786  6-27-1963 Cabana Apartments area North of Stone Drive 1796  8-20-1963 13 acres-Chestnut Ridge, Laguardia et al. 1808 12-17-1963 10 acres-A.V. Cole Subdivision on Chestnut Ridge 1823  3- 3-1964 61 acres-East and Barker property near Lynn Garden Drive 1826  4- 7-1964 78 acres-Beechcliff on Orebank Road 1834  6-16-1964 17 acre-Sevier Terrace 1881  7- 6-1965 Narrow strip along railroad in Ridgefields 1900  2-15-1966 Malabar Heights 1934 11-15-1966 33 acres-Near Rotherwood Hills 1939  2-21-1967 27 acres-Stone Drive (Waterman, Groseclose, Kilgore) 1977  4- 2-1968 6 acres-Cabana Apartments area 1986  6- 4-1968 Amersham/Huntington Hills area 1998  9- 3-1968 15 acres-Country Garden Apartments area 2024  6-17-1969 40 acres-Near Preston Forest 2058  4- 7-1970 105.1 acres-Preston Forest 2063  4-21-1970 129.04 acres-Brookside Drive area 2147  4- 4-1972 Bays Mountain Park 2178 10- 3-1972 Trammel Apartment site near Westview Addition 2239  5- 7-1974 Granby Road School site 2269 12- 3-1974 Rotherwood Heights-Lewis Lane area 2326  3- 2-1976 806 acres-East Stone Drive, Mason Dixon 2328  4- 6-1976 1,600 acres-Bays Mountain Park 2399 12- 6-1977 Sevier Terrace Area 2404  2- 7-1978 180 acres-Rotherwood Farms area 2430  8-15-1978 Southside area 2476  9-18-1979 12 acres-Brookside Drive 2498  4- 1-1980 33.9 acres-Bays Mountain Park 2534  1-20-1981 322 acres-Regional Service Park 2612 11-30-1982 Section 1, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2618 12-21-1982 22 acres-Tranbarger Drive area 2627  2-15-1983 1.5 acres-Demik property on Old Stage Road 2657  8-16-1983 1.8 acres-Tranbarger Drive area 2674 11-15-1983 104 acres-Ed Leeper property on East Stone Road 2675 11-15-1983 Section 2, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2677 11-15-1983 Clinchfield Railroad property near Eastman 2683  1-17-1984 70 acres-Brookside Drive area 2685  1-17-1984 Accepting deeds and easements from various parties-Brookside Drive area annexation 2717 10- 2-1984 63 acres-James D. Hendrickson property near Glenbrook & Harbor Drive 2720 11-20-1984 167.82 acres-Section 3, Tennessee Eastman Company (TEC) 2726 12- 6-1984 Joyner property-Harbor Chapel Road 2729  2- 5-1985 Miller Park 2730  2- 5-1985 Childress property 2755  7-16-1985 River Mountain Village Subdivision 2771 10-15-1985 Five residences-June Drive 2774 10-15-1985 Cox property-Dennis Highway 2806  6-17-1986 Gage property-Memorial Boulevard and Old Stage Road 2808  6-17-1986 12.55 acres-Bisceglia property, River Mountain Village 2834 10-21-1986 Dougherty property-June Drive 2844  1-20-1987 Study Area I-Colonial Heights (repealed by Ord. No. 2938) 2845  1-20-1987 Study Area II 2846  1-20-1987 Study Area III 2847  1-20-1987 Study Area IV 2848  1-20-1987 Study Area V 2849  1-20-1987 Study Area VI 2850  1-20-1987 Study Area VII 2851  1-20-1987 Study Area VIII 2852  1-20-1987 Study Area IX (repealed by Ord. No. 2875) 2856  2-17-1987 Fain Avenue area 2862  3- 2-1987 Boyd and Cox property-Ambleside 2872  4-21-1987 Racetrac Petroleum property-J.B. Dennis and I-81 2875  5- 7-1987 Repeal of Ord. No. 2852-Study Area IX 2876  5-19-1987 Study Area X-Sam's 2884  8- 4-1987 Clyde Bowers property-Lewis Lane, Hawkins County 2887  7-21-1987 Vaughn Chambers property-4220 Rustic Way 2893  9- 1-1987 Mike And Linda Freeman property-4174 Triangle Circle 2897  9- 1-1987 4174 Triangle Circle (amending Ord. No. 2893) 2905 10-20-1987 Joe Wimberly property-Bloomingdale Pike and Gravely Road 2917 11-14-1987 City property near Kendricks Creek Road 2922 10-20-1987 Rock Springs Road/I-181 2923 10-20-1987 Dennis Coffey property-326 Iris Drive 2933  1- 5-1988 Garland Farm near Cox Hollow Road and I-181, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County 2938  2- 2-1988 (Repealed by Ords. No. 2844-2850) 2941  2-16-1988 Rustic Way/Harbor Drive area in Cook's Valley, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 2943  2-16-1988 105 Patterson Road-part of 11th Civil District 2945  2-16-1988 Triangle Circle area in Cook's Valley 2949  2-16-1988 Triangle Circle area in Cook's Valley 2954  4-19-1988 Steadman Farm near airport, 18th Civil District, Sullivan County 2966  4-19-1988 316 Mullins Street 2967  4-19-1988 Virgil Street, Lynn Street, Lynn Garden Drive area 2968  4-19-1988 120 Virginia Street area near Lynn Garden Drive and Virginia Street 2970  5-17-1988 1300-1308 Lynn Garden Drive-201 Glen Avenue Area 2972  5-17-1988 104-464 Lynn Garden Drive 2973  5-17-1988 Bert Street/Frank Street area in Lynn Garden 2982  8- 2-1988 Part of Briarwood Acres Subdivision 2983  8- 2-1988 1500-1506 Lynn Garden Drive 3003  9-20-1988 4608 Sterling Lane, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3007  9-20-1988 Part of Hickory Hills Subdivision on Ronald Drive; 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3008  9-20-1988 J. R. Pierce property, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County on John B. Dennis Highway 3010  9-20-1988 1075 Lynn Garden Drive, 12th Civil District, Sullivan County 3013  9-20-1988 920 South Wilcox Drive, 13th Civil District, Sullivan County 3015 10- 4-1988 John B. Dennis-Brookside, 10th Civil District 3024 10-18-1988 Willmary Drive, June Drive, Cook's Valley Road, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3030 11-15-1988 4570-4574 Ronald Drive, 7th Civil District, Cooks Valley 3032 11-15-1988 Jericho Shriner's Temple, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3046 12-14-1988 Moody Farm, 7th Civil District, Sullivan County 3047 11-15-1988 1613 Lynn Garden Drive, 12th Civil District, Sullivan County 3051 12-20-1988 Addition to Roy Bailey area near Brookside Road and Dennis Highway-10th Civil District, Sullivan County 3061  7- 5-1988 Mercer, Carr, Fleenor property on Airport Access Road 3079 12-20-1988 4548 Matilda Place in Cooks Valley 3082 12-20-1988 Cooks Valley Road, Merrywood Avenue, Stillwood Avenue area in Cooks Valley 3083 12-20-1988 General Shale-Holston Mental Health Center area near Bowater Drive 3087  1-17-1989 4500-4517 Merrywood Avenue area in Cooks Valley 3090  2-21-1989 4507 Harbor Drive 3093  3- 7-1989 Lynn Garden Drive to state line 3094  3- 7-1989 I-181 Eastern Star Road to Washington County line 3096  3-21-1989 Eagles View Row in Lynn Garden 3107  4-18-1989 Pannell 3109  5-16-1989 Southwest Lynn Garden Area 3112  5-16-1989 Cracker Barrel area on Airport Rd 3135  6-20-1989 Andy Brooks property-Fort Henry Drive 3137  6-20-1989 Raintree area of Lynn Garden 3139  6-20-1989 Fairview-Virgil Area in Lynn Garden 3141  6-20-1989 Cooks Valley-4620 Matilda Place 3145  7- 6-1989 Allen Drive Area-Lynn Garden 3157  8- 1-1989 Northeast Lynn Garden 3159  8- 1-1989 Southeast Lynn Garden 3161  8- 1-1989 East Lynn Garden 3163  8- 1-1989 Echo/Northwest Lynn Garden 3167  8-15-1989 J. R. Pierce Property 3169  8-15-1989 Elks Property 3171  8-15-1989 1005 Fairview Avenue 3173  8-15-1989 1216 Bloomingdale Pike 3186 10-17-1989 Bradley Brothers property-John B. Dennis Highway 3197 11-21-1989 A&M Express and Central Transport 3199 11-21-1989 Eastern Concrete 3206 12-19-1989 Cooks Valley-Briarwood West 3208 12-19-1989 Cooks Valley-Cedarwood 3210 12-19-1989 Slipnot Belting-1171 Shipp Street 3212 12-19-1989 1103 Ambleside Drive 3218  1-16-1990 Harbor-Talbert-Matilda 322  1-16-1990 Matilda-June 3222  1-16-1990 West View 3224  1-16-1990 Oak Hill 3233  2-20-1990 Duke Properties-104108 Ferrell Avenue 3235  2-20-1990 Colonial Manor Condominiums-Ferrell Avenue 3237  2-20-1990 Cook's Valley-Dickson Meadows 3239  2-20-1990 Willmary West and Mowdy-Merrywood 3241  2-20-1990 Colonial Walk Shoppes-Fort Henry Drive 3243  2-20-1990 Waterman Farm 3250  3-20-1990 Stapleton Drive 3252  3-20-1990 Cook's Valley-Ronald, June and Briarwood East 3254  3-20-1990 Willowbrook 3263  4- 3-1990 Kingsport Demolition Landfill 3274  5- 1-1990 300 Blakley Drive 3276  5- 1-1990 Rock Springs-Moreland 3280  5-15-1990 Deneen Lane, Granby Road, Williams Road 3282  5-15-1990 West Cook's Valley 3284  5-15-1990 Dr. Ralph White property-Fort Henry Drive 3296  6-19-1990 Midfields 3298  6-19-1990 Beartown 3300  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-Sterling Place 3302  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-East 3304  6-19-1990 Cooks Valley-Harbor Chapel 3306  6-19-1990 McCann Property 3308  6-19-1990 4516 Fort Henry Drive 3310  6-19-1990 Antiques Etc-Airport Parkway 3322  7-17-1990 Days Inn, 10150 Airport Parkway 3324  7-17-1990 4598 Fort Henry Drive-Fire Station No. 6 3332  8-21-1990 Perkins Restaurant 3334  8-21-1990 Averitt Express 3358 11- 6-1990 Holston River Mountain 3367 11-20-1990 Colonial Heights And Springdale-Long Island (amended by Ord. No. 3620) 3370 11-20-1990 Ratliff Farm 3372 11-20-1990 Brooks Property 3419  4-16-1991 Tri-City Motor Lodge-9980 Airport Parkway 3424  5- 7-1991 Crown Colony/East Stone Drive (amended by Ord. No. 3493) 3433  5-21-1991 Bowater Drive 3434  5-21-1991 Yellow Freight System 3493 11- 5-1991 East Stone Drive (amending Ord. No. 3424) 3498 11-19-1991 Vernon Heights 3506 11-19-1991 1167 and 11671/2 Bloomingdale Pike 3519  1-21-1992 Pierce property near Airport Parkway 3521  1-21-1992 Lots 5, 6, 7 and the outlot of Northeast Tennessee Business Park 3527  3-17-1992 C. F. Netherland 3529  3-17-1992 Saltwater Willy's Seafood Restaurant 3542  4-21-1992 Saltwater Willy's Addition 3554  5-19-1992 McCray Mobile Home Park 3558  5-19-1992 Walkey-Preston Forest, Section 12 3565  6-18-1992 Flagship Commercial Park Phase I 3576  7-21-1992 Rock Springs 3602  9-15-1992 Grubb property-2325 Princeton Road 3604  9-15-1992 Slemp property near Airport Parkway 3620 10- 6-1992 Meadowview Golf Course (amending Ord. No. 3367) 3623 10-26-1992 Conference And Civic Center site-Meadowview Golf Course 3626 11- 3-1992 Bloomington Heights Addition 3630 11-17-1992 L. B .Franklin area 3632 11-17-1992 Mullins/Ridgecrest area 3648 12-15-1992 Interstate 81/Exit 66 area 3661  2- 2-1993 Wendy's near Flagship Drive and Airport Parkway 3666  2-16-1993 Horse Creek Village (repealed by Ord. No. 4176) 3686  4-20-1993 Jobe 3696  5-18-1993 Gravely/Ridgecrest 3698  5-18-1993 Wimberly Area 3732  8-17-1993 Aurawood Heights area 3734  8-17-1993 Walkey-Moreland Drive 3748  9-21-1993 Bowen Property 3765 10-19-1993 Aurawood Hills 3778 11-16-1993 Mayfield Avenue/Dickerson Street 3780 11-16-1993 Rose Tree Lane/Ward Avenue 3799  1-18-1994 Taff Property 3801  1-18-1994 Idle Hour Road 3807  2- 1-1994 608 Mayfield Avenue 3809  2- 1-1994 Moccasin Street Area 3815  2-15-1994 Diana Road/Diana Avenue 3823  3-15-1994 243 West Carters Valley 3825  3-15-1994 Dora Street/Austin Street 3827  3-15-1994 4624-4628 Fairlane Drive (Patel property) 3835  4-19-1994 11421/2 Bloomingdale Pike (and some others) 3852  5-17-1994 Donihe Graphics, Phase I 3854  5-17-1994 Rocky Branch (Shekinah) 3877  6-22-1994 Harrison Avenue/Allgood Drive 3879  6-22-1994 Fort Henry Drive/Summerville Road 3900  8- 2-1994 1417 Childress Ferry Road 3902  8- 2-1994 4234-4250 Fort Henry Drive 3904  8- 2-1994 Clinic Drive-Dutch Maid Laundry area 3908  8-16-1994 133-145 Shipp Springs 3910  8-16-1994 489 Roan Street 3912  8-16-1994 Shipp Street 3929  9-20-1994 Ferrell Avenue Phase II 3940 10-18-1994 368 Old Kinkead Road 3942 10-18-1994 413 Arlington Court 3944 10-18-1994 Sherry Street 3946 10-18-1994 Princeton Road 3954 11-15-1994 212 Lakecrest Drive Area 3956 11-15-1994 Reservoir Road/New Moore Road area 3963 12- 6-1994 888-896 Cooks Valley Road 3975  1- 3-1995 504 New Beason Well Road 3977  1- 3-1995 1605-1805 Harrison Avenue 3979  1- 3-1995 Flanders Street 3981  1- 3-1995 Hurd Road/Welk Road 4000  2-21-1995 Fort Henry Drive/Fairlane Drive area 4003  2-21-1995 605 Bell Ridge Road 4005  2-21-1995 Southgate Shopping Center area 4019  3-21-1995 1448 Bell Ridge Drive 4029  4-18-1995 Mayfield Avenue 4041  5-16-1995 Factory Stores of America (Carolina Pottery) 4043  5-16-1995 Bowater Drive-General Shale-Panay area 4045  5-16-1995 South Wilcox-South John B Dennis area 4075  7- 5-1995 Reservoir Road Section II 4086  8- 1-1995 4222-4226 Fort Henry Drive-Arby's, Pal's 4088  8- 1-1995 Jersey Street 4090  8- 1-1995 Gravely Road 4092  8- 1-1995 1154 Bloomingdale Pike 4127 10-17-1995 Edens Ridge 4129 10-17-1995 Orebank Road 4131 10-17-1995 1334-1336 Ridgecrest Avenue 4152 12-19-1995 200-204 Lakecrest Drive 4160  1-16-1996 4200-4214 Fort Henry Drive 4162  1-16-1996 1320-1332 Ridgecrest Avenue 4164  1-16-1996 374 and 389 Ridgeway Road 4176  6- 5-1996 Horse Creek (Repealing Ords. No. 3666 and 3667) 4177  3- 5-1996 Bays Mountain Recreation Area 4187  3-19-1996 Bramblewood Drive 4211  5-21-1996 Copperfield Addition 4214  5-21-1996 4301-4313 Fort Henry Drive 4216  5-21-1996 4209 Fort Henry Drive 4220  6- 4-1996 Mack Carr-Airport Parkway Area 4230  6-18-1996 400 West Carters Valley Road 4292 11- 5-1996 1441 Ridgecrest Avenue 4297 11- 5-1996 Glen Alpine/Bailey Farm (Potato Hill) 4300 11-19-1996 Princeton Road area (amended by Ord. No. 4686) 4308 12- 3-1996 Reservoir Road 4332  2- 4-1997 Tidewater Court 4334  2- 4-1997 2225 Diana Avenue 4355  3-18-1997 South Wilcox Drive, Phase I 4371  5-20-1997 Exxon/Taco Bell/Baskin-Robbins 4374  5-20-1997 Enterprise Place 4382  6- 3-1997 1419 Ridgecrest Avenue-Bishop 4405  7- 1-1997 1453-1457 Ridgecrest Avenue 4450 11- 4-1997 2413-2421 Little Valley Road 4452 11- 4-1997 Northeast Tennessee Business Park 4473  1- 6-1998 Anco Place/Moreland Drive 4482  2- 3-1998 South Highway 93 4515  5- 5-1998 738 Rocky Branch Road 4533  6-16-1998 2219 Diana Avenue 4550  7-12-1998 Fort Henry Drive/Lebanon Road 4570  8-18-1998 Edens Ridge 4593 10-20-1998 Eastman Credit Union/Wendover Drive 4595 10-20-1998 Jett Road 4610 12- 1-1998 Breckenridge Addition 4623  1-19-1999 General Development Corporation 4681  7-20-1999 Bill Milton/Orbin Drive 4686  7-20-1999 4300 Princeton Road area (amending Ord. No. 4300) 4687  8- 3-1999 Millennium Business Park 4716 11-16-1999 Fort Henry Drive/Hemlock Road 4788  7-18-2000 219 West Carters Valley Road 4794  8- 1-2000 214 West Carters Valley Road 4847  1-16-2001 1938 Tenneva Drive, 410 West Carters Valley Road, corner of West Carters Valley Road and Harrison Avenue and 714 West Carters Valley Road 4947  8- 7-2001 Boones Creek Properties and Charter Communications Property 4969 11-20-2001 Long Island, Phase I 4990  3- 5-2002 Conventry Wynde 4997  4-16-2002 Holston Business Development Center Subdivision 5026  7-16-2002 Hunt Property 5030  8- 6-2002 Sumner Property 5045  9-17-2002 Crossroads 5093  3-18-2003 Springdale Park Addition 5100  4-15-2003 Bachman Property 5171  1-20-2004 Broyles Property 5226 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 1 5228 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 2 5230 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 3 5232 10- 5-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 4 5234 10- 5-2004 Dave Clark 5236 10- 5-2004 Three parcels near intersection of Bloomingdale Pike and Gibson Mill Road 5242 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 5 5244 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 6 5246 11- 2-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase I, Area 8 5248 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 1 5250 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 2 5252 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 3 5254 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 4 5256 11-16-2004 Fort Henry Drive-Phase II, Area 5 5274  2- 1-2005 Fort Henry Drive-Phase 1, Area 7 5324  8- 2-2005 Gaylemont, Lot 1, Block B 5335  9-20-2005 Bell Ridge and Harrison Road 5349 11- 1-2005 Bell Ridge Road and Bell Ridge Drive 5351 11- 1-2005 Rock Springs Road South-Area 1 5362 11-17-2005 Rock Springs Road-Area 1 (amending Ord. No. 5351) 5395  5- 2-2006 Bridwell and Rock Springs Road 5397  5- 2-2006 McKee 5406  5-16-2006 Bell Ridge-Area 3 5445  8-15-2006 Saratoga Road 5475 12- 5-2006 Bays Mountain Park Eastman Donation 5502  2-20-2007 Peach Orchard 5535  5-15-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 2 5542  6- 5-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 3 5544  6- 5-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 5589  8-21-2007 Old Island 5599 10- 2-2007 213 Colonial Heights 5606 10-16-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 1 5620 11-20-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 3 (South Side) 5632 12-18-2007 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 (South Side) 5636  1-15-2008 Kendrick 5641  2- 5-2008 Rock Springs Road South-Area 5 (North Side) 5643  2- 5-2008 Meadows 5651  2-19-2008 Preston Park-Lot 9 5653  2-19-2008 Taylor 5691  6- 3-2008 Owner Petitioned Areas of Rock Springs South Area 5857  7-21-2009 Eastern Star 5859  7-21-2009 RS2 5861  7-21-2009 Flanders Street 5869  8- 4-2009 RS3 5871  8- 4-2009 RS4 5873  8- 4-2009 Parker Lane 5878  9- 1-2009 RS5 5880  9- 1-2009 RS6 5894 10-20-2009 RS7 5896 10-20-2009 RS8 5904 11- 3-2009 Stonetree A 5906 11- 3-2009 Stonetree B 5908 11- 3-2009 Stonetree C 5910 11- 3-2009 Stonetree D 5917 12- 1-2009 Colonial Heights United Methodist Church 5929  2- 2-2010 New Beasonwell 5956  5- 4-2010 Rock Springs North-Area 1 5958  5- 4-2010 Lebanon Road 5982  7- 6-2010 Eagle Pointe 5986  7-20-2010 Kendrick Creek 5997  8-17-2010 Diana Road 6013 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part A 6015 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part B 6017 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part C 6019 10-26-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 1, Part D 6021 10-26-2010 Edinburgh Addition 6035 12- 7-2010 Warrior Falls 2010-Sec. A 6037 12- 7-2010 Warrior Falls 2010-Sec. B 6039 12- 7-2010 State Line Baptist 6041 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part A 6043 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part B 6045 12- 7-2010 Colonial Heights-Area 2, Part C 6049 12-21-2010 VFW 6063  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part A 6065  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part B 6067  3- 1-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 3, Part C 6071  4- 5-2011 Montvue Road 6147 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part A 6149 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part B 6151 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part C 6153 11-15-2011 Colonial Heights-Area 6, Part D 6166  1-24-2012 Kendrick Creek, Part B 6169  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 1 6171  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 2 6173  2- 7-2012 Border Regions-Area 3 6176  2-21-2012 Old Mill 6188  3-20-2012 Cleek Road, Part 2 6190  3-20-2012 Eastern Star Road, Part 2 6192  3-20-2012 Kingsport South 6202  6-15-2012 Emory Church 6204  6-15-2012 Grandview  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1981 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code that are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1981 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-5 1-17 1-6 1-5 1-7 1-12 1-8 1-14 1-8.1 1-15 1-9 1-16 2-1 2-298 2-2 2-1 2-4, 2-5 2-631, 2-632 2-17-2-19 2-54-2-56 2-31-2-35 2-87-2-91 2-36 2-86 2-45-2-48 2-21-2-24 2-56 2-113 2-57(a)-2-57(g) 2-591-2-597 2-57(h) 2-601 2-57(i)- 
2-57(k) 2-598-2-600 2-57(l)- 
2-57(o) 2-602-2-605 2-58 2-114 2-66-2-68 2-144-2-146 2-74-2-76 2-176-2-178 2-83-2-85 22-48-22-50 2-92-2-94 2-210-2-212 2-111, 2-112 2-233, 2-234 2-124 66-42 2-134-2-137 2-474-2-477 2-138 2-545 2-141-2-143 2-569-2-571 2-144 2-511 2-145 2-510 2-146, 2-147 2-512, 2-513 2-147.1- 
2-147.4 2-514-2-517 2-148-2-151 30-19-30-22 2-153, 2-154 30-23, 30-24 2-156, 2-157 30-26, 30-27 2-163-2-165 30-49-30-51 2-213-2-217 2-349-2-353 2-221-2-226 2-262-2-267 2-236-2-244 2-382-2-390 2-250-2-252 34-54-34-56 3-21 18-19 3-22 18-22 3-23 18-21 3-24 18-20 4-1 6-2 4-33, 4-34 6-169, 6-170 4-35 6-172 4-37-4-39 6-206-6-208 4-41 6-209 4-43, 4-44 6-211, 6-212 4-45, 4-46 6-215, 6-216 4-47 6-173 4-48 6-213 4-50 6-218 4-52 6-174 4-53 6-219 4-54 6-175 4-55 6-214 4-56 6-171 4-69 6-1 4-70 6-5 4-71 6-8 4-72 6-102 4-73 6-39 4-75 6-150 4-76 6-6 4-77 6-9 4-78 6-4 4-79 6-10 4-80 6-7 4-88-4-91 6-67-6-70 4-92, 4-93 6-78, 6-79 4-107 6-72 4-108 6-103 4-109 6-75 4-110 6-73 4-111 6-71 4-112, 4-113 6-76, 6-77 4-114 6-74 4-122-4-131 6-135-6-144 4-133-4-137 6-145-6-149 5-1 14-1, 14-2 5-2, 5-3 14-3, 14-4 5-5 14-5 5-8, 5-9 14-6, 14-7 5-20-5-22 14-33-14-35 5-35-5-37 14-59-14-61 5-46 14-81 5-47-5-49 14-83-14-85 5-50 14-82 6-1 22-2 6-16 22-96 6-17 22-1 6-29-6-31 22-121- 
22-123 6-39 22-145 6-40-6-43 22-148- 
22-151 6-44, 6-45 22-146, 
22-147 6-46-6-48 22-152- 
22-154 6-56 22-177 6-57-6-59 22-197- 
22-199 6-60-6-62 22-222- 
22-224 6-63-6-66 22-226- 
22-229 6-68 22-225 6-69, 6-70 22-178, 
22-179 6-78-6-86 22-252- 
22-260 6-98-6-100 22-74-22-76 6-112 22-284 6-120-6-122 22-302- 
22-304 6-123-6-130 22-306- 
22-313 6-131 22-305 6-132, 6-133 22-314, 
22-315 6-141-6-143 22-359- 
22-361 6-144-6-147 22-363- 
22-366 6-149 22-362 6-150, 6-151 22-334, 
22-335 6-163 22-391 6-175-6-178 22-411- 
22-414 6-186 22-442 6-187-6-189 22-445- 
22-447 6-190, 6-191 22-443, 
22-444 6-192, 6-193 22-448, 
22-449 6-201 22-467 6-202-6-204 22-492- 
22-494 6-205-6-208 22-496- 
22-499 6-209 22-495 6-210, 6-211 22-468, 
22-469 6-223 22-522 6-224 22-526 6-225, 6-226 22-524, 
22-525 6-227, 6-228 22-527, 
22-528 6-229 22-523 6-230 10-19 6-301, 6-302 22-551, 
22-552 6-303 22-555 6-310 22-550 6-311 22-558 6-312, 6-313 22-553, 
22-554 6-314, 6-315 22-556, 
22-557 6-320 22-581 6-321 22-580 6-321.1 22-582 6-322-6-326 22-585- 
22-589 6-327 22-584 6-328, 6-329 22-590, 
22-591 6-330 22-583 6-340-6-343 22-617- 
22-620 6-344 22-616 7-31 34-19 7-32-7-36 34-21-34-25 7-37 34-20 8-1-8-4 42-80-42-83 8-16-8-18 42-19-42-21 8-31-8-38 42-46-42-53 8-41-8-45 98-300- 
98-304 8-55-8-57 42-145- 
42-147 8-58 42-144 11-1, 11-2 94-1, 94-2 11-13-11-15 94-27-94-29 11-16, 11-17 94-47, 94-48 11-36, 11-37 10-42, 10-43 11-46 10-75 11-54 10-94 11-81 26-19 11-82, 11-83 26-21, 26-22 11-84 26-20 11-85 94-70 11-86 94-72 11-87-11-92 94-74-94-79 11-93 94-71 11-94, 11-95 94-80, 94-81 11-95.1 94-73 11-156 26-48 11-157- 
11-159 26-82-26-84 11-160 26-50 11-161, 11-162 26-88, 26-89 11-163- 
11-165 26-51-26-53 11-166 26-85 11-167 26-54 11-168, 11-169 26-86, 26-87 12-1 38-19 12-2-12-4 38-22-38-24 12-6 38-25 12-7-12-12 38-27-38-32 12-13-12-17 38-59-38-63 12-18-12-20 38-33-38-35 12-21 38-26 12-22 38-21 12-23 38-20 13-1 58-1 13-3, 13-4 58-2, 58-3 13-16, 13-17 58-25, 58-26 13-18 58-29 13-19, 13-20 58-27, 58-28 13-31-13-36 58-47-58-52 13-44-13-48 58-78-58-82 13-58-13-61 58-109- 
58-112 13-66(g) 58-108 14-1-14-5 98-1-98-5 14-6 98-84 14-7 98-6 14-8 98-85 14-9 98-7 14-10, 14-11 98-35, 98-36 14-36-14-44 98-468- 
98-476 14-44.1 98-477 14-45, 14-46 98-478, 
98-479 14-61-14-65 98-120- 
98-124 14-81-14-84 98-147- 
98-150 14-101- 
14-109 98-63-98-71 14-110 98-73 14-111 98-72 14-112- 
14-118 98-151- 
98-157 14-120- 
14-128 98-75-98-83 14-141- 
14-146 98-369- 
98-374 14-181 98-184 14-184- 
14-187 98-185- 
98-188 14-201- 
14-204 98-392- 
98-395 14-205- 
14-207 98-396 14-208, 
14-209 98-397, 
98-398 14-210 98-396 14-211, 
14-212 98-399, 
98-400 14-214- 
14-222 98-401- 
98-409 14-251- 
14-260 98-327- 
98-336 14-262- 
14-265 98-337- 
98-340 14-281- 
14-285 98-215- 
98-219 14-285.1 98-220 14-286- 
14-292 98-221- 
98-227 14-293 98-227 14-294 98-229 14-297 98-233 14-341- 
14-347 98-262- 
98-268 14-361- 
14-369 98-434- 
98-442 14-386 98-530 14-387- 
14-389 98-532- 
98-534 14-390 98-596 14-391- 
14-393 98-562- 
98-564 14-395 98-565 14-397- 
14-400 98-597- 
98-600 14-400.1 98-566 14-400.2 98-531 14-401 98-8 14-402- 
14-404 98-86-98-88 14-421- 
14-428 98-37-98-44 14-432 98-620 14-433 98-619 14-434- 
14-438 98-622- 
98-626 14-439 98-621 16-1-16-4 62-72-62-75 16-5-16-7 62-23-62-25 16-10 62-22 16-14 62-26 16-16 62-47 16-19, 16-20 62-48, 62-49 16-24 62-189 16-26(b) 62-21 16-27 62-27 16-29 62-28 16-30 62-20 16-41 34-86 16-44-16-46 34-87-34-89 16-48 34-90 16-50, 16-51 34-91, 34-92 16-60, 16-61 62-125, 
62-126 16-62 62-128 16-63 106-49- 
106-54 16-66 62-127 17-1-17-4 46-19-46-22 17-7, 17-8 46-23, 46-24 18-2-18-6 66-73-66-77 18-7-18-20 66-98-66-111 18-40, 18-41 66-154, 
66-155 18-42 66-158 18-43, 18-44 66-156, 
66-157 18-45, 18-46 66-159, 
66-160 18-58 66-189 18-60 66-190 18-62, 18-63 66-191, 
66-192 19-16-19-21 74-19-74-24 20-1, 20-2 50-19, 50-20 20-4-20-9 50-21-50-26 20-11 50-27 20-21, 20-22 50-58, 50-59 20-24-20-28 50-60-50-64 20-29 50-66 21-1-21-4 54-1-54-4 21-16-21-24 54-27-54-35 21-40-21-47 54-59-54-66 22-9 62-19 23-1 82-1 23-2 82-3 23-5 82-4 23-6 82-2 23-18, 23-19 82-27, 82-28 24-1-24-3 90-47-90-49 24-5 90-50 24-7, 24-8 90-1, 90-2 24-11 90-3 24-13 90-4 24-14, 24-15 90-27, 90-28 24-16, 24-17 90-28, 90-29 24-18(a)-24-18(d) 90-248- 
90-251 24-18(e), 
24-18(f) 90-223, 
90-224 24-18(g) 90-226 24-18(i) 90-252 24-18(j) 90-225 24-29-24-38 22-644- 
22-653 24-50-24-53 90-375- 
90-378 24-65-24-68 90-162- 
90-165 24-69, 24-70 90-160, 
90-161 24-71 90-159 24-82 90-284 24-83 90-283 24-84-24-88 90-285- 
90-289 24-100, 
24-101 90-312, 
90-313 24-102- 
24-104 90-315- 
90-317 24-105 90-314 24-106- 
24-108 90-318- 
90-320 24-121 90-400 24-122, 
24-123 90-403, 
90-404 24-124 90-402 24-125 90-401 24-134- 
24-140 90-422- 
90-428 24-141 90-431 24-142, 
24-143 90-429, 
90-430 26-16-26-20 102-19- 
102-23 26-21 102-25 26-41-26-46 102-55- 
102-60 26-46.1 102-61 26-47-26-54 102-62- 
102-69 26-61 102-144 26-62 102-143 26-63 102-142 26-64-26-68 102-145- 
102-149 26-69 102-167 26-72-26-80 102-221- 
102-229 26-81-26-84 102-252- 
102-255 26-85-26-88 102-274- 
102-277 26-89 102-305 26-90-26-92 102-309- 
102-311 26-93-26-95 102-306- 
102-308 26-96 102-312 26-97-26-100 102-316- 
102-319 26-101 102-313 26-102 102-320 26-103 102-315 26-104 102-314 26-105, 
26-106 102-321, 
102-322 26-107- 
26-114 102-348- 
102-355 26-114.5 102-356 26-115- 
26-118 102-357- 
102-360 26-119- 
26-121 102-379- 
102-381 26-141, 
26-142 102-190, 
102-191 26-143- 
26-147 102-406- 
102-410 111-134 70-1 app. A, art. I, § 1- 
app. A, art. I, § 4 114-2-114-5 app. A, art. I, § 6- 
app. A, art. I, § 8 114-6-114-8 app. A, art. I, § 9 114-1 app. A, art. II, § 1 114-35 app. A, art. II, § 1(A), (B) 114-36 app. A, art. II, § 1(C) 114-37 app. A, art. II, § 2 114-38 app. A, art. II, § 3(A), 
app. A, art. II, § 3(B) 114-65, 
114-66 app. A, art. II, § 3(C) 114-68 app. A, art. II, § 3(D) 114-67 app. A, art. II, § 3(E)- 
app. A, art. II, § 3(G) 114-69- 
114-71 app. A, art. III, § 1 114-129 app. A, art. III, § 2- 
app. A, art. III, § 13 114-131- 
114-142 app. A, art. IV, § 1- 
app. A, art. IV, § 9 114-172- 
114-180 app. A, art. IV, § 9 114-181- 
114-200 app. A, art. V, § 1- 
app. A, art. V, § 7 114-224- 
114-230 app. A, art. VI, § 1- 
app. A, art. VI, § 6 114-238- 
114-243 app. A, art. VIII, § 1- 
app. A, art. VIII, § 10 114-298- 
114-307 app. A, art. IX, § 1- 
app. A, art. IX, § 9 114-316- 
114-324 app. A, art. X, § 1- 
app. A, art. X, § 9 114-352- 
114-360 app. A, art. XI, § 1- 
app. A, art. XI, § 6 114-379- 
114-384 app. A, art. XI, § 7(A)-(F) 114-385 app. A, art. XI, § 7(G) 114-567 app. A, art. XI, § 7(H)-(J) 114-385 app. A, art. XI, § 8 114-386 app. A, art. XII, § 1- 
app. A, art. XII, § 7 114-101- 
114-107 app. A, art. XIII, § 1 114-525 app. A, art. XIII, § 2- 
app. A, art. XIII, § 9 114-527- 
114-534 app. A, art. XIII, § 10 114-526 app. A, art. XIV, § 1- 
app. A, art. XIV, § 5 114-562- 
114-566 app. A, art. XV, § 1 114-599 app. A, art. XV, § 2 114-598 app. A, art. XV, § 3- 
app. A, art. XV, § 5 114-600- 
114-602 app. A, art. XVII, § 1 114-38  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1998 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented through August 7, 2007, that are included herein. Sections of the 1998 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1998 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-4, 1-5 1-3, 1-4 1-6 1-17 1-7 1-5 1-8 1-12 1-9-1-11 1-14-1-16 1-12-1-14 1-6-1-8 2-1 2-298 2-2 2-1 2-3, 2-4 2-631, 2-632 2-5 2-92 2-6 2-330 2-31-2-35 2-21-2-25 2-61-2-63 2-54-2-56 2-91-2-96 2-86-2-91 2-97 2-655 2-98 2-653 2-99-2-105 2-656-2-662 2-106 2-654 2-126 2-113 2-127 2-591-2-605 2-128 2-114 2-129 2-606 2-156-2-158 2-144-2-146 2-186-2-188 2-176-2-178 2-216-2-218 2-210-2-212 2-276, 2-277 2-233, 2-234 2-346-2-351 2-349-2-354 2-381-2-389 2-382-2-390 2-396-2-400 2-409-2-413 2-431-2-434 2-474-2-477 2-435 2-545 2-461-2-463 2-569-2-571 2-491-2-498 2-510-2-517 2-571-2-576 2-262-2-267 6-1, 6-2 6-2, 6-3 6-31 6-1 6-32-6-36 6-4-6-8 6-37 6-102 6-38 6-39 6-39 6-150 6-40, 6-41 6-9, 6-10 6-71-6-74 6-67-6-70 6-75, 6-76 6-78, 6-79 6-101 6-72 6-102 6-74 6-103 6-103 6-104 6-75 6-105 6-73 6-106 6-71 6-107, 6-108 6-76, 6-77 6-136-6-150 6-135-6-149 6-181-6-188 6-169-6-176 6-216-6-229 6-206-6-219 10-26 10-19 10-56, 10-57 10-42, 10-43 10-86 10-75 10-116 10-94 14-1-14-4 14-1-14-4 14-6 14-5 14-9, 14-10 14-6, 14-7 14-36-14-38 14-33-14-35 14-66-14-68 14-59-14-61 14-96-14-100 14-81-14-85 18-26 18-19 18-28-18-30 18-20-18-22 22-1 22-2 22-51-22-53 22-48-22-50 22-81-22-83 22-74-22-76 22-111 22-96 22-112 22-1 22-141- 
22-143 22-121- 
22-123 22-171- 
22-180 22-145- 
22-154 22-206- 
22-208 22-177- 
22-179 22-236- 
22-238 22-197- 
22-199 22-266- 
22-273 22-222- 
22-229 22-301- 
22-309 22-252- 
22-260 22-336 22-284 22-366- 
22-379 22-302- 
22-315 22-406, 
22-407 22-334, 
22-335 22-436- 
22-443 22-359- 
22-366 22-471 22-391 22-501- 
22-504 22-411- 
22-414 22-531- 
22-538 22-442- 
22-449 22-566- 
22-568 22-467- 
22-469 22-596- 
22-603 22-492- 
22-499 22-631- 
22-637 22-522- 
22-528 22-666, 
22-667 22-551, 
22-552 22-668 22-555 22-696 22-550 22-697, 
22-698 22-553, 
22-554 22-699- 
22-701 22-556- 
22-558 22-731- 
22-742 22-580- 
22-591 22-771- 
22-775 22-616- 
22-620 22-801- 
22-810 22-644- 
22-653 26-26-26-29 26-19-26-22 26-56 26-48 26-57-26-61 26-50-26-54 26-91-26-98 26-82-26-89 26-121- 
26-129 26-107- 
26-115 30-1-30-7 34-19-34-25 34-26-34-29 30-19-30-22 34-31-34-38 30-23-30-30 34-61-34-63 30-49-30-51 38-26-38-28 34-54-34-56 38-56-38-62 34-86-34-92 42-26-42-42 38-19-38-35 42-71-42-75 38-59-38-63 46-1-46-4 42-80-42-83 46-31-46-33 42-19-42-21 46-61-46-68 42-46-42-53 46-96-46-99 42-144- 
42-147 50-26-50-29 46-19-46-22 50-32, 50-33 46-23, 46-24 54-26-54-34 50-19-50-27 54-61-54-69 50-58-50-66 54-96-54-100 50-91-50-95 54-126- 
54-128 50-119- 
50-121 58-1-58-4 54-1-54-4 58-31-58-39 54-27-54-35 58-66-58-73 54-59-54-66 62-1-62-3 58-1-58-3 62-31-62-35 58-25-58-29 62-61-62-66 58-47-58-52 62-91-62-95 58-78-58-82 62-121- 
62-125 58-108- 
58-112 66-1-66-4 62-72-62-75 66-5 62-19 66-6-66-8 62-23-62-25 66-10 62-22 66-13 62-26 66-15 62-47 66-17, 66-18 62-48, 62-49 66-21 62-189 66-23 62-21 66-24, 66-25 62-27, 62-28 66-26 62-20 66-27 62-29 66-56-66-59 62-125- 
62-128 66-61(a), 
66-61(b) 106-50, 
106-51 66-61(c), 
66-61(d) 106-53, 
106-54 66-61(e) 106-52 66-61(f) 106-49 66-70-66-75 62-155- 
62-160 70-26 66-19 70-51 66-42 70-76-70-80 66-73-66-77 70-106- 
70-119 66-98-66-111 70-171- 
70-177 66-154- 
66-160 70-206- 
70-209 66-189- 
66-192 74-1 70-1 74-26 70-23 74-27 70-21 74-28-74-36 70-24-70-32 74-37 70-22 78-26-78-31 74-19-74-24 82-26-82-31 78-19-78-24 86-1-86-4 82-1-82-4 86-31, 86-32 82-27, 82-28 90-1 86-1 90-2 86-5 90-3 86-2 90-4-90-6 86-39-86-41 90-7 86-33 90-8, 90-9 86-3, 86-4 90-36 86-30 90-37 86-34 90-38 86-29 90-39-90-41 86-35-86-37 90-42, 90-43 86-31, 86-32 90-44 86-38 90-71 86-71 90-72 86-97 90-73-90-76 86-72-86-75 90-101- 
90-103 86-94-86-96 90-104- 
90-108 86-98-86-102 94-1-94-4 90-47-90-50 94-6-94-8 90-1-90-3 94-10 90-4 94-11-94-13 90-27-90-29 94-66-94-69 90-375- 
90-378 94-96-94-99 90-223- 
90-226 94-126- 
94-130 90-248- 
90-252 94-156- 
94-162 90-159- 
90-165 94-191- 
94-197 90-283- 
90-289 94-226- 
94-234 90-312- 
90-320 94-261 90-400 94-262 90-402 94-263 90-401 94-264, 
94-265 90-403, 
90-404 94-291- 
94-300 90-422- 
90-431 94-401 106-21 94-402 106-19 94-403- 
94-411 106-22- 
106-30 94-412 106-20 98-1-98-4 94-1-94-4 98-31-98-33 94-27-94-29 98-61, 98-62 94-47, 94-48 98-91-98-102 94-70-94-81 102-1-102-5 98-1-98-5 102-6 98-84 102-7 98-6 102-8 98-85 102-9 98-7 102-10, 
102-11 98-35, 98-36 102-12 98-8 102-13- 
102-15 98-86-98-88 102-46- 
102-53 98-37-98-44 102-81- 
102-89 98-63-98-71 102-90 98-73 102-91 98-72 102-92- 
102-98 98-151- 
98-157 102-100- 
102-108 98-75-98-83 102-136- 
102-140 98-120- 
98-124 102-166- 
102-169 98-147- 
98-150 102-198 98-62 98-74 102-226 98-184 102-228- 
102-231 98-185- 
98-188 102-261- 
102-273 98-215- 
98-227 102-274 98-227 102-275, 
102-276 98-229, 
98-230 102-276.5 98-231 102-277- 
102-279 98-232- 
98-234 102-306- 
102-312 98-262- 
98-268 102-341- 
102-345 98-300- 
98-304 102-376- 
102-385 98-327- 
98-336 102-387- 
102-390 98-337- 
98-340 102-421- 
102-426 98-369- 
98-374 102-456- 
102-474 98-392- 
98-410 102-501- 
102-509 98-434- 
98-442 102-541- 
102-552 98-468- 
98-479 102-553(a) 98-497 102-553(b) 98-499 102-553(c)(1)- 
102-553(c)(4) 98-500- 
98-503 102-553(d) 98-498 102-581 98-530 102-582- 
102-584 98-532- 
98-534 102-585 98-596 102-586- 
102-588 98-562- 
98-564 102-590 98-565 102-592- 
102-595 98-597- 
98-600 102-596 98-566 102-597 98-531 102-631 98-619 102-633- 
102-640 98-620- 
98-627 106-26- 
106-32 102-19- 
102-25 106-61 102-98 106-62 102-100 106-64 102-99 106-65- 
106-78 102-101- 
102-114 106-105- 
106-120 102-54- 
102-69 106-151- 
106-158 102-142- 
102-149 106-186 102-167 106-209, 
106-210 102-190, 
102-191 106-236- 
106-244 102-221- 
102-229 106-271- 
106-274 102-252- 
102-255 106-301- 
106-305 102-274- 
102-278 106-331- 
106-348 102-305- 
102-322 106-376- 
106-388 102-348- 
102-360 106-416- 
106-418 102-379- 
102-381 106-446- 
106-450 102-406- 
102-410 110-1 110-1 114-1-114-8 114-1-114-8 114-36- 
114-39 114-35- 
114-38 114-66- 
114-72 114-65- 
114-71 114-101- 
114-108 114-101- 
114-108 114-136 114-129 114-137- 
114-150 114-131- 
114-144 114-181- 
114-209 114-172- 
114-200 114-246- 
114-253 114-224- 
114-231 114-281- 
114-286 114-238- 
114-243 114-316- 
114-319 114-252- 
114-255 114-320 114-251 114-326- 
114-333 114-257- 
114-264 114-341- 
114-343 114-271- 
114-273 114-350.1- 
114-350.8 114-283- 
114-290 114-350.16, 
114-350.17 114-274 114-350.26 114-256 114-351- 
114-360 114-298- 
114-307 114-391- 
114-399 114-316- 
114-324 114-426- 
114-434 114-352- 
114-360 114-461- 
114-468 114-379- 
114-386 114-501- 
114-511 114-416- 
114-426 114-520- 
114-526 114-451- 
114-457 114-541, 
114-542 114-484, 
114-485 114-543 114-483 114-544- 
114-551 114-486- 
114-493 114-561- 
114-571 114-525- 
114-535 114-601- 
114-606 114-562- 
114-567 114-646- 
114-650 114-598- 
114-602  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances that are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 3998  2- 7-1995 I 2-354 4012  3- 7-1995 II(9-1) 86-1 II(9-2) 86-5 II(9-3)-II(9-5) 86-39-86-41 II(9-6) 86-38 II(9-7) 86-2 II(9-8) 86-33 II(9-11) 86-34 II(9-12) 86-29 II(9-13)-II(9-15) 86-35-86-37 II(9-16), II(9-17) 86-31, 86-32 II(9-20) 86-94 II(9-21) 86-102 II(9-22) 86-95 II(9-23) 86-98 II(9-24) 86-96 II(9-25) 86-99 II(9-26) 86-74 II(9-27) 86-97 II(9-28) 86-75 II(9-29) 86-100 II(9-30), II(9-31) 86-72, 86-73 II(9-32) 86-71 II(9-33) 86-101 III, IV 2-263, 2-264 4014  3- 7-1995 II(4-1), II(4-2) 6-2, 6-3 4018  3-21-1995 I 114-1 II(art. III, § 14) 114-143 IV(9)-IV(28) 114-180-114-199 IV(29) 114-179 IV(30) 114-200 V 114-353 4021  3-21-1995 I 2-477 4031  4-18-1995 1 114-564 4037  5- 2-1995 I 42-48 4059  6-20-1995 I 2-591-2-605 II 2-510 4062  6-20-1995 I, II 6-207 4077  7- 5-1995 I, II 114-385 4080  7- 5-1995 II, III 102-409, 102-410 4081  7-18-1995 II(2-155) 30-25 4083  7-18-1995 I 114-1 II 114-131 4099  8- 1-1995 I 1-14 III 22-523 IV 38-20 V 98-220 VI 98-37 VII 50-64 VIII 114-38 4122 10- 3-1995 I 110-1 4185  3- 5-1996 I(11-3), I(11-4) 94-3, 94-4 96-097  3-19-1996(Res.) 94-72 4199  5- 7-1996 I-V 114-319-114-323 VI(art. IX, § 9) 114-324 VII, VIII 114-105, 114-106 4223  6- 4-1996 I 90-50 II 98-84 4224  6- 4-1996 II(16-80) 78-19 II(16-81) 78-21 II(16-82) 78-19, 78-20 II(16-83)-II(16-85) 78-22-78-24 4258  7-16-1996 I, II 6-208 III(4-40) 6-217 IV(4-41) 6-209 V(4-42) 6-210 VI 6-213 4276  9- 3-1996 I 114-181 114-186-114-188 114-191-114-195 114-197-114-200 114-225 114-353 I(art. I) 114-1 I(art. III, § 14) 114-144 4369 10- 3-1996 1(i) 26-115 1(f), 1(g) 26-112, 26-113 4289 10-15-1996 I 102-359 4295 11- 5-1996 II 22-96 4296 11- 5-1996 I(26-15) 102-24 III(26-22) 102-98 III(26-23), III(26-24) 102-101, 102-102 III(26-25) 102-100 III(26-26)-III(26-37) 102-103-102-114 III(26-39) 102-99 4302 11-19-1996 I(20-40) 50-119 I(20-41) 50-121 I(20-42) 50-120 4303 11-19-1996 I 42-48 4312 12- 3-1996 II(20-21)-II(20-29) 50-58-50-66 III(20-40)-III(20-44) 50-91-50-95 4318 12-17-1996 I 114-3 4319 12-17-1996 I 114-531 4337  2- 4-1997 1 6-216 4338  2- 4-1997 1 6-176 4339  2- 4-1997 1 62-155-62-160 4347  2-18-1997 1 2-477 4369  5- 6-1997 1(a)-1(d) 26-107-26-110 1(h) 26-114  5- 7-1997 1(e) 26-111 4422  9- 2-1997 1 114-191 4441 10- 7-1997 1 22-96 2 22-121 3 22-284 4 22-391 5 22-411 7 22-522 4454 11- 4-1997 1 114-192 4456 11-18-1997 1 114-1 4457 11-18-1997 1 6-213 4470 12-16-1997 1 114-533 4497  4- 7-1998 1 114-1 4498  4- 7-1998 1 114-176 2 114-195 3 114-224-114-231 4501  4- 7-1998 1 62-72 4508  4-21-1998 1 6-174 4512  4-21-1998 1, 2 98-227 4517  5- 5-1998 1 114-1 4518  5- 5-1998 1 114-1 4519  5- 5-1998 1 114-108 4520  5- 5-1998 1 114-532 4573  9- 1-1998 I 102-278 II 102-356 IV 102-357 4598 10-20-1998 II 98-408 4602 11- 3-1998 I 62-20 4607 11-17-1998 I 106-49-106-54 4618 12-15-1998 I 102-59 4619 12-15-1998 I 102-54 4620 12-15-1998 I 86-3, 86-4 4629  2- 2-1999 1 114-195 4714 11-16-1999 I 114-530 II 114-533, 114-534 III 114-533 IV 114-385 4736  2-15-2000 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 4775  6- 6-2000 I 66-73 4825 10-17-2000 I 2-477 4945  8- 7-2001 I 2-25 4946  8- 7-2001 I 2-570 4953  8-21-2001 I 62-73 4959 10- 2-2001 I 114-600 5039  8- 6-2002 I 98-234 5050 10- 1-2002 I, II 114-195 5057 10-15-2002 I, II 98-35 III 98-227 V-VII 98-230-98-232 VIII 98-234 5065 11- 5-2002 I, II 114-533 III 114-385 IV 114-535 5075 12- 3-2002 I 98-530 5083  2- 4-2003 I 114-133 III-V 114-182-114-184 VI, VII 114-186, 114-187 VIII 114-563 IX-XI 114-564 5087  2- 4-2003 II 70-21-70-32 5097  4- 1-2003 I 114-195 II 114-535 5128  7- 1-2003 I 2-591-2-605 5171  1-20-2004 II(94-401) 106-21 II(94-402) 106-19 II(94-403)- 
II(94-411) 106-22-106-30 II(94-412) 106-20 5219  8-17-2004 I-IV 2-606 5265 12- 7-2004 I 34-55 5272  1-18-2005 I 62-29 98-627 5291  4- 5-2005 I, II 30-29, 30-30 5298  5-17-2005 I(114-700)- 
I(114-722) 114-650-114-672 5318  6-21-2005 I 86-29 5343 10- 4-2005 I 106-49-106-54 5372  1-17-2006 I 2-477 5383  3- 7-2006 I-III 2-92 5392  4-18-2006 I 86-30 5399  5- 2-2006 I-III 2-409-2-411 IV, V 2-411, 2-412 VI, VII 2-412, 2-413 5400  5- 2-2006 I 2-330 5401  5- 2-2006 I, II 6-2, 6-3 III, IV 6-170, 6-171 V 6-213 5404  5-16-2006 I 98-410 II 98-497-98-503 5414  6-20-2006 I(A)-I(D) 114-252-114-255 II 114-251 III(A)-III(H) 114-257-114-264 IV(A)-IV(C) 114-271-114-273 V(A)-V(H) 114-283-114-290 VI(A), VI(B) 114-274 VII(A) 114-256 5434  8- 1-2006 I 86-1 II 86-4 III 86-30 IV 86-29 V 86-32 5435  8- 1-2006 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 V 22-391 VI 22-411 5464 11- 7-2006 I 114-416-114-426 5493  1-16-2007 I 30-29 5497  2- 6-2007 I 114-528 II 114-533 5501  2- 6-2007 I 114-451-114-457 5523  4-17-2007 I 30-28 5526  4-17-2007 I, II 1-15 5527  4-17-2007 I 98-497-98-503 II 98-497-98-503 5528  4-17-2007 I 98-470 5554  6-19-2007 I 114-483-114-493 5558  6-19-2007 I 2-653-2-662 5567  6-19-2007 I 2-632 II 2-178 5572  7- 3-2007 I 94-72 5583  8- 7-2007 I 2-591-2-605 5584  8- 7-2007 I 2-606 5596  9- 4-2007 I, II 114-652, 114-653 III 114-655 5610 10-16-2007 1(2-616) 2-544 5613 11- 6-2007 I 114-1 II 114-195 5616 11- 6-2007 I 114-1 II 114-535 5656  2-19-2008 I 2-569 II 2-571 5663  3- 4-2008 I(42-75), I(42-76) 38-85, 38-86 I(42-77) 38-374 I(42-78)-I(42-80) 38-118-38-120 I(42-81)-I(42-86) 38-139-38-144 I(42-87) 38-172 I(42-88)-I(42-95) 38-198-38-205 I(42-96) 38-234 I(42-97), I(42-98) 38-262, 38-263 I(42-99) 38-290 I(42-100)-I(42-104) 38-314-38-318 I(42-106) 38-87 I(42-107)-I(42-117) 38-340-38-350 5669  4- 1-2008 I 50-61 5684  5- 6-2008 I 2-412 5746  9-16-2008 I(110-2) 110-21 5747  9-16-2008 I 14-33 5810  2-17-2009 I(94-14(a)) 90-76, 90-77 I(94-14(b)), 
I(94-14(c)) 90-74, 90-75 I(94-14(d)) 90-98 I(94-14(e)(1))- 
I(94-14(e)(4)) 90-98-90-103 I(94-14(e)(4)), 
I(94-14(e)(5)) 90-131, 90-132 I(94-14(e)(6)) 90-103 I(94-14(e)(7)) 90-127, 90-128 I(94-14(e)(8)) 90-130 I(94-14(e)(9)) 90-128 I(94-14(e)(10)) 90-130 I(94-14(e)(11)) 90-104 I(94-14(e)(12)) 90-133 I(94-14(e)(13)) 90-135 I(94-14(e)(14)), 
I(94-14(e)(15)) 90-129, 90-130 I(94-14(e)(16)) 90-136 I(94-14(e)(17)) 90-77 I(94-14(e)(18)) 90-126 I(94-14(e)(19)) 90-134 I(94-14(e)(20)) 90-105, 90-106 90-129 II, III 6-2, 6-3 IV, V 6-213 5827  4- 7-2009 I 14-4 5856  7- 2-2009 I 2-477 5868  8- 4-2009 I, II 114-67 5949  4- 6-2010 I, II 102-142, 102-143 III(106-187)-III(106-208) 102-168-102-189 IV 102-190 V, VI 102-225, 102-226 VII 102-274 VIII 102-307 IX(106-341) 102-315 IX(106-376) 102-348 X, XI 102-350, 102-351 XII 102-354 XIII 102-356 XIV, XV 102-359, 102-360 5955  5- 4-2010 I 114-546 5992  8- 3-2010 I(art. I, § A)- 114-252-114-255 I(art. I, § D) I(art. II) 114-251 I(art. III, § A)- 114-257-114-264 I(art. III, § H) I(art. IV, § A)- 114-271-114-273 I(art. IV, § C) I(art. V, § A)- 114-283-114-290 I(art. V, § H) I(art. VI, § A, B) 114-274 I(art. VII, § A) 114-256 6001  9- 7-2010 I 114-1 II 114-199 6006  9-21-2010 I(94-501) 90-157 I(94-502) 90-156 I(94-503) 90-158 I(94-504)-I(94-512) 90-184-90-192 6008 10- 5-2010 I 114-564 6009 10- 5-2010 I 114-231 6024 10-26-2010 I(405)-I(410) 2-440-2-445 6080  5-17-2011 1 42-48 6092  6-21-2011 I 30-25 6101  8- 2-2011 I 114-191 6102  8- 2-2011 I(46-5(a)) 42-110 I(46-5(b))-I(46-5(e)) 42-112-42-115 I(46-5(f)) 42-111 6146 11- 1-2011 I 38-375-38-386 I(42-77) 38-374 6181  3- 6-2012 I 114-175 II, III 114-201 6186  3-20-2012 I(114-467) 114-385 6187  3-20-2012 I 114-1 6231  7-24-2012 I 58-110(e) II, III 86-1 6242  9- 4-2012 I 98-81 6245  9-18-2012 I 114-192 (tit.) 114-192 6248 10-16-2012 I Adopt. Ord. II 66-102 6268 11-20-2012 I 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-144, 38-172, 38-198-38-205, 38-234, 38-262, 38-263, 38-290, 38-314-38-318, 38-340-38-350 6305  5- 7-2013 I 114-533(13) 6306  5- 7-2013 I 114-1 6322  6-18-2013 I 30-29 6343  8-20-2013 I 98-231 6354 10-15-2013 I 114-1 II 114-103 III 114-131(4) 6360 11-19-2013 I       Added 114-536 6367 12- 3-2013 I 6-173(e) II       Added 6-213(d)       Rnbd 6-213(d)-(g)       as 6-213(e)-(h) 6373  1- 7-2014 I 98-215-98-234 II-IV       Added 98-235-98-237 V 98-264 6374  1- 7-2014 I       Added 2-479 6383  3- 4-2014 I-III 114-186-114-188 6385  4- 1-2014 I 114-533(9)a. 6386  4- 1-2014 I 114-133(2) 6387  4- 1-2014 I, II 114-1 III 114-298-114-307 6388  4- 1-2014 I 114-1 II 114-192(a)(9) III 114-194(a)(4) IV 114-195(a)(1) V 114-197(b)(3) VI 114-225 VII 114-353(5) VIII 114-380(4) IX 114-383(3) 6405  6-17-2014 I       Added 114-175(10) II       Added 114-202 6430  8-19-2014 I 22-96 II 22-121 III 22-284 IV 22-391 V 22-411 VI 22-522 VII 42-46 VIII       Rpld 42-48 6432  9- 2-2014 I 2-569 II 2-570 6440 10- 7-2014 I 30-29 6451 12- 2-2014 I 114-1 II       Added 114-568 III       Added 114-569 6456 12-16-2014 I 114-106(tit.) 114-106 II 114-305(tit.) 114-305 6463  1- 6-2015 I 6-169 II 6-173(e) III 6-207 IV 6-208 V 6-211 VI 6-213 6469  4- 7-2016 I 114-104(3) 6474  4- 7-2015 I 114-353 II       Rpld 114-355 6475  4-21-2016 I 114-194 II 114-533(7) III 114-535 IV       Dltd 114-563(3) 6526 10-20-2015 I 2-263 II 2-264 III 98-534 6533  1-19-2016 I 114-1 II 114-530(4) III       Added 114-537 6544  2-16-2016 I       Added 114-242(3)d. 6545  2-16-2016 I       Added 114-203 II       Added 114-533(15) 6547  2-16-2016 I 114-194 6559  4- 5-2016 I 22-96(e) 6569  6- 7-2016 I       Added 114-193(a)(6) 6586  6-21-2016 I       Added 62-212 6587  6-21-2016 I       Added 62-233 6589  7- 5-2016 I       Added 86-6 6602  9-20-2016 I 114-143 6604  9-20-2016 I 22-616(tit.) 22-616 22-617(tit.) 22-617 22-618-620 II 22-621 6632 12-20-2016 I       Rpld 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-144, 38-172, 38-198, 38-200-38-205, 38-234, 38-262, 38-263, 38-290, 38-314-38-318, 38-340-38-350 I       Added 38-85-38-87, 38-118-38-120, 38-139-38-145, 38-168-38-173, 38-199, 38-225 38-253, 38-254, 38-281, 38-305-38-309, 38-331-38-341 6648  2-21-2017 I 102-142 II 102-226 III 102-359  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Tennessee statutory law. 
T.C.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-102 1-2 1-3-104 1-2 1-3-104(a) 1-2 1-3-104(c) 1-2 1-3-105 1-2 1-3-105(12) 1-2 1-3-105(19)- 
1-3-105(21) 1-2 1-3-105(24), 
1-3-105(25) 1-2 1-3-105(27) 1-2 1-3-105(32) 1-2 1-3-106 1-2 2-3-101- 
2-3-108 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-3-201- 
2-3-205 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-5-208(j) Char. Art. II, § 4 2-8-117 Char. Art. II, § 4 2-10-101(a) 6-213 2-13-101 6-213 2-301-2-326 Char. Art. II, § 4 4-7-301 et seq. Ch. 38 4-21-101 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-401 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-501 et seq. Ch. 46 4-21-601 et seq. Ch. 46 5-19-101 et seq. Ch. 86 6-2-201(22) 62-189 6-4-301 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 6-19-101(22) 62-189 6-19-101(33) 62-189 6-21-703 42-20 6-33-101 62-189 6-51-101 et seq. Ch. 1 6-51-120 Ch. 66 6-53-102 Char. Art. II, § 3 6-54-101 et seq. Ch. 2 6-54-104 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IV 6-54-107, 6-54-108 Char. Art. XX, § 3 6-54-112 Ch. 2, Art. II 6-54-113 22-616 22-618 6-54-119 Ch. 22 6-54-120 Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 6-54-123 Ch. 2, Art. III 6-54-137 2-1 6-54-305 98-37 6-54-306 1-14 6-54-401 Ch. 30 6-54-402 Ch. 50 6-54-501 et seq. Ch. 1 42-46 6-54-502 Ch. 22 6-54-508, 6-54-509 1-1 6-54-509 Ch. 1 6-54-512 Ch. 1 2-54 6-54-513 2-479 6-55-102 Ch. 94 94-47 6-55-201 et seq. Ch. 94 94-2 6-56-101 2-474 7-31-101 et seq. Ch. 90 7-31-105 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-31-114 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-31-1206 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III 7-32-101 Ch. 66 Ch. 90, Art. V 7-32-101 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. III Ch. 90, Art. III, 
Div. 3 Char. Art. IA, § 1 7-33-101 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 2 Char. Art. IA, § 1 7-34-104 Ch. 102 Ch. 102, Art. III 7-34-114 Ch. 102 102-55 7-35-414 Ch. 102 102-55 7-51-1401 et seq. Ch. 10 7-62-103, 
7-62-104 Ch. 22 7-86-101 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 7-86-104 34-54 8-1-101 et seq. Ch. 2 8-17-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IX 8-17-102 2-653 2-655 8-17-103 Ch. 2, Art. IX 2-655 8-35-201 et seq. 34-56 8-38-101 2-90 8-47-101 et seq. Char. Art. III, § 15 8-50-107 Ch. 2, Art. III Char. Art. III, § 3 8-50-601- 
8-50-604 Char. Art. II, § 6 9-4-111 et seq. 2-477 9-4-704 Char. Art. XX, § 1 9-21-101 et seq. Char. Art. XIII 38-377 10-1-101 et seq. Ch. 54 10-3-101 et seq. Ch. 54 10-3-103 Ch. 54 54-28 10-7-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 10-7-503 2-631 10-7-503 et seq. 102-145 10-7-504 2-631 10-7-701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII Ch. 54 11-3-106 Ch. 66 11-24-101 et seq. Ch. 66 12-4-101 Char. Art. XX, § 3 R.L. Art. II, § 6 12-4-102 Char. Art. XX, § 3 R.L. Art. II, § 6 12-9-103 102-149 tit. 13 Ch. 74 13-3-101 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. II 13-3-101- 
13-3-105 74-24 13-3-201- 
13-3-203 74-24 13-3-301- 
13-3-303 74-24 13-3-310 114-106 114-305 13-3-401- 
13-3-411 74-24 13-3-413 114-106 114-305 13-4-101 74-19, 74-20 13-4-101- 
13-4-105 74-24 13-4-102 74-21, 74-22 13-4-301- 
13-4-309 74-24 13-7-101 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-105 114-7 13-7-106 et seq. 114-65 13-7-201 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-201- 
13-7-210 74-24 114-3 114-252 13-7-205 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. II, 
Div. 2 13-7-207 et seq. 114-67 13-7-301 et seq. Ch. 114 13-7-401 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. III, 
Div. 4 114-451 13-7-407(b) 114-651 13-10-101 et seq. Ch. 110 13-10-108 Ch. 110 13-21-101 22-550 13-21-101 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IX 22-581 13-21-102 Ch. 22, Art. IX 22-556 22-584 22-586 13-21-104 22-584 13-21-105 22-590 13-21-107 22-583 16-1-101 et seq. Ch. 30 16-3-101 Char. Art. II, § 4 16-18-101 Ch. 30 16-18-101 et seq. Ch. 30 16-18-301 et seq. Ch. 30 30-29, 30-30 26-1-101- 
26-3-117 30-27 27-8-101 102-189 27-8-101 et seq. 38-350 27-9-101 et seq. 86-101 29-3-101 62-125 29-3-101 et seq. Ch. 62 29-20-205 50-65 50-95 38-1-101 et seq. 50-59 38-3-101 62-23 38-8-101 50-58 38-8-101 et seq. Ch. 50 38-8-105 Ch. 50 38-9-103 62-189 39-6-1701 et seq. 62-72 39-11-101 et seq. Ch. 62 39-13-511 62-157 39-14-405 62-47 39-14-408 62-48 39-14-502 et seq. Ch. 86 39-16-301 50-64 39-16-602 Ch. 50 50-26 39-17-108 Ch. 90 39-17-302, 
39-17-303 62-23 39-17-305 62-25 39-17-307 Ch. 90 39-17-310 Ch. 6 98-337 39-17-401- 
39-17-432 46-21 39-17-502 62-22 39-17-708 6-8 39-17-1301 et seq. 62-75 39-17-1302 66-102 39-17-1307 62-72 39-17-1311 Ch. 66 66-102 39-17-1315 50-61 39-17-1351 66-102 40-1-101 et seq. Ch. 62 40-7-101 Ch. 50 50-24 40-7-108 Ch. 50 50-26 40-24-105 2-479 42-3-101 et seq. Ch. 18 42-3-119 Ch. 18 42-5-102 Ch. 18 42-8-101 et seq. Ch. 18 42-8-102 Ch. 18 43-6-101 et seq. Ch. 106 43-14-101 et seq. Ch. 38 43-21-101 et seq. Ch. 10 44-8-101 et seq. Ch. 14 44-8-401 et seq. Ch. 14 44-8-408 Ch. 14 14-33 44-8-410 Ch. 14 14-33 44-15-101 et seq. 114-202 44-17-101 et seq. Ch. 14 44-17-301 et seq. Ch. 14 14-85 44-17-304 14-83 45-6-201 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 45-6-219 Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 47-25-1601 et seq. Ch. 78 49-2-116 2-354 50-1-201 et seq. 62-27 50-3-101 et seq. 2-91 50-3-103 2-91 50-6-101 et seq. 50-58 51-51-101 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. VI 54-5-133 Ch. 106 54-10-110 62-49 54-20-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 54-20-113 Ch. 78 55-1-101 et seq. Ch. 98 98-530 55-1-102 et seq. 98-1 55-1-105 98-530 55-4-113 98-1 55-4-401 et seq. Ch. 58 55-4-402 58-1 55-4-413 Ch. 58 55-5-129 98-532 55-7-201 98-437, 
98-438 55-8-101- 
55-8-103 98-1-98-3 55-8-104 98-5 55-8-106, 
55-8-107 98-6, 98-7 55-8-108 98-85 55-8-109 98-35 98-470 55-8-109(b) 98-471 55-8-110 98-473 55-8-110 et seq. 98-35 55-8-110(a)(3) 98-500 55-8-111- 
55-8-113 98-474- 
98-476 55-8-114 98-478 55-8-115- 
55-8-125 98-63-98-73 55-8-128 98-151 55-8-130, 
55-8-131 98-152, 
98-153 55-8-133(a) 98-327 55-8-134, 
55-8-135 98-328, 
98-329 55-8-136 98-62 98-74 98-336 55-8-137- 
55-8-139 98-331- 
98-333 55-8-140 98-155 55-8-142 98-156, 
98-157 55-8-144 98-156 55-8-145 98-77 55-8-149 98-152 55-8-151 98-78 55-8-152 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. III, 
Div. 2 55-8-158 98-217, 
98-218 55-8-160 42-82 98-216 55-8-160(a)(15) 98-227 55-8-162, 
55-8-163 98-79, 98-80 55-8-164 Ch. 98, Art. VI 98-87 98-370 55-8-165 98-82 98-87 55-8-168, 
55-8-169 98-75, 98-76 55-8-170 98-8 55-8-180 98-338 55-8-182 98-371 55-8-183 98-86 55-8-189 98-87 55-8-193 62-29 Ch. 98, Art. X 55-8-198 30-25 98-497- 
98-500 55-9-201 98-400 55-9-201(c) 98-396 55-9-203, 
55-9-204 98-402, 
98-403 55-9-212 98-404 55-9-215 98-405 55-9-302 98-374 55-9-304 98-374 55-9-305 98-373 55-9-401 98-395 55-9-401(a) 98-393 55-9-402 98-396 55-9-405(d) 98-399 55-9-407 98-398 55-9-413 98-395 55-9-414 Ch. 50 55-9-602 98-408 55-9-603 98-406 55-9-603(h) 98-406 55-10-106 98-185 55-10-110 98-186 55-10-113, 
55-10-114 98-187, 
98-188 55-10-207(e) 30-29 55-10-307 et seq. Ch. 98 55-10-416(a)-(c) 6-2 55-21-101 et seq. 98-228 55-21-102 98-228 55-21-104 98-228 55-50-801, 
55-50-802 98-43 55-53-101 66-101 tit. 57 Char. Art. I, § 2 6-78 57-1-101 et seq. Ch. 6 57-3-101 6-1 57-3-101 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 6-67 57-3-102 6-39 57-3-106 Char. Art. I, § 2 6-69 57-3-201 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 57-3-208 6-1 57-3-210(i) 6-140 57-3-210(g), 
57-3-210(h) 6-141, 6-142 57-3-214 6-78 57-3-404(f) 6-139 57-3-405 6-145 57-3-406 6-137 6-149 57-3-501, 
57-3-502 6-72, 6-73 57-3-502 6-74, 6-75 57-4-101 et seq. 6-146 57-4-203 6-144 6-149, 6-150 57-4-203(f) 6-143 57-4-204 62-156- 
62-158 57-5-101 et seq. Ch. 6 57-5-101(c)Tc>6-208 Tc>6-213 57-5-101(c)(1)Tc>6-213 57-5-106 6-170 57-5-108 Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Art. III 57-5-301 6-174 6-218 58-1-601 Ch. 90 Ch. 90, Art. VIII 58-2-101 34-19 58-2-101 et seq. Ch. 34 58-2-110 Ch. 34 34-24 58-2-110(3)(A)(vi) 34-21 58-8-101 et seq. Ch. 34 62-6-101 et seq. Ch. 22 62-7-101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 62-9-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 70 Ch. 78 62-30-101 et seq. Ch. 70 62-32-101 et seq. Ch. 42 63-18-101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-49 63-18-102 26-48 65-15-101 et seq. Ch. 110 66-29-101 et seq. 2-545 67-1-101 et seq. Ch. 94 94-71 67-1-707 94-80 67-1-911 94-80 67-4-501 Ch. 26 Ch. 94 94-47 67-4-701 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. III 67-4-704 Ch. 94 94-47 67-4-710 Ch. 70 67-4-1401 94-70 67-4-1401 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. IV 67-4-1403 94-81 67-4-1404 94-76 67-4-1408, 
67-4-1409 94-78, 94-79 67-4-1701 et seq. Ch. 26 67-4-2201 et seq. Ch. 10 67-5-101 et seq. Ch. 94 67-5-2005 et seq. Ch. 94 94-2 67-6-101 et seq. Ch. 94 94-27 67-6-102(8) 94-27 67-6-102(12) 94-27 67-6-207 38-382 67-6-212 Ch. 10 67-6-213 Ch. 70 67-6-516 94-27 67-6-701 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. II 94-27 67-6-702 94-27, 94-28 68-8-102 Ch. 14 14-59 68-8-104 Ch. 14 14-59 68-14-101 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 68-14-305 Ch. 26 68-101-101 et seq. Ch. 38 68-102-101 et seq. Ch. 42 68-102-117 Ch. 22, Art. IX 68-102-148 42-83 68-102-149 Ch. 42 62-72 68-102-151 Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 68-104-101 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 68-120-101 Ch. 22 68-120-101 et seq. Ch. 22 68-120-101(a)(8)(A) 22-96 68-120-101(a)(C)(i)(a) 22-96 68-120-111 Ch. 42, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 68-120-113 Ch. 22 68-121-116 et seq. Ch. 10 68-126-101 et seq. Ch. 58 68-126-201 et seq. Ch. 58 68-126-202 58-1 98-530 68-126-202(4) 58-1 114-1 68-126-202(6), 
68-126-202(7) 114-1 68-126-401 et seq. Ch. 58 68-201-101 et seq. Ch. 38 68-211-101 et seq. Ch. 86 68-211-835 Ch. 86 68-211-851 et seq. Ch. 86 68-211-1002(8) 86-1 68-212-104 86-1 68-221-101 et seq. Ch. 102 102-101 68-221-701 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 102 68-221-711 Ch. 102 102-105 68-221-1101 et seq. Ch. 38 38-376 68-221-1105 38-86 68-221-1106 et seq. 38-119 68-221-1106(a) 38-335 68-221-1112 38-385 69-3-10(40)Tc>38-85 69-3-123 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 102 102-167 102-185 69-3-124 102-186, 
102-187 102-189 70-4-403(3)Tc>114-202  
