THE
LAWRENCEBURG
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
April 2004
Change 4
March 28, 2019
CITY OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Blake Lay
COUNCILMEMBERS
Ronald Fox
Chad Moore
Jaime Sevier
Robin Williams
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Chris Shaffer
ii
PREFACE
The Lawrenceburg Municipal Code contains the codification and revision
of the ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. By referring to the
historical citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine
the origin of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means
that the section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical
citation indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations included
as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code relating to any
question that might arise. However, the user should note that most of the
administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map Amendments, Tax
Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise, ordinances that have
been passed since the last update of the code do not appear here. Therefore, the
user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city recorder for a
comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 7 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
(3) That the city agrees to reimburse MTAS for the actual costs of
reproducing replacement pages for the code (no charge is made for the
consultant's work, and reproduction costs are usually nominal).
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
iii
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of the codes team: Hannah Kraemer, Program
Resource Specialist; and Linda Winstead, Nancy Gibson, and Doug Brown,
Administrative Specialists, is gratefully acknowledged.
Steve Lobertini
Codification Consultant
iv
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER
Section N. Ordinance procedure. Every ordinance shall be
considered and passed on two (2) different days, at regular, special or recessed
meetings of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners. Passage shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership to which the Board is
entitled, excluding vacancies. Each ordinance shall relate to a subject which
shall be generally expressed in a caption and material or substantial
amendments may be made on final passage. Every ordinance shall be effective
upon final passage unless by its terms the effective date is deferred.
Every ordinance upon final passage shall be signed by the presiding
officer of the Board of Mayor and Commissioners, and shall be numbered, copied
in an ordinance book, and authenticated by the signature of the Recorder, and
filed and preserved in the City's records.
An emergency ordinance may be passed after being considered at one (1)
meeting. The ordinance shall contain the statement that an emergency exists
and shall specify the facts and reasons constituting such an emergency. The
unanimous vote of those present shall be required to pass an emergency
ordinance. No ordinance making a grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise or
other special privilege, or regulating the rate to be charged for its service by any
public utility shall ever be passed as an emergency ordinance. (Article IV,
Section N)
v
1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. BOARD OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL2
SECTION
1-101. Compensation.
1-102. Officers, employees, etc., who handle money shall be bonded.
1-103. Establishment of the time and place for regular meetings of the Board
of Mayor and Council.
1-101. Compensation. The annual salary of the Mayor and Council
members of the City of Lawrenceburg are fixed at the amounts shown below.
Mayor: $24,000.00 per year
Council members: $12,000.00 per year (Ord. #962, March 2003, as amended
by Ord. #1091, March 2012, and Ord. #1244, Sept. 2018
Ch4_03-28-19)
1-102. Officers, employees, etc., who handle money shall be
bonded. The city administrator and every officer, agent and employee having
duties embracing the receipt, disbursement, custody, or handling of money shall,
1Charter references
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, electrical and gas inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
2Charter references
Compensation: art. IV, § E.
Oath of office: art IV, § H.
Term of office: art. IV, § A.
Vacancy in office: art. IV, § J.
1-2
before entering upon his duties, execute a surety bond with some surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, as surety, in such
amount as shall be prescribed by ordinance or this charter. All such bonds and
sureties shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Mayor and Council, and
the Board of Mayor and Council may provide for blanket bonds. The cost of all
bonds shall be an expense of the city.1 (1999 Code, § 1-102, modified, and
amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
1-103. Establishment of the time and place for regular meetings
of the Board of Mayor and Council. The Board of Mayor and Council of the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee shall meet in regular session on the second
and fourth Thursday of each month at the Lawrenceburg Municipal Complex
Council Meeting Room, 25, Public Square, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, beginning
at 9:00 A.M. In the event any of the regular meeting days falls on a legal
holiday, the meeting shall be held on a date set by motion of the board of mayor
and council.2 (1999 Code, § 1-103, as amended by Ord. #963, May 2003,
Ord. #1029, Sept. 2007, Ord. #1039, July 2008, and Ord. #1091, March 2012,
and replaced by Ord. #1171, March 2016 Ch4_03-28-19, and Ord. #1257, Feb.
2019 Ch4_03-28-19)
1Charter reference
Official bonds: art. VIII, § E.
2Charter reference
Time and place of meetings: art. IV, § K.
2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. AIRPORT AND AERONAUTICS BOARD.
2. LAWRENCEBURG CROCKETT THEATER BOARD.
CHAPTER 1
AIRPORT AND AERONAUTICS BOARD
SECTION
2-101. Creation and establishment.
2-102. General powers.
2-103. Funds for the board's use.
2-104. Specific powers.
2-105. Agreement for operation of airport.
2-106. Airport is within police jurisdiction.
2-101. Creation and establishment. (1) Membership. There is
hereby created and established an airport and aeronautics board, which shall
consist of six (6) members, three (3) of which shall be appointed by the Board of
Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, and three (3) of
which shall be appointed by the County Commission of Lawrence County,
Tennessee, and whose term of office shall be for a period of three (3) years,
except the first board, whereon the term of one member shall expire in one (1)
year, another in two (2) years and another in three (3) years.
(2) Term. The term of each commissioner shall begin on the 1st day
of July and shall expire on the 30th day of June.
The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee
shall appoint a resident of Lawrenceburg or Lawrence County, Tennessee to
serve for a term of three (3) years, beginning on July 1 of that year, for the
member of said board whose term expires that year.
No board or committee member may serve more than twelve (12)
consecutive years in the same appointed board or committee position.
(3) Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy on said airport and
aeronautics board by reason of death, resignation, or removal from Lawrence
County, Tennessee, the Board of Mayor and Council who elected said member,
shall elect some person, a resident of either Lawrence County, Tennessee or the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, to fill the unexpired term of the member.
All members of said board shall serve until the expiration of their term
or a vacancy otherwise occurs and until the appointment and qualification of his
successor.
2-2
(4) Compensation. No member of said board shall receive
compensation, as such, except there may be allowed such amount as fixed by the
Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg and the County
Commission of Lawrence County, Tennessee, out of funds appropriated for or
received by said board out of the income from the operation of the airport, for
attending each meeting of the board.
Members of the board shall be eligible to be reimbursed for board
approved travel expenses.
(5) Organization. At the first meeting of the board, after their
appointment, the board shall organize and elect from their number a chairman
and a secretary, who shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of said
board. (1999 Code, § 2-101, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
2-102. General powers. The joint board herein established shall have
power and authority to plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge,
improve, maintain, equip, operate, regulate protect, and police the
Lawrenceburg Airport and/or air navigation easement to be or which has
previously been jointly acquired, controlled, and operated. Such board may
exercise on behalf of the City of Lawrence and Lawrence County, Tennessee all
the powers of each with respect to such airport, air navigation facilities, airport
hazard, or navigation easement, subject to the limitations contained in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-5-204.
Said joint board shall have full power and authority to adopt its rules of
procedure and shall act upon a majority vote of a quorum, and a majority of said
board present at a meeting shall constitute a quorum. (1999 Code, § 2-102)
2-103. Funds for the board's use. For the purpose of providing the
joint board with monies for necessary expenditures in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, a joint fund shall be created and maintained, into
which shall be deposited the share of each the City of Lawrenceburg and
Lawrence County, Tennessee, as provided by the joint agreement between them,
and which shall be provided from funds from sources available to each. Any
federal, state or other contributions or loans, and the revenues obtained from
the joint ownership, control, and operation of said airport or air navigation
facilities, under the jurisdiction of the board, shall be paid into the joint fund.
Disbursements from such fund shall be made by order of the board, subject,
subject to the limitations prescribed in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-5-204.
The board shall keep all funds coming into its hands in a separate bank
account and shall render a statement of its accounts and fund balances,
including a statement of all receipts and expenditures to the Board of Mayor and
Council of the City of Lawrenceburg and the County Commissioners of Lawrence
County, Tennessee, quarterly. Said board shall have its books, accounts, and
funds audited each year by a reputable certified public accountant, and a report
shall be filed with the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg
2-3
and the County Commission of Lawrence County, Tennessee. (1999 Code,
§ 2-103, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
2-104. Specific powers. There is hereby delegated to the board the
authority to enforce all state and federal regulations as relates to airports. Said
board shall have the authority to enter into agreements with the Tennessee
Aeronautics Commission, Federal Aviation Agency, and the United States
Government or the State of Tennessee, or any administrative body under either
of the aforesaid entities, for the purpose of planning, acquiring, establishing,
developing, construction, enlarging, improving, operating, regulating, protecting,
and policing the airport appurtenances and facilities related thereto owned by
the City of Lawrenceburg and Lawrence County, Tennessee, and in addition
thereto it shall have the following power and authority:
(1) Expenditures. The total expenditures to be made by the joint board
for any purpose in any fiscal year shall be determined by a budget approved by
the governing bodies of its constituent public agencies on or before the first day
of the fiscal year.
(2) Acquisitions beyond sums allotted. No airport, air navigation
facility, airport hazard, navigation easement, or real or personal property, the
cost of which is in the excess of sums therefore fixed by the joint agreement or
allotted in the annual budget, may be acquired by the joint board without the
approval of the governing bodies of its constituent public agencies.
(3) Eminent domain. Eminent domain proceedings under Tennessee
Code Annotated, §§ 42-5-201 and 42-5-205 may be instituted only by authority
of the governing bodies of the constituent public agencies, which authority may
be resolution or ordinance, provided that the joint board may, without such
consent, enter into the contract, lease or other arrangements contemplated by
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-5-110.
(4) Disposal of real property. The joint board shall not dispose of any
airport navigation facility, navigation easement, or real property under its
jurisdiction except with the consent of the governing bodies of its constituent
public agencies; provided that the joint board may, without such consent enter
into the contract, lease, or other arrangements contemplated by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 42-5-110.
(5) Police regulations. Any resolutions, rules, regulations, or orders
of the joint board dealing with subjects authorized by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 42-5-113 shall become effective only upon approval of the
governing bodies of the constituent public agencies provided that upon approval,
the resolutions, rules, regulations, or orders of the joint board shall have the
same force and effect in the territories or jurisdictions involved as the
ordinances, resolutions, rules of order, of each public agency would have in its
own territory or jurisdiction.
(6) To enter into contracts, leases, agreements, grants or other
arrangements for a term not exceeding ten (10) years, with any person or
2-4
persons, or corporation, either exclusive or in common with others, for the
operation and maintenance of the airport, as stated below, provided that the
public is not deprived of its lawful use thereof, and provided that the same shall
not be inconsistent with the project application with the Federal Aviation
Agency and the Grant Agreement with the Federal Aviation Agency thereof.
(a) Granting the privilege of using or improving such airport or
air navigation facilities, including buildings or structures, or any portion
of facility thereof, relating thereto, or real property acquired or set aside
for such purposes, or space therein for commercial purposes, establishing
the charges, rentals or fees at a fixed or variable rate binding upon the
parties thereto for the full term of such contracts, leases, agreements,
grants or other arrangements.
(b) Conferring the privileges of supplying goods, commodities,
things, services or facilities at such airport or air navigation facilities.
(c) Determining the charges, rentals or fees for the use of any
properties under its control and the charges for any services or any
property may be used, except that such charges, rentals and fees as may
be fixed or determined by any contract, lease agreement, grant or other
arrangement or privileges, uses, services, accommodations or concessions
to which the cities are a party, or are the grantors, shall, if expressly
provided therein, be binding upon all parties thereto for the full term
prescribed therein, unless the same is sooner nullified or terminated by
mutual consent of the parties thereto.
(d) To enforce the payment of any charges for repairs or
improvements to, or storage or care of, any personal property made or
furnished in connection with the operation of the airport or air navigation
facilities owned by the City of Lawrenceburg and Lawrence County,
Tennessee.
(e) The board shall not dispose of any airport property or
facilities except with the consent of the Board of Mayor and Council of the
City of Lawrenceburg and the County Commission of Lawrence County,
Tennessee, by joint action of said two bodies.
(f) The enumeration of powers herein shall not be construed as
a limitation upon the power of said board, but the board shall have full
and complete authority to carry out the purposes of this chapter and as
vested in it by the laws of the State of Tennessee and this chapter. (1999
Code, § 2-104, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
2-105. Agreement for operation of airport. This chapter, together
with the resolution of the County Commission of Lawrence County, Tennessee,
shall be considered as, and be, the agreement found in the Lawrence County,
Tennessee and City of Lawrenceburg, for the joint operation of said airport.
(1999 Code, § 2-105)
2-5
2-106. Airport is within police jurisdiction. Said airport shall be
considered and deemed as one of the public streets of the City of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, and the police jurisdiction of the City of Lawrenceburg shall extend
to and cover said airport property, and the same shall be subject to enforcement
of the ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg to the same extent as if said
airport were included within the city boundaries of the city. (1999 Code,
§ 2-106)
2-6
CHAPTER 2
LAWRENCEBURG CROCKETT THEATER BOARD
SECTION
2-201. Creation and establishment.
2-202. General powers and responsibilities.
2-203. Funds for the board's use.
2-204. Specific powers.
2-201. Creation and establishment.
(1) Creation and objective. Upon the adoption of this ordinance, there
is created the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board. The objective of the
Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board is to enhance the quality of life for
citizens of Lawrenceburg by encouraging visual and performing arts in order to
further the public enjoyment and awareness of the visual and performing arts
through the utilization of the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater.
(2) Membership. (a) Qualifications. The selection of the board
members shall be made from individuals who have an interest in the arts
as evidenced by knowledge, support and experience. Members shall be
selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve without
salary or compensation.
(b) Number of members/terms. The Lawrenceburg Crockett
Theater Board shall consist of nine (9) members, each of whom shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years, provided that three of the initial
nine members shall serve for one (1) year, three for two (2) years and
three for three (3) years in order to achieve staggered terms of office. All
subsequent appointments shall be for three (3) years, or for the duration
of an unexpired term in the case of an appointment to a vacancy.
No board or committee member may serve more than twelve (12)
consecutive years in the same appointed board or committee position.
(c) Appointment. Members of the Lawrenceburg Crockett
Theater Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Lawrenceburg, subject to confirmation by the Board of Mayor and
Council. City residency is preferred, but not required.
(d) Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy on said board by reason
of death, resignation, or removal, the Board of Mayor and Council of the
City of Lawrenceburg shall appoint some person to fill the unexpired
term of the member. All members of said board shall serve until the
expiration of their term or a vacancy otherwise occurs and until the
appointment and qualification of his successor.
(3) Compensation. No member of said board shall receive
compensation as such except there may be allowed such amount as fixed by the
Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg out of funds
2-7
appropriated for or received by said board out of the income from the operation
of the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater, for attending each meeting of the board.
Members of the board shall be eligible to be reimbursed for board
approved travel expenses.
(4) Organization. At the first meeting of the board, after their
appointment, the board shall organize and elect from their number a chairman,
vice-chairman, secretary, and a treasurer who shall keep an accurate record of
the proceedings of said board. Each shall serve for one (1) year terms of office.
A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business
and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any proposition.
(a) The board shall determine a regular meeting schedule as
necessary but not less frequent than once every two (2) months. All
meetings shall be open to the public and the meetings shall be ruled by
the Tennessee Sunshine Law to the extent proceedings of the Board of
Mayor and Council are governed by such law.
(b) The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as
necessary for the conduct of its business. The rules and regulations shall
be reviewed and revised by the Board of Mayor and Council as may be
required. (1999 Code, § 2-201, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091,
March 2012)
2-202. General powers and responsibilities. The board herein
established shall have the power and authority to enter into a lease with the
City of Lawrenceburg for the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater building, and to
oversee the general maintenance, operation, regulation, protection of the
Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater.
(1) The Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board is also authorized to
apply for grants for renovations, improvements, or construction concerning the
Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board. However, no structural changes shall
be authorized by the theater board without prior approval of the Board of Mayor
and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(2) The board shall advise the Board of Mayor and Council on matters
pertaining to cultural and artistic endeavors, projects, acquisitions of funds, and
expenditures in which the city becomes involved concerning the Lawrenceburg
Crockett Theater and will act as a representative of the community in such
matters.
(3) The board shall, on behalf of the city, encourage, sponsor,
co-sponsor, or conduct public programs to further the development and public
awareness of the arts.
(4) The board shall encourage donations, grants and other support to
further expand the arts and cultural services and programs available to the
citizens of Lawrenceburg and the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater.
2-8
(5) The board shall take such other actions as the mayor may direct
from time to time. (1999 Code, § 2-202, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091,
March 2012)
2-203. Funds for the board's use. (1) Fund created. For the purpose
of providing the board with monies for necessary expenditures and carrying out
the provisions of this chapter, a fund shall be created and maintained into which
shall be deposited funds available for the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board
approved by the City of Lawrenceburg. All grants, contributions or loans and
the revenue from the control and operation of the Lawrenceburg Crockett
Theater, under the jurisdiction of the board, shall be paid into said fund.
Disbursements from such fund shall be made by order of the board.
The board shall keep all funds coming into its hands in a separate bank
account and shall render a statement of its accounts and fund balances,
including a statement of all receipts and expenditures to the Board of Mayor and
Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, quarterly. Said board shall have its books,
accounts and funds audited each year by a reputable certified public accountant,
and a report shall be filed with the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of
Lawrenceburg.
(2) Budget. The Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board shall submit
a budget request to the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg
on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of June of each year. The budget shall
include annual recommendation to the Board of Mayor and Council for the
expenditure of funds in the Crockett Theater Board fund.
Total expenditures to be made by the board for any purpose in any fiscal
year shall be determined by a budget approved by the Board of Mayor and
Council of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(3) Acquisitions beyond sums allotted. The board does not have the
authority to exceed its budget without the prior approval of the Board of Mayor
and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg. (1999 Code, § 2-203, modified, and
amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
2-204. Specific powers. There is hereby delegated to the board the
authority to enter agreements for the purpose of planning, developing,
construction, enlarging, improving, operating, regulating, protecting, and
policing the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater and facilities related thereto owned
by the City of Lawrenceburg, and in addition thereto it shall have the following
power and authority:
(1) To enter into a lease with the City of Lawrenceburg for the
Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater.
(2) To enter into contracts, leases, agreements, grants, or other
arrangements for a term not exceeding ten (10) years, with any person or
persons, or corporation, either exclusive or in common with other, concerning
2-9
the Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater, provided that the same shall not be
inconsistent with the interests of the citizens of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(a) Granting the privilege of using or improving said Crockett
Theater including any portion of the facility thereof, relating thereto or
real property acquired or set aside for such purpose, establishing the
charges, rental or fees at a fixed or variable rate binding upon the parties
thereto for the full term of such contracts, leases, agreements, grants or
other arrangements. NOTHING HEREIN SHALL GRANT TO THE
BOARD THE AUTHORITY TO APPROVE ANY STRUCTURAL
CHANGES TO THE LAWRENCEBURG CROCKETT THEATER
WITHOUT THE PRIOR APPROVAL OF THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE.
(b) Conferring the privileges of supplying goods, commodities,
things, services or facilities at such Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater.
(c) Determining the charges, rentals or fees for the use of any
properties under its control and the charges for any services or any
property may be used.
(d) To enforce the payment of any charges for repairs or
improvements to or storage or care of, any personal property made or
furnished in connection with the operation of Lawrenceburg Crockett
Theater owned by the City of Lawrenceburg.
(e) The board shall not dispose of any Crockett Theater property
except with the consent of the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of
Lawrenceburg.
(f) The enumeration of powers herein shall not be construed as
a limitation upon the power of said board, but the board shall have full
and complete authority to carry out the purposes of this chapter as vested
in it by the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(3) Liability insurance. It is the intent of this chapter that the
Lawrenceburg Crockett Theater Board and its members shall be covered by the
liability insurance of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 2-204,
as amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT1
CHAPTER
1. CITY COURT.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. SUMMONSES AND CITATIONS.
4. COURT COSTS.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COURT
SECTION
3-101. City judge to open and hold city court.
3-102. City judge's powers.
3-103. City judge to suspend sentence and/or judgment.
3-104. Duties and powers of city judge.
3-101. City judge to open and hold city court. The city judge of the
corporation shall open and hold court to be known as the city court for the trial
of all persons arrested by the City of Lawrenceburg law enforcement department
for the violation of any ordinance of the corporation. Such court shall be
convened as necessary until all cases submitted for the investigation of the court
shall be tried or otherwise disposed of. (1999 Code, § 3-101, modified)
3-102. City judge's powers. The city judge shall have and exercise all
powers set out in Article XI of the Charter of the City of Lawrenceburg for the
proper administration of justice in the city court. Said court shall be conducted
in strict conformity with the rules and regulations as set forth in Article XI of
the charter prescribing the conduct of the city judge's court. (1999 Code,
§ 3-102, modified)
3-103. City judge to suspend sentence and/or judgement. (1) The
City Judge of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, be and is hereby authorized
and empowered to suspend sentence, and/or judgment and to suspend execution
of judgements against defendants who plead guilty to misdemeanors; and to
make such suspension in whole or in part, or suspend the amount of fine upon
payment of cost - all this in his discretion.
1Charter reference
City court: art. XI.
3-2
(2) The city judge shall, in cases hereinbefore mentioned, pronounce
judgment against the defendant or defendants, which judgment shall be entered
upon minutes of the city judge's court; and if the city judge elects to suspend
such sentence and/or judgment, the fact of such suspension shall likewise be
noted upon the minutes of his court.
(3) The city judge may suspend such sentence and/or judgment
immediately upon rendering it, or suspend any part of the fine and cost after the
defendant has served part of his time in the county jail.
(4) If at any time within 12 months after such suspension it shall come
to the city judge's knowledge that such defendant or defendants whose sentence
or judgment has been suspended, have violated any or been guilty of the breach
of either or any of the ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, he shall have the
power in his discretion to issue an order or warrant against such defendant or
defendants and have them brought before him for trial on the charge of violating
any such ordinance; and if after a hearing on such charge, or on any charge
made by a city law enforcement officer, the city judge finds such defendant
guilty, the city judge shall have the right, in his discretion, to revoke such
suspension and so enter same on his minutes or city judge's docket, and collect
such fine and cost as was originally rendered against such defendant, take
security in the regular way, and in default of payment or security, commit such
defendant to the county jail, in as full and complete a manner as he could have
done before such suspension. (1999 Code, § 3-103, modified)
3-104. Duties and powers of city judge.1 The city judge shall try all
persons charged with violation of the ordinances of the city. He shall have the
power to levy fines, penalties and forfeitures, not exceeding the maximum set
by state law, for each offense and to impose such costs as the Board of Mayor
and Council may by ordinance provide, to issue all necessary process, to
administer oaths, and to punish for contempt. (1999 Code, § 3-104, modified,
and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
1Charter references
Compensation: art. XI, § A.
Duties and powers: art. XI, § B.
Qualifications, etc.: art. XI, § A.
3-3
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Maintenance of docket and other court rules.
3-202. Disturbance of proceedings.
3-201. Maintenance of docket and other court rules.1 The city judge
or his designee shall keep a docket. The Board of Mayor and Council may, by
ordinance, require such other records, fix the time for holding court, and provide
such other rules and regulations for the proper functioning of the court as
deemed necessary. (1999 Code, § 3-201, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091,
March 2012)
3-202. Disturbance of proceedings. Any person who shall
intentionally create a disturbance during the session of the city court by any
loud noise, indecorous or blasphemous language or other disorderly conduct
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine that does not exceed the
state authorized amount for municipalities (maximum set by state law), which
shall be imposed by the city judge and from which there shall be no appeal,
provided, however, the party so offending may give security for the fine as in
other cases. In appropriate cases, incarceration may be ordered. (1999 Code,
§ 3-202, modified)
1Charter references
Docket, etc.: art. XI, § D.
Jurisdiction: art. XI, § A.
3-4
CHAPTER 3
SUMMONSES AND CITATIONS
SECTION
3-301. Issuance of summonses.
3-302. Violations and penalty.
3-303. Use of citations in lieu of continued custody of an arrested person.
3-301. Issuance of summonses. It shall be unlawful for any person
receiving a summons or citation to appear in the Lawrenceburg city court, not
to appear to answer that summons or citation. (1999 Code, § 3-401, modified)
3-302. Violations and penalty. Any person or persons violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than the maximum set by state law
together with costs for each offense. Incarceration may also be ordered. (1999
Code, § 3-402, modified)
3-303. Use of citations in lieu of continued custody of an arrested
person. (1) As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Citation" means a written order issued by a peace officer
requiring a person accused of violating the law to appear in a designated
court or governmental office at a specified date and time. Such order
shall require the signature of the person to whom it is issued;
(b) "Magistrate" means any state judicial officer, including the
judge of a municipal court, having original trial jurisdiction over
misdemeanors or felonies; and
(c) "Peace officer" means an officer, employee or agent of
government who has a duty imposed by law to:
(i) Maintain public order;
(ii) Make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends
to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses; and
(iii) Investigate the commission or suspected commission
of offenses.
(2)(a) A peace officer who has arrested a person for the commission of a
misdemeanor committed in his presence, or who has taken custody of a
person arrested by a private person for the commission of a misdemeanor,
shall issue a citation to such arrested person to appear in court in lieu of
the continued custody and the taking of the arrested person before a
magistrate. If the peace officer is serving an arrest warrant or capias
issued by a magistrate for the commission of a misdemeanor, it is in the
discretion of the issuing magistrate whether the person is to be arrested
and taken into custody or arrested and issued a citation in accordance
3-5
with this section in lieu of continued custody. Each such warrant or
capias shall specify the action to be taken by the serving peace officer who
shall act accordingly.
(b) If a person is arrested for:
(i) The offense of theft which formerly constituted
shoplifting, in violation of § 39-14-103;
(ii) Issuance of bad checks, in violation of § 39-14-122;
(iii) Use of a revoked or suspended driver's license in
violation of § 55-50-504, § 55-50-601 or § 55-50-602;
(iv) Assault or battery as those offenses are defined by
common law, if the officer believes there is a reasonable likelihood
that persons would be endangered by the arrested person if a
citation were issued in lieu of continued physical custody of the
defendant; or
(v) Prostitution, in violation of § 39-13-513, if the
arresting party has knowledge of past conduct of the defendant in
prostitution or has reasonable cause to believe that the defendant
will attempt to engage in prostitution activities within a
reasonable period of time if not arrested;
a peace officer may issue a citation to such arrested person to appear in
court in lieu of the continued custody and the taking of the arrested
person before a magistrate.
(3) No citation shall be issued under the provisions of this section if:
(a) The person arrested requires medical examination or
medical care, or if he is unable to care for his own safety;
(b) There is a reasonable likelihood that the offense would
continue or resume, or that persons or property would be endangered by
the arrested person;
(c) The person arrested cannot or will not offer satisfactory
evidence of identification, including the providing of a field-administered
fingerprint or thumbprint which a peace officer may require to be affixed
to any citation;
(d) The prosecution of the offense for which the person was
arrested, or of another offense, would thereby be jeopardized;
(e) A reasonable likelihood exists that the arrested person will
fail to appear in court;
(f) The person demands to be taken immediately before a
magistrate or refuses to sign the citation;
(g) The person arrested is so intoxicated that he could be a
danger to himself or to others; and
(h) There are one (1) or more outstanding arrest warrants for
the person.
(4) In issuing a citation, the officer shall:
3-6
(a) Prepare a written order which shall include the name and
address of the cited person, the offense charged and the time and place
of appearance;
(b) Have the offender sign the original and duplicate copy of the
citation. He shall deliver one (1) copy to the offender and retain the
other; and
(c) Release the cited person from custody.
(5) By accepting the citation, the defendant agrees to appear at the
arresting law enforcement agency prior to trial to be booked and processed.
Failure to so appear is a Class C misdemeanor.
(6) If the person cited fails to appear in court on the date and time
specified or fails to appear for booking and processing prior to his court date, the
court shall issue a bench warrant for such person's arrest.
(7) Whenever a citation has been prepared, delivered and filed with a
court as provided herein, a duplicate copy of the citation constitutes a complaint
to which the defendant shall answer. The duplicate copy shall be sworn to by
the issuing officer before any person authorized by law to administer oaths.
(8) Nothing herein shall be construed to affect a peace officer's
authority to conduct a lawful search even though the citation is issued after
arrest.
(9) Any person who intentionally, knowingly or willfully fails to appear
in court on the date and time specified on the citation or who knowingly gives
a false or assumed name or address is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor,
regardless of the disposition of the charge for which he was originally arrested.
Proof that the defendant failed to appear when required constitutes prima facie
evidence that the failure to appear is willful.
(10) Whenever an officer makes a physical arrest for a misdemeanor
and the officer determines that a citation cannot be issued because of one (1) of
the eight (8) reasons enumerated in subsection (3), the officer shall note the
reason for not issuing a citation on the arrest ticket. An officer who, on the basis
of facts reasonably known or reasonably believed to exist, determines that a
citation cannot be issued because of one (1) of the eight (8) reasons enumerated
in subsection (3) shall not be subject to civil or criminal liability for false arrest,
false imprisonment or unlawful detention.
(11)(a) Each citation issued pursuant to this section shall have
printed on it in large, conspicuous block letters the following:
NOTICE: FAILURE TO APPEAR IN COURT ON THE DATE
ASSIGNED BY THIS CITATION OR AT THE APPROPRIATE POLICE
STATION FOR BOOKING AND PROCESSING WILL RESULT IN
YOUR ARREST FOR A SEPARATE CRIMINAL OFFENSE WHICH IS
PUNISHABLE BY A JAIL SENTENCE UP TO SIX (6) MONTHS
AND/OR A FINE NOT TO EXCEED THE MAXIMUM SET BY STATE
LAW.
3-7
(b) Each person receiving a citation under this section shall sign
this citation indicating the knowledge of the notice listed in subdivision
(11)(a). The signature of each person creates a presumption of knowledge
of the notice and a presumption of intent to violate this section if the
person should not appear as required by the citation.
(c) Whenever there are changes in the citation form notice
required by this subsection, a law enforcement agency may exhaust its
existing supply of citation forms before implementing the new citation
forms.
(12) The provisions of this section shall govern all aspects of the
issuance of citations in lieu of the continued custody of an arrested person,
notwithstanding any provision of Rule 3.5 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure to
the contrary.
(13) In cases in which:
(a) The public will not be endangered by the continued freedom
of the suspected misdemeanant;
(b) The law enforcement officer has reasonable proof of the
identity of the suspected misdemeanant; and
(c) There is no reason to believe the suspected misdemeanant
will not appear as required by law;
the general assembly finds that the issuance of a citation in lieu of arrest of the
suspected misdemeanant will result in cost savings and increased public safety
by allowing the use of jail space for dangerous individuals and/or felons and by
keeping officers on patrol. Accordingly, the general assembly encourages all law
enforcement agencies to so utilize misdemeanor citations and to encourage their
personnel to use such citations when reasonable and according to law. (1999
Code, § 3-403, modified)
3-8
CHAPTER 4
COURT COSTS
SECTION
3-401. Bill of costs.
3-402. Establishment of equipment, education, and D.A.R.E. fund.
3-401. Bill of costs. The court costs of all warrants and citations in
Lawrenceburg City Court after the effective date of the ordinance comprising
this section shall be as follows:
Speeding
under 9 mph
Speeding 10 mph
and all other
violations
Tax $ 1.50 $ 1.50
Affidavit and Warrant $ 5.00 $ 5.00
Arrest $ 15.50 $ 15.50
Issuing Subpoena (each $1.50)
Serving Subpoena ($2.50)
Appearance Bond $ 2.50 $ 2.50
Mittimus (each $1.00)
Bill of Costs $ 4.50 $ 4.50
Continuance (each $1.00)
Judgment $ 3.75 $ 3.75
Jail Fees days at $
Rearrest Order ($1.00)
Rearrest ($10.00)
Fine (in addition to costs up to
$50.00)
Contempt Fine
Moving violations speeding under
9 mph
$ 5.00 $ -0-
Moving violations speeding 10 mph
and all other violations
$ 20.00
Court Cost and Litigation Tax $ 41.75 $ 41.75
Administrative Charge $ 9.00 $ 9.00
Computer Charge $ 39.50 $ 39.50
(1999 Code, § 3-501, as amended by Ord. #969, Sept. 2003, and Ord. #986, Jan.
2005, and replaced by Ord. #1036, June 2008, and Ord. #1114, June 2013)
3-9
3-402. Establishment of equipment, education, and D.A.R.E. fund.
Ten dollars ($10.00) of the court cost shall go into the equipment, education, and
D.A.R.E. fund and shall be used for equipment purchases for law enforcement
purposes, education expenses for the department of safety, and for the D.A.R.E.
Drug Education Program for the Lawrenceburg Police Department. Allowable
education expenses would include any school education program approved by
the chief of police and city administrator for use in the law enforcement field.
(1999 Code, § 3-502, modified)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. SOCIAL SECURITY.
2. PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
3. [DELETED.]
4. [DELETED.]
5. [DELETED.]
6. [DELETED.]
7. [DELETED.]
8. [DELETED.]
9. [DELETED.]
10. [DELETED.]
11. [DELETED.]
12. [DELETED.]
13. [DELETED.]
14. [DELETED.]
15. [DELETED.]
16. [DELETED.]
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage.
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed.
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions.
4-105. Records and reports to be made.
4-106. Exclusions.
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage. It is hereby declared to
be the policy and purpose of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, to extend at
the earliest date, to employees and officials thereof and the employees and
officials of the City of Lawrenceburg's Electric System or Department, not
excluded by law or this chapter, and whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the System of Federal
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security
Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734, 81st Congress. In
pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as
4-2
may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. (1999 Code,
§ 4-101)
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed. The Mayor of the City
of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, is hereby authorized and directed to execute all the
necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state executive director
of old age and survivors insurance, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of
employees and officials as provided in the preceding section. (1999 Code,
§ 4-102)
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages. Withholdings from the
salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in the first
section of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations. (1999 Code, § 4-103)
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions. There shall be
appropriated from available funds, and from funds of the proper system or
department of the City of Lawrenceburg, such amounts at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's
contributions; which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated
by said laws or regulations. (1999 Code, § 4-104)
4-105. Records and reports to be made. The city, and each system
or department thereof, shall keep such records and make such reports as may
be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. (1999 Code,
§ 4-105)
4-106. Exclusions. There is hereby excluded from this chapter any
authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or employee or
official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating
any retirement system for any employee or official of the city, except, effective
January 1, 1956 the mayor is authorized to make an agreement with the State
of Tennessee to extend the benefits of the System of Federal Old Age and
Survivors Insurance to include those employees and officials of the
Lawrenceburg Electric System who are rendering services in positions covered
by a retirement plan with the Equitable Life Insurance Company of Iowa.
There is hereby excluded from this chapter authority to make an
agreement with respect to any employee or official not authorized to be covered
by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and the mayor is authorized
to make an agreement with the Director of Old Age and Survivors Insurance
Agency, State of Tennessee, to provide coverage effective October 1, 1960 of
employees rendering services in emergency, part-time and fee based positions,
and elective legislative, executive and judicial officials. (1999 Code, § 4-106)
4-3
CHAPTER 2
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS1
SECTION
4-201. Personnel rules and regulations.
4-202. [Deleted.]
4-203. [Deleted.]
4-204. [Deleted.]
4-205. [Deleted.]
4-206. [Deleted.]
4-207. [Deleted.]
4-208. [Deleted.]
4-209. [Deleted.]
4-201. Personnel rules and regulations. The Personnel Manual for
the City of Lawrenceburg is adopted by reference as if copied herein fully and
may be viewed in its entirety in the office of the city administrator and on the
City of Lawrenceburg's website: http://www.lawrenceburgtn.gov. (1999 Code,
§ 4-201, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March 2007, and Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-202. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-202, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-203. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-203, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-204. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-204, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-205. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-205, as amended by Ord. #971, Oct.
2003, replaced by Ord. #1011, March 2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb.
2012)
4-206. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-206, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-207. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-207, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
1Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012 (and any amendments) is available in the office of
the city administrator.
4-4
4-208. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-208, as replaced by Ord. #1011, March
2007, and deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-209. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 4-209, as deleted by Ord. #1011, March
2007)
4-5
CHAPTER 3
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-6
CHAPTER 4
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-7
CHAPTER 5
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-8
CHAPTER 6
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-9
CHAPTER 7
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-10
CHAPTER 8
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-11
CHAPTER 9
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-12
CHAPTER 10
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-13
CHAPTER 11
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-14
CHAPTER 12
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-15
CHAPTER 13
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-16
CHAPTER 14
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-17
CHAPTER 15
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
4-18
CHAPTER 16
[DELETED]
(as deleted by Ord. #1090, Feb. 2012)
5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. PRIVILEGE TAXES.
2. PURCHASING REGULATIONS.
3. REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
4. OPEN RECORDS FEE.
CHAPTER 1
PRIVILEGE TAXES
SECTION
5-101. Tax levied.
5-102. License required.
5-101. Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
code, there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses
declared by the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by
municipalities, an annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by
state laws. The taxes provided for in the state's "Business Tax Act" (Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 67-4-701, et seq.) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained, and
levied on the businesses, business activities, vocations, and occupations carried
on within the city at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the act. (1999
Code, § 5-101)
5-102. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the city without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be
issued by the recorder to each applicant therefor upon the applicant's
compliance with all regulatory provisions in this code and payment of the
appropriate privilege tax. (1999 Code, § 5-102)
1Charter reference
Taxation: art. X.
5-2
CHAPTER 2
PURCHASING REGULATIONS
SECTION
5-201. Purchasing agent; office created.
5-202. Duties of purchasing agent.
5-203. Purchasing procedures only revised by resolution.
5-201. Purchasing agent; office created. As provided in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 6-56-301, et seq., the office of purchasing agent is hereby
created and the city administrator shall faithfully discharge the duties of said
office or appoint an individual to make purchases for the City of Lawrenceburg.
Purchases shall be made in accordance with the Municipal Purchasing Law of
1983 and amendments thereto, this chapter and purchasing procedures
approved by the governing body. (1999 Code, § 5-201, modified)
5-202. Duties of purchasing agent. The purchasing agent, or
designated representative, as provided herein, shall purchase materials,
supplies, services and equipment, provide for leases and lease-purchases and
dispose of surplus property in accordance with purchasing procedures approved
by the governing body and filed with the city recorder. (1999 Code, § 5-202,
modified)
5-203. Purchasing procedures only revised by resolution. After
initial approval by resolution of the governing body of this city, changes or
revisions to the purchasing procedures shall be made only by resolution. (1999
Code, § 5-203)
5-3
CHAPTER 3
REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
SECTION
5-301. Partial payments.
5-301. Partial payments. (1) The city shall accept partial payments
of annual real property taxes beginning on the first Monday of October 2011.
Notwithstanding the following schedule, the entire amount of taxes due must
be paid in full prior to the first day of March.
(2) Partial payments will be accepted according to the following
schedule:
(a) The City of Lawrenceburg will accept partial payments in
increments of four (4) before the first day of March without penalty.
(b) Any tax remaining after said first day of March will accrue
interest and the entire property will be considered delinquent and may
be subject to a tax lien and enforcement by tax sale or other legally
authorized procedures.
(3) Notwithstanding the schedule in subsection (2), no penalties, fines,
interest or other fees shall be assessed against the taxpayer except as provided
by subsection (2).
(4) Prior to the final reading of the ordinance comprising this chapter,
the recorder shall transmit to the state comptroller of the treasury a copy of the
ordinance comprising this chapter, which shall serve as the plan required by
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-152(b)1. To fulfill the requirements of that
section, the city hereby declares that:
(a) The city has the appropriate accounting technology to
implement this program; and
(b) The city can implement this program within existing
resources. (as added by Ord. #1080, July 2011)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-152 permits a municipality that
collects its own property taxes to, via ordinance, accept partial
payment of property taxes upon filing a plan for such with the
comptroller of the treasury. The plan must indicate that the
municipality has the appropriate accounting system technology. The
plan must also indicate whether the program will be implemented
within existing resources or indicate prior approval of the governing
body if additional resources are needed. The plan is not required for
a city that has implemented a partial payment program prior to
March 29, 2010.
5-4
CHAPTER 4
OPEN RECORDS FEE
SECTION
5-401. Procedures regarding access to an inspection of public records.
5-401. Procedures regarding access to an inspection of public
records. (1) Consistent with the Public Records Act of the State of Tennessee,
personnel of the City of Lawrenceburg shall provide full access and assistance
in a timely and efficient manner to Tennessee residents who request access to
public documents.
(2) Employees of the City of Lawrenceburg shall protect the integrity
and organization of public records with respect to the manner in which the
records are inspected and copied. All inspections of records must be performed
under the supervision of the department manager of the department
maintaining records requested or his/her designee. All copying of public records
must be performed by employees of the city, or, in the event that city personnel
are unable to copy the records, by an entity or person designated by the
department manager maintaining records requested.
(3) To prevent excessive disruptions of the work, essential functions,
and duties of employees of the City of Lawrenceburg, persons requesting
inspection and/or copying of public records are requested to complete a records
request form to be furnished by the city. If the requesting party refuses to
complete a request form, a city employee shall complete the form with the
information provided by the requesting party. Persons requesting access to open
public records shall describe the records with specificity so that the records may
be located and made available for public inspection or duplication, as provided
in subsection (2) above. All requests for public records shall be directed to the
records custodian (department manager of department maintaining records
requested).
(4) When records are requested for inspection or copying, the records
custodian (department manager) has up to seven (7) business days to determine
whether the city can retrieve the records requested and whether the requested
records contain any confidential information, and the estimated charge for
copying based upon the number of copies and amount of time required. Within
seven (7) business days of a request for records the records custodian
(department manager) shall:
(a) Produce the records requested;
(b) Deny the records in writing, giving explanation for denial;
or
(c) In the case of voluminous requests, provide, in writing, the
requestor with an estimated time frame for production and an estimation
of duplication costs.
5-5
(5) There is no charge assessed to a requester for inspecting a public
record. Charges for physical copies of records, in accordance with the Office of
Open Records Counsel (OORC) schedule of reasonable charges, are as follows:
(a) Standard 8 ½ x11 or 8 ½ x14 black and white copy - $.15 per
page for each produced.
(b) Standard 8 ½ x11 or 8 ½ x14 color copy - $.50 per page for
each produced.
(c) Maps, plats, electronic data, audio discs, video discs, and all
other materials shall be duplicated at actual costs to the city.
(6) Requests requiring less than one (1) hour of municipal employee
labor for research, retrieval, redaction and duplication will not result in an
assessment of labor charges to the requester.
Employee labor in excess of one (1) hour may be charged to the requester,
in addition to the cost per copy, as provided in subsection (5). The city may
require payment in advance of producing any request. Requests for copies of
records may not be broken down to multiple requests for the same information
in order to qualify for the first free hour.
(a) For a request requiring more than one (1) employee to
complete, labor charges will be assessed based on the following formula:
In calculating the charge for labor, a department head shall determine
the number of hours each employee spent producing a request. The
department head shall then subtract the one (1) hour threshold from the
number of hours the highest paid employee(s) spent producing the
request. The department head will then multiply total number of hours
to be charged for the labor of each employee by that employees hourly
wage. Finally, the department head will add together the totals for all the
employees involved in the request and that will be the total amount of
labor that can be charged.
(b) When the total number of requests made by a requestor
within a calendar month exceeds four (4), the requests will be aggregated,
and the requestor shall charge a fee for any and all labor that is
reasonably necessary to produce the copies of the requested records after
informing the requestor that the aggregation limit has been met. Request
for items that are routinely released and readily accessible, such as
agendas for current calendar month meetings and approved minutes from
meetings held in the previous calendar month, shall not be counted in the
aggregated requests.
(7) If the city is assessed a charge to retrieve the requested records
from archives or any other entity having possession of requested records, the
records custodian (department manager) may assess the requestor the cost
assessed to the city.
(8) Upon completion of a records request the requestor may pick up the
copies of records at the office of the records custodian (department manager).
Alternatively, the requestor may choose to have the copies of records delivered
5-6
via United States Postal Service; provided that the requestor pays all related
expenses in advance.
(9) If the public records requested are frail due to age or other
conditions, and copying of the records will cause damage to the original records,
the requesting party may be required to make an appointment for inspection.
(as added by Ord. #1123, Nov. 2013)
6-1
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
2. POLICE DEPARTMENT RESERVE.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
6-101. Created; composition; terms.
6-102. Chief of police-control and supervision.
6-103. Duties of department.
6-104. Compensation.
6-101. Created; composition; terms. There shall be, and is hereby
created, in and for the municipality of the City of Lawrenceburg, in Tennessee,
a police department to be known and designated as the City of Lawrenceburg
Police Department, and which may be composed of a chief, assistant chief,
lieutenants, and sergeants, and such other personnel as the governing body of
said municipality may provide, including the City of Lawrenceburg Police
Department Reserve created by Ordinance #797 of said municipality, adopted
and entitled as more fully hereinafter set out in chapter 2 of this title. The chief
is appointed by the Board of Mayor and Council upon recommendation of the
city administrator pursuant to Article V, Section C, of city's charter. (1999 Code,
§ 6-101, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
6-102. Chief of police-control and supervision. The chief of police,
through himself and the assistant chief, shall have the control and supervision
of the police department, and the work assignments of all personnel of said
police department, the hours and places of work under such assignments. (1999
Code, § 6-103, modified)
6-103. Duties of department. It shall be the duty of the chief of police
and all policemen and other personnel of the Lawrenceburg police department
to enforce within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, and within
the police jurisdiction of said City of Lawrenceburg for said distance of not
1Municipal code reference
Traffic citations, etc.: title 15, chapter 7.
6-2
exceeding one (1) mile from such corporate limits outside of same, as well as the
lawful orders of the city administrator of said municipality, and the laws of the
State of Tennessee, and also any rules and regulations adopted by the chief of
police, the city administrator of said municipality for said Lawrenceburg Police
Department, the said chief and city administrator being hereby empowered to
promulgate and put into effect such rules and regulations, the same, however,
to also be entered on the minutes of said governing body.
It shall be the duty of said chief of police or any member of said
Lawrenceburg police department designated by him to serve all process issued
by the city judge of the municipal court, provided, that any member of said
Lawrenceburg police department who shall have sworn out or caused the
issuance by said city judge of any warrant for violation of any ordinance of said
city shall have authority to make the arrest thereby authorized.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or some member of the
Lawrenceburg police department designated by him to attend all sessions of the
municipal court and act as bailiff thereof, but if no bailiff has been thus
designated, the city judge may call on any member of said Lawrenceburg police
department to act as bailiff of said court. (1999 Code, § 6-104, modified)
6-104. Compensation. The governing body of said municipality is
hereby authorized to compensate for their services the chief, assistant chief, and
other personnel of said Lawrenceburg Police Department and said City of
Lawrenceburg Police Department Reserve for their services in such amounts,
and payable at such times as they deem advisable, and such compensation may
be raised or lowered as such governing body may decide through budget
ordinances. (1999 Code, § 6-106, modified)
6-3
CHAPTER 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT RESERVE
SECTION
6-201. Definition.
6-202. Appointment.
6-203. Compensation.
6-204. Supervision.
6-205. Departmental rules and regulations.
6-206. At will.
6-207. Powers of reserve officers.
6-201. Definition. The police department reserve force is a volunteer
organization, the members of which have enrolled as a civic service to assist the
regular police force of the Lawrenceburg Police Department. (1999 Code,
§ 6-201)
6-202. Appointment. Members of the police department reserve force
shall be appointed by the chief of police. (1999 Code, § 6-202, modified)
6-203. Compensation. All members of the police department reserve
force shall receive no salary or compensation for their services as such, except
that for appearance in court as witnesses, such member shall be entitled to
receive the fees provided by law for witnesses. (1999 Code, § 6-203)
6-204. Supervision. The chief of police, under the direction of the city
administrator, shall have control of the organization, government,
administration, supervision, operation, and discipline of the police reserve force.
(1999 Code, § 6-204, modified)
6-205. Departmental rules and regulations. Members of the police
department reserve force shall be governed by such rules and regulations of the
Lawrenceburg Police Department as, in the opinion of the chief of police, are
applicable to them. (1999 Code, § 6-205, modified)
6-206. At will. All reserve officers, after the effective date of this
chapter, shall serve at the will and pleasure of the chief of police. (1999 Code,
§ 6-206, modified)
6-207. Powers of reserve officers. The members of such police
department reserve shall have, and there is hereby conferred upon them, the
powers to act as police officers being peace officers or special policemen,
provided, however, that the members of said police department reserve shall
6-4
perform such police powers within the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrenceburg, and outside of but within one mile of such corporate limits, being
the area over which the City of Lawrenceburg is given police jurisdiction under
its original charter, Acts 1901, ch. 457, as amended and extended and contracted
by ordinance, during such periods of time and at such times as such members
of such police department reserve are actually performing duties officially
prescribed or ordered by the Chief of Police of the City of Lawrenceburg, and
while performing such duties, but at no other times, such member of such police
department reserve shall wear a police badge specifically furnished therefor by
the Chief of Police of the City of Lawrenceburg, and/or shall have in his or her
possession an appointment, or other credentials, showing authority. (1999 Code,
§ 6-207, modified)
7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS1
CHAPTER
1. FIRE DISTRICT.
2. FIRE CODE.
3. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. FIREWORKS.
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION
7-101. Fire limits described.
7-101. Fire limits described. The corporate fire limits shall be
congruent with the City of Lawrenceburg corporate limits. (1999 Code, § 7-101,
modified)
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
7-2
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE1
SECTION
7-201. [Deleted.]
7-202. Enforcement.
7-203. Definitions.
7-204. Storage and transportation of explosives, flammable liquids, etc.
7-205. Modifications.
7-206. Appeals.
7-207. New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
7-208. Violations and penalties.
7-201. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 7-201, as amended by Ord. #955, July
2002, and Ord. #991, April 2005, and deleted by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-202. Enforcement. (1) The fire prevention codes herein adopted by
reference shall be enforced by the Lawrenceburg Codes Department of the city
which shall be operated under the director of codes enforcement or his designee.
(2) There is established the office of fire inspector. The fire inspector
shall be supervised by and report to the director of codes department and shall
inspect all commercial and industrial property at least bi-annually; shall make
recommendations for strict compliance of the fire prevention codes; shall keep
and maintain permanent records of his inspections; shall keep the director of
codes department informed of the results of all inspections; shall inform owners
of property inspected of non-compliance by registered or certified mail; shall aid
the director of codes department in enforcement of the fire prevention codes;
shall notify the director of codes department of flagrant violations potential high
hazard fire fighter safety issues; and shall file an annual report with the
director of codes department.
(3) An annual report from the director of codes department shall be
made and transmitted to the city administrator; it shall contain all proceedings
under this code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish
to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any
amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. (1999 Code,
§ 7-202, modified, and amended by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
7-3
7-203. Definitions. (1) Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the
fire prevention code herein adopted, it shall be held to mean the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
(2) Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire
prevention code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of
Lawrenceburg.
(3) Wherever the term "chief of the fire department" is used in the fire
prevention codes, it shall be held to mean the Fire Chief for the City of
Lawrenceburg.
(4) The term "fire inspector" shall be held to mean the person charged
with the responsibility of conducting bi-annual inspections of commercial and
industrial property within the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code,
§ 7-203, modified)
7-204. Storage and transportation of explosives, flammable
liquids, etc. (1) The routes referred to in § 1903.2 of the standard fire
prevention code or adopted NFPA codes for vehicles transporting explosives and
blasting agents are hereby established upon authority of the chief of police.
(2) The routes referred to in § 2201.1.2 of the standard fire prevention
code or adopted NFPA codes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemical and
other dangerous articles are hereby established upon authority of chief of police
and chief of fire department. (1999 Code, § 7-204, as amended by Ord. #1142,
Aug. 2014)
7-205. Modifications. (1) The Board of Mayor and Council shall have
power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when
there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured,
and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision or the Board of Mayor and Council thereon shall be
entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished
the applicant.
(2) When reference is made to the duties of a certain official named
therein, that designated official of the City of Lawrenceburg, County of
Lawrence, Tennessee who has duties corresponding to those of the named
official in the fire code shall be deemed to by the responsible official insofar as
enforcing the provisions of the fire code.
(3) Any matters in the Standard Fire Prevention Code, National Fire
Code, and Life Safety Code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the City
of Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee shall prevail and, to that
extent any existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that
respect only. (1999 Code, § 7-205, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002,
modified, and Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-4
7-206. Appeals. Whenever the fire inspector shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
the decision of the fire inspector to the Board of Mayor and Council within 30
days from the date of the decision appeared. (1999 Code, § 7-206, modified, and
amended by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-207. New materials, processes or occupancies which may
require permits. The city administrator and the director of codes enforcement
shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons
any opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The
director of codes enforcement shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his
office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1999 Code, § 7-207,
modified, and amended by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-208. Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the Standard Fire Prevention
Code, the National Fire Code, or the Life Safety Codes herein adopted, or fail to
comply therewith, or violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder;
or build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken; or fail to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of Mayor and Council or by
a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein. The application
of a penalty under the general penalty clause for the municipal code shall not
be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1999 Code,
§ 7-208, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012, and Ord. #1142,
Aug. 2014)
7-5
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership.
7-302. Objectives.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations.
7-304. Records and reports.
7-305. Discipline of members.
7-306. Chief responsible for training and maintenance.
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership. There is
hereby established a fire department to be supported and equipped from
appropriations of the Board of Mayor and Council. Any funds raised or gifts
received by the fire department as a whole, or by any individual or group of
firemen in the name of the fire department, shall be turned over to and become
the property of, the city and the city shall use such funds in the equipping of the
fire department. All other apparatus, equipment, and supplies of the fire
department shall be purchased by or through the city and shall be and remain
the property of the city. The fire department shall be composed of a chief
recommended by the city administrator and appointed by the Board of Mayor
and Council, pursuant to Article V, Section C of the city's charter, and such
number of physically-fit subordinate officers and firemen as the city
administrator shall appoint. 2 (1999 Code, § 7-301, modified, and amended by
Ord. #1091, March 2012)
7-302. Objectives. The fire department shall have as its objectives:
(1) To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting.
(2) To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires.
(3) To confine fires to their places of origin.
(4) To extinguish uncontrolled fires.
(5) To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning.
(6) To perform such rescue and medical work as its equipment and/or
the training of its personnel makes practicable. (1999 Code, § 7-302, modified)
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges with respect to traffic: title 15, chapter 2.
2Charter reference
City administrator; Powers and duties: art. V, § C.
7-6
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations. The chief of the fire
department shall set up the organization of the department, under the direction
and guidance of the city administrator. The chief shall make definite
assignments to individuals, and formulate and enforce such rules and
regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the
fire department, with the concurrence and approval of the city administrator.
The fire chief will make reports as required and necessary to the city
administrator regarding the organization, manning and operating regulations
of the City of Lawrenceburg Fire Department.1 (1999 Code, § 7-303, modified)
7-304. Records and reports. The chief of the fire department or his
designee shall keep adequate records of all fires, apparatus, equipment,
personnel, and work of the department. He shall submit such written reports
on those matters to the city administrator as he so requires.1 The city
administrator shall submit a report on those matters to the Board of Mayor and
Council as they may require. (1999 Code, § 7-304, modified, and amended by
Ord. #1091, March 2012, and Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-305. Discipline of members. The chief of the fire department shall
have the authority to suspend any member of the fire department when he
deems such action to be necessary for the good of the department, pursuant to
the provisions of the Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of
Lawrenceburg. The chief may be suspended pursuant to the provisions of the
Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of Lawrenceburg. (1999 Code,
§ 7-305)
7-306. Chief responsible for training and maintenance. The chief
of the fire department shall be fully responsible for the training of the
firefighters and for maintenance of all property and equipment of the fire
department, under the direction and subject to the requirements of the city
administrator. (1999 Code, § 7-306, modified)
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the fire chief is
designated as an assistant to the State Commissioner of Insurance and is
subject to all the duties and obligations and imposed by Tennessee Code
Annotated, Title 68, Chapter 102, and shall be subject to the directions of the
commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. (1999 Code, § 7-307)
1Municipal code reference
Annual report of fire chief: § 7-202(3).
7-7
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION
7-401. Purpose.
7-402. Definition of terms.
7-403. Manufacture prohibited.
7-404. Permits required, storage, sale and use restricted.
7-405. Permit fee.
7-406. Business and privilege licenses required.
7-407. Permissible type of fireworks.
7-408. Conditions for sale and use of permissible items.
7-409. Retail sale of permissible items--time limitations--exceptions.
7-410. Public displays--permits--regulation.
7-411. Regulations governing storing, locating or display of fireworks.
7-412. Unlawful acts in the sale, handling or private use of fireworks.
7-413. Seizure and destruction of fireworks.
7-414. Penalty for violation.
7-415. Exceptions to application.
7-401. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the sale,
display and use of certain fireworks for both private and public display within
the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, within certain
guidelines which shall provide for the general safety and welfare of the citizens
thereof. (Ord. #940, July 2001)
7-402. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein, unless clearly indicated
otherwise:
(1) "Distributor" means any person engaged in the business of making
sales of fireworks to any other person engaged in the business of reselling
fireworks either as a retailer, wholesaler, or any person who receives, brings or
imports any fireworks of any kind, in any manner into the City of
Lawrenceburg, except to a holder of a manufacturer's distributor's or
wholesaler's permit issued by the state fire marshal and the Lawrenceburg
Codes Department;
(2) "D.O.T. Class 1.4 common fireworks" means all articles of fireworks
as are now or hereafter classified as "D.O.T. Class 1.4 common fireworks" in the
regulations of the United States Department of Transportation for
transportation of explosive and other dangerous articles;
7-8
(3) "Manufacturer" means any person engaged in the making,
manufacture or construction of fireworks of any kind within the City of
Lawrenceburg;
(4) "Permit" means the written authority of the Lawrenceburg Codes
Department issued under the authority of this chapter;
(5) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, LLC
or LLP, or any other entity;
(6) "Retailer" means any person engaged in the business of making
retail sales of fireworks at specified times during the year as provided herein;
(7) "Sale" means an exchange of articles of fireworks for money and
also includes the barter, exchange, gift or offer thereof, and each such
transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, salesman,
agent, association, copartnership, or any one (1) or more individuals;
(8) "Special fireworks" means all articles of fireworks that are
classified as Class 1.3 explosives in the regulations of the United States
Department of Transportation and includes all articles other than those
classified as Class 1.4. (Ord. #940, July 2001, as amended by Ord. #1142, Aug.
2014)
7-403. Manufacture prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
as defined herein, to manufacture within the corporate limits of Lawrenceburg,
pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks, of any kind or description. (1999
Code, § 7-403)
7-404. Permits required, storage, sale and use restricted. It shall
be unlawful for any person, as defined herein, to store or sell in, or ship into, the
corporate limits of Lawrenceburg, any pyrotechnics, commonly known as
fireworks, except those fireworks classed as permissible fireworks in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 68-104-108. The storage and sale of permissible fireworks
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Any person, as defined herein, desiring to store and/or sell
fireworks within the corporate limits of Lawrenceburg shall make application
for a permit to do so on forms provided for that purpose.
The application shall include the name of the person making the
application, the person, as defined herein, he represents, the business address
of both the applicant and the person he represents, the address and description
of the premises where the storage and/or the sale of fireworks is contemplated
and any other information the fire inspector deems pertinent to aid in the
investigation of the application.
The application shall be referred to the Lawrenceburg Fire Inspector who
shall interview the applicant and inspect the premises in which the storage
and/or sale of fireworks is contemplated and make whatever additional
7-9
investigation of the applicant or premises he deems appropriate to insure that
the premises and its operation by the applicant will not constitute a fire,
explosion or similar safety hazard. The fire inspector shall make a
determination which shall indicate whether the application is approved or
denied and shall clearly state the reasons for denial, if applicable. The report
may also indicate a qualified approval based on authority which the fire
inspector shall have to impose reasonable restrictions on the applicant and/or
premises.
If the fire inspector approves the application the permit shall be issued.
If the fire inspector's approval is qualified, the restrictions and conditions
imposed by the fire inspector upon the applicant and/or premises shall be stated
in writing in the permit. The permit shall not be transferable to any other
person, as defined herein, or on any other premises or location. (1999 Code,
§ 7-404, as amended by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014, and Ord. #1180, Aug. 2016
Ch4_03-28-19)
7-405. Permit fee. The permit fee for the permit provided in §7-404 of
this chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the fee split between
the codes department and the fire department. The permit shall be valid for
twelve (12) months. The permit and fee may change from time to time through
resolution. However, the Board of Mayor and Council of Lawrenceburg may in
its discretion waive the permit fee for any non-profit organization requesting the
permit. (1999 Code, § 7-405, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March
2012, and Ord. #1180, Aug. 2016 Ch4_03-28-19)
7-406. Business and privilege licenses required. The issuance of
permits provided for herein shall not replace or relieve any person of state,
county or municipal business and privilege licenses as now or hereafter provided
by law. (1999 Code, § 7-406)
7-407. Permissible type of fireworks. It is unlawful for any person
as defined herein to possess, sell or use within the City of Lawrenceburg, or ship
into the City of Lawrenceburg, except as provided in this chapter, any
pyrotechnics commonly known as "fireworks" other than the following
permissible items:
(1) Those items now or hereafter classified as D.O.T. Class 1.4 common
fireworks; or
(2) Those items that comply with the construction, chemical
composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission and permitted for use by the general
public under its regulations. (1999 Code, § 7-407)
7-10
7-408. Conditions for sale and use of permissible items. No
permissible articles of common fireworks shall be sold, offered for sale, or
possessed within the City of Lawrenceburg, or used within the city, except as
herein provided unless it is properly named to conform to the nomenclature and
unless it is certified as "common fireworks" on all shipping cases and by
imprinting on the article or retail container "D.O.T. Class 1.4 common
fireworks," such imprint to be of sufficient size and so positioned as to be readily
recognized by law enforcement authorities and the general public. (1999 Code,
§ 7-408)
7-409. Retail sale of permissible items--time limitations--
exceptions. Permissible articles of fireworks may be sold at retail in the City
of Lawrenceburg and used within the City of Lawrenceburg from June 20th
through July 5th, and December 10th through December 31st and January 1st and
2nd of each year only, except that "fireworks" do not include toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty five
one-hundredths (25/100) grains or less of explosive compounds are used,
provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the
cap when in place for exploding, and toy paper pistol caps which contain less
than twenty-five one-hundredths (25/100) grains of explosive compounds, cone,
bottle, tube, or other type serpentine pop-off novelties, model rockets, wire
sparklers, containing not over one hundred (100) grams of composition per item
(sparklers containing chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five (5) grams
of composition per item), emergency flares, matches, trick matches, and
cigarette loads, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. (1999
Code, § 7-409)
7-410. Public displays--permits--regulation. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as applying to the shipping, sale, possession, and use of
fireworks for public displays by holders of a permit for a public display to be
conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
state fire marshal. Such items of fireworks which are to be used for public
display only and which are otherwise prohibited for sale and use within the City
of Lawrenceburg shall include display shells designed to be fired from mortars
and display set pieces of fireworks classified by the regulation or the United
States Department of Transportation as "Class 1.3 special fireworks" and shall
not include such items of commercial fireworks as cherry bombs, tubular
salutes, repeating bombs, aerial bombs and torpedoes. Public displays shall be
performed only under competent supervision, and after the persons or
organizations making such displays shall have received written approval from
the Lawrenceburg Codes Department, and applied for and received a permit for
such displays issued by the state fire marshal and from the City of
7-11
Lawrenceburg Codes Department. Applicants for permits for such public
displays shall be made in writing and shall show that the proposed display is to
be so located and supervised that it is not hazardous to property and that it
shall not endanger human lives. Possession of special fireworks for re-sale to
holders of a permit for public fireworks display shall be confined to holders of a
distributors permit only.
Permit fees for public display provided for in this section shall be four
hundred dollars ($400.00) but the fee may be waived at the discretion of the
Board of Mayor and Council for any non-profit organization requesting the
permit. (1999 Code, § 7-410, as amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012, and
Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-411. Regulations governing storing, locating or display of
fireworks. (1) Placing, storing, locating or displaying fireworks in any window
where the sun may shine through glass onto the fireworks so displayed or to
permit the presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes, or pipes within ten (10) feet of
where the fireworks are offered for sale is hereby declared unlawful and
prohibited. At all places where fireworks are stored or sold, there must be
posted signs with the words "FIREWORKS--NO SMOKING" in letters not less
than four (4) inches high. No fireworks shall be sold at retail at any location
where paints, oils, or varnishes are for sale or use, unless such paints, oils or
varnishes are kept in their original consumer containers, nor where resin,
turpentine, gasoline or any other flammable substance is stored or sold, if the
storage creates an undue hazard to any person or property.
(2) All firework devices that are readily accessible to handling by
consumers or purchasers must have their fuses protected in such a manner as
to protect against accidental ignition of an item by spark, cigarette ash or other
ignition source. Safety-type thread-wrapped and coated fuses shall be exempt
from this provision. (1999 Code, § 7-411)
7-412. Unlawful acts in the sale, handling or private use of
fireworks. (1) It is unlawful to:
(a) Offer for retail sale or to sell any fireworks to children under
the age of ten (10) years or to any intoxicated or irresponsible person;
(b) Explode or ignite fireworks within six hundred feet (600') of
any church, hospital, funeral home, school, industrial complex, fuel
distribution center, commercial lumber yard, property of the City of
Lawrenceburg, or in the City of Lawrenceburg downtown business areas,
or within two hundred feet (200') of where fireworks are stored, sold or
offered for sale;
(c) Ignite or discharge any permissible articles of fireworks
within or throw the same from a motor vehicle while within, nor shall any
7-12
person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such
motor vehicle, or at or near any person or group of people.
(2) All items of fireworks which exceed the limits of D.O.T. Class 1.4
common fireworks as to explosive composition, such items being commonly
referred to as "illegal ground salutes" designed to produce an audible effect, are
expressly prohibited from shipment into, manufacture, possession, sale or use
within the City of Lawrenceburg for any purpose. This subsection shall not
affect display fireworks authorized by this chapter. (1999 Code, § 7-412)
7-413. Seizure and destruction of fireworks. (1) The Lawrenceburg
Codes Department shall seize as contraband any fireworks other than "Class 1.4
common fireworks" or "special fireworks" for public displays which are sold,
displayed, used or possessed in violation of this chapter.
(2) Before any seized fireworks may be destroyed:
(a) If the owner of such seized fireworks is known, the
Lawrenceburg Codes Department shall give notice by certified mail or
personal service to such owner, of the codes department's intention to
destroy such seized materials. Such notice shall inform the owner of the
owner's right to a hearing. Upon the request of the owner, the codes
department shall conduct an appropriate contested case hearing
concerning such destruction of fireworks in accordance with the Uniform
Administrative Procedures Act, complied in Tennessee Code Annotated,
Title 4, Chapter 5.
(b) If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is not
known to the Lawrenceburg Codes Department, the codes department
personnel shall cause to be published, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county wherein the seizure was made, notice of such
seizure, and the codes department's intention to destroy such fireworks.
The notice shall be published once and if no person claims ownership of
the fireworks within ten (10) days of the date of the publication, the
Lawrenceburg Codes Department may proceed to destroy the fireworks.
If the owner does claim the fireworks within the time specified, a hearing
as set out in this subsection shall be held. (1999 Code, § 7-413, as
amended by Ord. #1142, Aug. 2014)
7-414. Penalty for violation. Any person as defined herein that
violates any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed state authorized
limits. In addition, the Lawrenceburg Codes Department may refuse to issue
another permit to the holder of a permit so convicted for a period not to exceed
three (3) years. (1999 Code, § 7-414, modified, and amended by Ord. #1142,
Aug. 2014)
7-13
7-415. Exceptions to application. (1) Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as applying to the manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals
necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private
transportation or of illuminating devices for photographic use, nor as applying
to the military or navel forces of the United States, or the State of Tennessee or
to peace officers, nor as prohibiting the sale or use of blank cartridges for
ceremonial, theatrical, or athletic events, nor as applying to the transportation,
sale or use of fireworks solely for agricultural purposes, providing the purchaser
first secures a written permit to purchase and use fireworks for agricultural
purposes only from the state fire marshal, and after approval of the county
agricultural agent of the county in which the fireworks are to be used and the
fireworks must at all times be kept in possession of the farmer to whom the
permit is issued. Such permits and fireworks shall not be transferable. Items
sold for agricultural purposes shall be limited to those items that are legal for
retail sale and use within the City of Lawrenceburg.
(2) Further exempt are fireworks and/or fireworks displays that might
be other than the use of Class 1.4 common fireworks when used solely for a
public exhibition of such items either when displayed or discharged. (1999
Code, § 7-415)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
CHAPTER
1. BEER.
2. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OTHER THAN BEER.
3. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
CHAPTER 1
BEER2
SECTION
8-101. Beer board established.
8-102. Meetings of the beer board.
8-103. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept.
8-104. Requirements for beer board quorum and action.
8-105. Powers and duties of the beer board.
8-106. "Beer" defined.
8-107. Permit required for engaging in beer business.
8-108. Privilege tax.
8-109. Beer permits shall be restrictive.
8-110. Types of permits.
8-111. Interference with public health, safety, and morals prohibited.
8-112. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes prohibited.
8-113. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders.
8-114. Revocation of beer permits.
8-115. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension.
8-116. Loss of clerk's certification for sale to minor.
8-101. Beer board established. There is hereby established a beer
board to be composed of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with consent
of the council. All members of the beer board shall be citizens of the city or
owners of real property located in the City of Lawrenceburg. Beer board
members shall be appointed for five (5) year terms except that the first members
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
2Municipal code references
Tax provisions: title 5.
State law reference
For a leading case on a municipality's authority to regulate beer, see
Watkins v. Naifeh, 635 S.W.2d 104 (Tenn. 1982).
8-2
shall be appointed for staggered terms so that the term of one (1) member shall
expire each year thereafter. Beer board members shall hold office for their term
or until their successors are appointed and qualified. No board or committee
member may serve more than twelve (12) consecutive years in the same board
or committee position.1A chairman shall be elected annually by the board from
among its members. The Board of Mayor and Council may also, by resolution
adopt from time to time as they deem proper the amount of compensation to be
paid, and the time of payment, to the members of said beer board for their
services thereon, as said council may deem proper; provided that the members
of said beer board may serve without compensation for services thereon.
If at any time all places on such beer board are vacant or unfilled, the
Board of Mayor and Council shall serve as and perform the duties of, such beer
board. If vacancies should occur in such beer board the Board of Mayor and
Council shall appoint one (1) or more of their members, as may be necessary, to
serve as a member or members of the beer board until the vacancy or vacancies
are filled. (1999 Code, § 8-101, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March
2012)
8-102. Meetings of the beer board. All meetings of the beer board
shall be open to the public. The board shall hold regular meetings in the city
administration building at such times as it shall prescribe. When there is
business to come before the beer board, a special meeting may be called by the
chairman or any two members provided he or they give a reasonable notice
thereof to each member. The board may adjourn a meeting at any time to
another time or place. (1999 Code, § 8-102)
8-103. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept. The city
administrator or his designee shall make a record of the proceedings of all
meetings of the beer board. The record shall be a public record and shall contain
at least the following: The date of each meeting; the names of the board
members present and absent; the names of the members introducing and
seconding motions and resolutions, etc., before the board; a copy of each such
motion or resolution presented; the vote of each member thereon; and the
provisions of each beer permit issued by the board. (1999 Code, § 8-103,
modified)
8-104. Requirements for beer board quorum and action. The
attendance of at least a majority of the members of the beer board shall be
required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
Matters before the board shall be decided by a majority of the members present
if a quorum is constituted. Any member present but not voting shall be deemed
to have cast a "nay" vote. (1999 Code, § 8-104)
1Charter reference
Article IV, Section G(1).
8-3
8-105. Powers and duties of the beer board. The beer board shall
have the power and it is hereby directed to approve or disapprove and/or restrict
applicants for the selling, storing for sale, distributing for sale, and
manufacturing of beer within this city in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, subject to the provisions of state law. (1999 Code, § 8-105, modified)
8-106. "Beer" defined. The term "beer" as used in this chapter shall
mean and include all intoxicating beverages such as beers, ales, and other malt
liquors having an alcoholic content of not more than five percent (5%) by weight.
(1999 Code, § 8-106)
8-107. Permit required for engaging in beer business. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute, or manufacture beer
without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer board
of the City of Lawrenceburg. The application shall be made on such form as the
beer board shall prescribe and/or furnish, and pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-5-101 et seq., and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be in
the form of a cashier's check payable to the City of Lawrenceburg. Each
applicant must be a person of good moral character and he must certify that he
has read and is familiar with the provisions of this chapter.
Permits so issued shall continue in effect so long as the owner and
operator of the premises remains the same and the location of the premises
remains the same, and the establishment continues to do business; the location
of the establishment remains the same; the establishment continues to be
operated under the name identified in the permit application and the annual
privilege tax is paid. (1999 Code, § 8-107, modified)
8-108. Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of
selling, distributing, storing or manufacturing beer a privilege tax of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or
manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1, of each year, to the City
of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. At the time a new permit is issued to any business
subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax
on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next
tax payment date. (1999 Code, § 8-108)
8-109. Beer permits shall be restrictive. All beer permits shall be
restrictive as to the type of beer business authorized under them. Separate
permits shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing, and
manufacturing. Beer permits for retail sale of beer may be further restricted by
8-4
the beer board so as to authorize sales only for on or off premises consumption.
A single permit may be issued for on premise and off premise consumption. It
shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type or phase of
the beer business not expressly authorized by the permit. It shall likewise be
unlawful not to comply with any and all express restrictions or conditions which
may be written into his permit by the beer board.
No permit shall be issued to sell any beverage coming within the
provisions of this chapter in violation of the zoning ordinance of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 8-109)
8-110. Types of permits. (1) Club permits. There presently exists four
(4) clubs in the City of Lawrenceburg with a beer permit which were issued
pursuant to Ord. #507 of the City of Lawrenceburg. Club permits are limited
to the four (4) in existence on August 10, 1999
The possession for sale, storage for sale, and sale at retail of beer is
permitted to establishments holding a club permit under the provisions and
conditions of this chapter.
Such holders of club permits are permitted to sell, serve or dispense to
their respective members thereof, and to any guest of a member, when the guest
is accompanied by a member, at the club premises, cooled beer for consumption
on the premises where sold, delivered, served, and/or dispensed, and such clubs
are also permitted to sell or deliver to its respective members, at the club
premises, cooled or uncooled beer for off-premises consumption; Provided, that
a list of guests of members, be kept and at all times be maintained, and be
subject to inspection by representatives of the City of Lawrenceburg, and that
any member of such club who is the bartender or who is employed in the sale or
serving of beer is prohibited from selling, serving, delivering, or dispensing beer
to any guest of such bartender or employee; Provided, further, that such beer is
sold, serviced and dispensed, or delivered only to members of the club who hold
valid, unexpired membership of the club, for either on-premises consumption
(which may include service of beer to such guests as aforesaid) or off-premises
consumption, and that such sales, service, and delivery of beer shall be in
compliance with the hours allowed in this chapter. Provided however any holder
of a club permit who also holds a liquor by the drink license issued by the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall be allowed to sell, serve,
deliver, or dispense beer during the same days and same hours as it is
authorized to sell liquor by the drink by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage
Commission. The sale and/or service or delivery of beer by any club, club
member, or any officer or employee thereof or by its bartender, to any person,
including members of such club, who is a minor (i.e. a person under the age of
twenty-one years) or to any person who is not a member of the club or who
doesn't hold a valid unexpired membership, except a guest accompanied by the
member, is expressly prohibited, and likewise any purchases or receipts of beer
8-5
from such clubs by such persons and/or at such times, are prohibited, and any
such sale or purchase is declared to be illegal, and unlawful.
(2) Off premises permit. An off premises permit shall be issued for the
consumption of beer only off the premises of such seller and said beer is not to
be consumed by the purchaser or other persons upon the premises of such seller.
(3) On premises permit. An on premises permit shall be issued for the
consumption of beer on the premises of such seller. To qualify for an on premises
permit, an establishment must, in addition to meeting the other regulations in
this chapter:
(a) Be primarily a restaurant or bowling alley; and
(b) Be able to seat a minimum of thirty (30) people, in booths
and at tables, in addition to any other seating it may have; and
(c) The monthly beer sales of any establishment that holds an
on premises permit shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross sales
of the establishment. Any such establishment which for two (2)
consecutive months or for any three (3) months in any calendar year has
beer sales exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its gross sales, shall have its
beer permit revoked. Provided however, the beer board shall not suspend,
revoke, or deny an on premises permit to a business engaged in the sale
of beer on the basis that beer sales exceed fifty percent (50%) of its gross
sales if a valid on premises permit has been issued to any business as of
August 10, 1999; provided further, however, that this exception shall not
apply if beer is not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location
during any continuous six (6) month period after August 10, 1999.
(d) For the purposes of this chapter a "restaurant" is defined as
an establishment in which a diversified selection of food and beverages
are offered for sale within the building in which the establishment is
located, and has a kitchen separate and apart from the dining area; but
adjoining the dining area, in which food is prepared for consumption by
the public, and the serving of food or meals constitutes the principal
business of such establishment and the serving of beer being only an
incidental part of the business.
(e) For the purpose of this chapter a "bowling alley" is defined
as an establishment which has permanently affixed bowling lanes for the
sport of bowling and the sport of bowling constitutes the principal
business of such establishment and the serving of beer being only an
incidental part of the business.
(4) Special event permit. (a) The beer board shall have the authority
to issue temporary permits for the sale, storage, dispensing, serving,
distribution and/or manufacture of beer in the city for periods not to
exceed a total of ten (10) days during a calendar year. A temporary permit
may be issued by the beer board for scheduled sporting, recreation,
amusement, dining, entertainment and other similar events and
activities and shall specify with reasonable particularity the premises on
8-6
which the permit shall be valid and the time or times during which the
permit shall be valid. Temporary permits shall be issued upon the same
conditions governing other permits except that the posting of a sign on
the premises shall not be required as part of the application process, and
the beer board shall determine and specify the terms and conditions for
issuance of each temporary permit. Temporary permits may be issued for
on-premises consumption.
(b) A special event permit may be issued by the beer board and
is a permit which may be issued to a charitable or nonprofit organization
hosting or sponsoring the event. Such permit shall be issued for a period
of time not to exceed ten (10) days, subject to the hours of sale which may
be imposed by law or regulation, and such permit may be issued in
advance of its effective date. A multiple event permit may be issued for
a fixed number of events during a calendar year (provided a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each event listed in the multiple event
application has been paid). Such permit shall not be issued unless and
until there shall have been paid to the City of Lawrenceburg for each
such permit a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and there shall
have been submitted to the beer board an application which designates
the premises and the confined area on the premises upon which beer shall
be served and consumed. The application for a special event permit shall
set forth the following information:
(i) The name, address and telephone number of the
presiding officer of the charitable or nonprofit organization seeking
a special event permit; and
(ii) The name, address and telephone number of the
person responsible for beer sales under the permit; and
(iii) The date(s) and time(s) when the event will be held;
and
(iv) The hours when beer sales will be conducted during
the event; and
(v) The proposed location for the same, storage,
dispensing and distribution is to take place.
(vi) The proposed confined area on the premises where
consumption of beer is to be restricted to. (Map or drawing of the
premises with the confined area highlighted.)
(c) A special event permittee shall be restricted where hours of
sale, distribution, dispensing or serving shall terminate at 10:00 P.M. on
any date during the permit time and shall be unlawful for the special
event permit holder to allow the sale, distribution, dispensing or serving
past 10:00 P.M. on any date during her permit duration.
(d) Special event permit holders shall allow the sale,
distribution, dispensing, or serving of more than three (3) sixteen (16)
ounce containers of beer to any one (1) patron during any calendar day.
8-7
The special event permittee shall provide the beer board with their plans
and procedures to assure that no patron shall be served more that three
(3) sixteen (16) ounce containers of beer during any calendar day when
applying for the special events permit.
(e) Special event permittees shall not allow the sale,
distribution, dispensing, or serving of beer in any container that
advertises beer or other alcoholic beverage on the container.
(f) Special event permittees shall not allow persons under the
age of twenty-one (21) in the confined area where the sale, distribution,
dispensing or serving of beer is taking place.
(g) Special event permittees must have food sales available at
the event in order to qualify for a special event permit. (Ord. #942, June
2001, as amended by Ord. #1077, June 2011, Ord. #1121, Nov. 2013, Ord.
#1203, July 2017 Ch4_03-28-19, and Ord. #1223, Feb. 2018
Ch4_03-28-19)
8-111. Interference with public health, safety, and morals
prohibited. No permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when such
business would cause congestion of traffic or would interfere with schools,
churches, or other places of public gathering, or would otherwise interfere with
the public health, safety, and morals. In no event will a permit be issued
authorizing the manufacture or storage of beer, or the sale of beer within three
hundred (300) feet of any hospital, school, church or other place of public
gathering. The distances shall be measured in a straight line from the front
door on the building from which beer will be manufactured, stored or sold to the
front door of the hospital, school, church or other place of public gathering
unless a specific waiver is granted by the beer board after a full hearing. No
permit shall be suspended, revoked or denied on the basis of proximity of the
establishment to a school, church, or other place of public gathering if a valid
permit had been issued to any business on that same location as of January 1,
1995, unless beer is not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location
during any continuous twelve-month period after January 1, 1995. (1999 Code,
§ 8-112)
8-112. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes
prohibited. No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years.
No person, firm, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate, or association
having at least a five percent (5%) ownership interest in the applicant shall have
been convicted of any violation of the laws against possession, sale,
manufacture, or transportation of beer or other alcoholic beverages or any crime
involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years. (1999 Code, § 8-113)
8-8
8-113. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders. It
shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to:
(1) Employ any minor under 18 years of age in the sale, storage,
distribution or manufacture of beer. This prohibition shall not apply to any
establishment with a beer permit that engages in the restaurant business or
bowling alley business. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as a prohibition of
employing a minor in the restaurant business or the bowling alley business.
(2) Make or allow any sale, service, delivery or dispensing of beer
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Monday through Saturday and
between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. on Sundays. This prohibition
shall not apply to any establishment which has a liquor by the drink license
issued by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. Any establishment
having a liquor by the drink license shall be allowed to sell beer during the same
hours it is authorized to sell liquor by the drink as established by the Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(3) Make or allow any sale of beer to a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
(4) Allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to loiter in or
about his place of business. This prohibition shall not apply to any
establishment involved in the restaurant business or bowling alley business.
(5) Make or allow any sale of beer to any intoxicated person or to any
feeble-minded, insane, or otherwise mentally incapacitated person.
(6) Allow drunk persons to loiter about his premises.
(7) Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for
men and women. (1999 Code, § 8-114, as amended by Ord. #942, June 2001,
Ord. #1027, Sept. 2007, Ord. #1077, June 2011, and Ord. #1121, Nov. 2013)
8-114. Revocation of beer permits. (1) The beer board shall have the
power to revoke any beer permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
when the holder thereof is guilty of making a false statement or
misrepresentation in his application or of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or state law. However, no beer permit shall be revoked until a public
hearing is held by the board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in
interest. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the police chief or by any
member of the beer board or by the district attorney.
(2) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-608, the beer board
shall not revoke or suspend the permit of a "responsible vendor" qualified under
the requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606 for a clerk's illegal
sale of beer to a minor if the clerk is properly certified and has attended annual
meetings since the clerk's original certification, unless the vendor's status as a
certified responsible vendor has been revoked by the alcoholic beverage
commission. If the responsible vendor's certification has been revoked, the
vendor shall be punished by the beer board as if the vendor were not certified
as a responsible vendor. "Clerk" means any person working in a capacity to sell
8-9
beer directly to consumers for off-premises consumption. Under Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-5-608, the alcoholic beverage commission shall revoke a
vendor's status as a responsible vendor upon notification by the beer board that
the board has made a final determination that the vendor has sold beer to a
minor for the second time in a consecutive twelve-month period. The revocation
shall be for three (3) years. (1999 Code, § 8-115, as amended by Ord. #1027,
Sept. 2007)
8-115. Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension.
(1) Definition. "Responsible vendor" means a person, corporation or
other entity that has been issued a permit to sell beer for off-premises
consumption and has received certification by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage
Commission under the "Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006," Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-5-601, et seq.
(2) Penalty, revocation or suspension. The beer board may, at the time
it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder that is not a
responsible vendor the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed two
thousand five hundred and dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense of making or
permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil penalty not to exceed one
thousand and 00/100 dollars ($1,000.00) for any other offense.
(3) The beer board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil penalty
not to exceed one thousand and 00/100 dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense of
making or permitting to be made any sales to minors or for any other offense.
(4) If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or
suspension, the holder shall have seven (7) days within which to pay the civil
penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil penalty
is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed
withdrawn.
(5) Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension by
a permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged
and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the city may impose.
(1999 Code, § 8-116, modified, as amended by Ord. #Ord. #1027, Sept. 2007)
8-216. Loss of clerk's certification for sale. If the beer board
determines that a clerk of an off-premises beer permit holder certified under
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606, sold beer to a minor, the beer board shall
report the name of the clerk to the alcoholic beverage commission within fifteen
(15) days of determination of the sale. The certification of the clerk shall be
invalid and the clerk may not reapply for a new certificate for a period of one (1)
year from the date of the beer board's determination. (as added by Ord. #1027,
Sept. 2007)
8-10
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OTHER THAN BEER1
SECTION
8-201. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation.
8-202. Application for certificate.
8-203. Applicant to agree to comply with laws.
8-204. Applicant to appear before board of mayor and commissioners; duty to
give information.
8-205. Action on application.
8-206. Deleted.
8-207. Applicants for certificate who have criminal record.
8-208. Only one establishment to be operated by retailer.
8-209. Where establishments may be located.
8-210. Retail stores to be on ground floor; entrances.
8-211. Limitation on number of retailers.
8-212. Sales for consumption on premises.
8-213. Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in retail
establishments.
8-214. Inspection fee.
8-215. Violations.
8-201. Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation. It shall be
unlawful to engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting, distributing,
or to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the
City of Lawrenceburg except as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
(as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-202. Application for certificate.2 Before any certificate, as required
by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208 or a renewal as required by § 57-3-213
shall be signed by the mayor, or by any commissioner3, an application in writing
1State law reference
Employee and server permits: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-701,
et seq.
2State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208.
3State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-208 requires the certificate to be
signed by the mayor or a majority of the governing body.
8-11
shall be filed with the city administrator on a form to be provided by the city,
giving the following information:
(1) Name, age and address of the applicant.
(2) Number of years of residence in the City of Lawrenceburg and
Lawrence County, Tennessee.
(3) Occupation or business and length of time engaged in such
occupation or business.
(4) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a violation of
any state or federal law or of the violation of this code or any city ordinance, and
the details of any such conviction.
(5) If employed, the name and address of employer.
(6) If in business, the kind of business and location thereof.
(7) The location of the proposed store for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(8) The name and address of the owner of the store.
(9) If the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address of each
partner, and his occupation, business or employer. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name, age and address of the stockholders and their degrees of
ownership of stock in the corporation. If the applicant is an LLC, they shall list
the name, age and address of the members, their degree of ownership. All
parties shall also list the place of residence and length of residence of all
partners, owners, stockholders and members.
The information in the application shall be verified by the oath of the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or LLC, the application
shall be verified by the oath of each partner, or by the president of the
corporation or the members of the LLC.
Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable investigation
fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per person associated with the
applicant. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-203. Applicant to agree to comply with laws. The applicant for a
certificate of compliance shall agree in writing to comply with the state and
federal laws and ordinances of the city and rules and regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverage Commission of the State for sale of alcoholic beverages. (as added by
Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-204. Application to appear before board of mayor and
commissioners; duty to give information. An applicant for a certificate of
compliance may be required to appear in person before the board of mayor and
commissioners for such reasonable examination as may be desired by the board.
(as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-205. Action on application. Every application for a certificate of
compliance shall be referred to the chief of police for investigation and to the city
8-12
attorney for review, each of whom shall submit his findings to the Board of
Mayor and Council within thirty (30) days of the date each application was filed.
The Board of Mayor and Council may issue a certificate of compliance to
any applicant, which shall be signed by the mayor or by a majority of the Board
of Mayor and Council. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007, and amended by
Ord. #1091, March 2012)
8-206. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007, and deleted by
Ord. #1117, Sept. 2013)
8-207. Applicants for certificate of compliance who have criminal
record. No certificate of good moral character for the manufacture or sale at
wholesale or retail of alcoholic beverages, or for the manufacture or vinting of
wine, shall be issued to any person, (or if the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, LLC or other entity, any partner, any stockholder, officer or
member, who, within ten (10) years preceding the application for such certificate
of compliance, has been convicted of any felony or convicted of any offense under
the laws of the state or of the United States prohibiting the sale, possession,
transportation, storage or otherwise handling of intoxicating liquors, or who has
during such period been engaged in business, alone or with others, in violation
of such laws. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-208. Only one establishment to be operated to retailer. No
retailer shall operate, directly or indirectly, more than one place of business for
the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. The word "indirectly," as used in this
section, shall include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business
by way of stock, ownership, loan, partner's interest or otherwise. (as added by
Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-209. Where establishments may be located. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or maintain any retail establishment for the sale,
storage or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city except at locations zoned
for that purpose, but in no event shall any establishment be located within three
hundred (300) feet of a hospital, church or school, or any other place of public
gathering, measured in a straight line from the front door on the building from
which alcoholic beverage will be manufactured, stored or sold to the front door
of the hospital, school, church or other place of public gathering. (as added by
Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-210. Retail stores to be on ground floor; entrances. No retail
store shall be located anywhere on premises in the city except on the ground
floor thereof. Each such store shall have only one main entrance; provided, that
when a store is located on the corner of two (2) streets, such store may maintain
a door opening on each such street; and provided further, that any salesroom
8-13
adjoining the lobby of a hotel may maintain an additional door into such lobby
as long as the lobby is open to the public. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-211. Limitation on number of retailers to be licensed. Within the
corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg there shall be a limit on the
number of retailers licensed to sell alcoholic beverages other than beer under the
provisions of this chapter. That limit shall be one (1) retailer for every three
thousand four hundred (3,400) inhabitants of the City of Lawrenceburg
according to the latest federal census, whether regular or special. No person,
firm or corporation shall be licensed under this chapter or permitted by the City
of Lawrenceburg to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
other than beer in excess of one licensee for every three thousand four hundred
(3,400) inhabitants of Lawrenceburg according to the last federal census,
whether regular or special. When the number of licenses issued under this
chapter for retail dealers in alcoholic beverages other than beer within the
corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg equals one for every three thousand
four hundred (3,400) inhabitants of said city according to the last federal census,
whether special or regular, all other applications for a license to engage in the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages within the limits of said city shall be opposed
by the City of Lawrenceburg before the alcoholic beverage commission, unless
or until some person, firm or corporation holding such a valid license
discontinues the operation of a retail liquor establishment in the City of
Lawrenceburg.
Based upon the most recent census in the City of Lawrenceburg, the City
of Lawrenceburg has more than ten thousand (10,000) residents but less than
thirteen thousand six hundred (13,600) residents. Accordingly, the issuance of
licenses based upon the above population limits, there shall be no more than
three (3) retail licenses issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages other than beer
within the city limits of the City of Lawrenceburg until a regular or special
census shows the City of Lawrenceburg's population at thirteen thousand six
hundred (13,600) or more. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007, amended by
Ord. #1023, July 2007, and Ord. #1091, March 2012, and replaced by Ord.
#1095, May 2012 Ch4_03-28-19)
8-212. Sales for consumption on premises. No alcoholic beverages
shall be sold for consumption on the premises of the retail establishment. (as
added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-213. Radios, amusement devices and seating facilities
prohibited in retail establishments. No radios, pinball machines, slot
machines or other devices which tend to cause persons to congregate in such
place shall be permitted in any retail establishment. No seating facilities shall
be provided for persons other than employees. (as added by Ord. #1021, June
2007)
8-14
8-214. Inspection fee. The City of Lawrenceburg hereby imposes an
inspection fee in the maximum amount allowed by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-501 on all licensed retailers of alcoholic beverages located within the
corporate limits of the city. (as added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-215. Violations. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil
offense and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the general
penalty provision of this code. Upon conviction of any person under this chapter,
it shall be mandatory for the city judge to immediately certify the conviction,
whether on appeal or not, to the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (as
added by Ord. #1021, June 2007)
8-15
CHAPTER 3
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-301. Definition of alcoholic beverages.
8-302. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
8-303. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises.
8-304. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city administrator.
8-305. Concurrent sales of liquor by the drink and beer.
8-306. Advertisement of alcoholic beverages.
8-301. Definition of alcoholic beverages. As used in this chapter,
unless the context indicates otherwise: alcoholic beverages means and includes
alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine
and capable of being consumed by a human being, other than patented medicine
or beer, where the latter contains an alcoholic content of five percent (5%) by
weight, or less. (as added by Ord. #1075, June 2011)
8-302. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, inclusive, is hereby adopted so
as to be applicable to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on premises
consumption which are regulated by the said code when such sales are
conducted within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
It is the intent of the board of mayor and council that the said Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, inclusive, shall be effective in Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, the same as if said code sections were copied herein verbatim. (as
added by Ord. #1075, June 2011)
8-303. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. Pursuant to the authority contained in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-301, there is hereby levied a privilege tax (in
the same amounts levied by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4,
section 301, for the City of Lawrenceburg General Fund to be paid annually as
provided in this chapter) upon any person, firm, corporation, joint stock
company, syndicate, or association engaging in the business of selling at retail
in the City of Lawrenceburg alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises where sold. The privilege tax amount shall be as follows:
(1) Private club $ 300.00
(2) Convention center $ 500.00
(3) Premier type tourist resort $1,500.00
(4) Historic performing arts center $ 300.00
(5) Urban park center $ 500.00
8-16
(6) Commercial passenger boat company $ 750.00
(7) Historic mansion house site $ 300.00
(8) Historic interpretive center $ 300.00
(9) Community theater $ 300.00
(10) Zoological institution $ 300.00
(11) Museum $ 300.00
(12) Establishment in a terminal building
of a commercial air carrier airport $1,000.00
(13) Commercial airline travel club $ 500.00
(14) Public aquarium $ 300.00
(15) Motor speedway $1,000.00
(16) Sports facility $1,000.00
(17) Theater $ 300.00
(18) Restaurant, according to seating capacity, on licensed premises:
(a) 75  125 seats $ 600.00
(b) 126  175 seats $ 750.00
(c) 176  225 seats $ 800.00
(d) 226  275 seats $ 900.00
(e) 276 seats and more $1,000.00
Wine-only restaurant, according to seating capacity on licensed premises:
(a) 40  125 seats $ 120.00
(b) 126  175 seats $ 150.00
(c) 176  225 seats $ 160.00
(d) 226  275 seats $ 180.00
(e) 226 seats and more $ 200.00
(19) Caterers $ 500.00
(20) Hotels, according to room capacity,
on licensed premises:
(a) 0  99 rooms $1,000.00
(b) 100  399 rooms $1,000.00
(c) 400 rooms and over $1,000.00
(as added by Ord. #1075, June 2011)
8-304. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city administrator.
Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association
exercising the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises in the City of Lawrenceburg shall remit annually to the city
administrator the appropriate tax described in § 8-303. Such payments shall be
remitted not less than thirty (30) days following the end of each twelve (12)
month period from the original date of the license. Upon the transfer of
ownership of such business or the discontinuance of such business, said tax shall
be filed within thirty (30) days following such event. Any person, firm,
corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association failing to make
8-17
payment of the appropriate tax when due shall be subject to the penalty
provided by law. (as added by Ord. #1075, June 2011)
8-305. Concurrent sales of liquor by the drink and beer. Any
person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association which
has received a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the City of Lawrenceburg,
pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, shall,
notwithstanding the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg,
qualify to receive a beer permit from the city, upon the application and approval
for a beer permit from the beer board. (as added by Ord. #1075, June 2011)
8-306. Advertisement of alcoholic beverages. All advertisement of
the availability of liquor for sale by those licensed pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (as added by
Ord. #1075, June 2011)
9-1
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. TAXICABS.
2. CABLE TELEVISION.
3. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
4. GARAGE OR YARD SALES.
CHAPTER 1
TAXICABS
SECTION
9-101. Definitions.
9-102. Permit required.
9-103. Application requirements.
9-104. Name displayed on taxicab.
9-105. Mechanical condition of vehicles.
9-106. Bond or liability policy required.
9-107. Permits are non-assignable.
9-108. License required for drivers.
9-109. Revocation of license.
9-110. Violation and penalty.
9-101. Definitions. (1) "Taxicab" as used in this chapter, means any
and all vehicles carrying passengers for hire, except motor busses or motor
coaches operated by bus lines over designated routes in and through said city.
(2) "Conducting a taxicab business" as used in this chapter shall be
held to mean the use of one or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, by the owner thereof, for the purpose of
carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the
same driven by some other person, but not operated on a fixed route.
(3) "Person" and all personal pronouns used herein shall be held to
apply to and include partnerships, firms, associations, corporations, as well as
individuals, and to include male or female. (1999 Code, § 9-201)
1Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, wiring and housing regulations: title 12.
Liquor and beer regulations: title 8.
Noise reductions: title 11.
Zoning: title 14.
9-2
9-102. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive,
operate, keep for hire or pay within the limits of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee any
taxicab without having first obtained a permit to operate a taxicab or to conduct
a taxicab business, and to obtain same from the City Administrator of the City
of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee; and without having obtained and paid for a license
for operating or keeping for pay or hire, or both, and having same, in force and
effect under the provisions of this chapter. Said license referred to here or at
other places in this chapter means the privilege license or privilege tax fixed by
the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999
Code, § 9-202, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
9-103. Application requirements. Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or association, applying for license to operate a taxicab or conduct
a taxicab business in the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, shall make such
application in writing under oath to the City Administrator of the City of
Lawrenceburg, and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended
place of business and the number of taxicabs to be operated, with the makes
motor numbers, state license plate numbers, and model of each. If the applicant
is a corporation the names and addresses of the president and secretary thereof
shall be given.
And no such license shall be issued unless and until the city
administrator shall have issued a permit to the applicant giving him permission
to operate a taxicab or conduct a taxicab business in the City of Lawrenceburg;
and no such permit shall be issued or held by a person who is not a person of
good moral character nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony, nor shall such permit be issued or held by any corporation
if any official thereof shall be ineligible for a permit under the foregoing
conditions.
The final decision as to granting or refusing such permit based on proof
or lack of proof is to the foregoing qualifications shall be left entirely to the
discretion and judgment of the city administrator of said city.
Such permits shall be substantially as follows:
" " is granted permission to operate a taxicab or
conduct a taxicab business in Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, provided he shall
comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
This to be signed by the city administrator of the city. (1999 Code,
§ 9-203, modified)
9-104. Name displayed on taxicab. Each taxicab while in operation
shall have the name of the licensee on it in such place and manner as to be
readable at a distance of 30 feet. (1999 Code, § 9-204)
9-105. Mechanical condition of vehicles. No taxicab shall be
operated unless it bears state license plated, and is equipped with proper
9-3
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wiper in
good condition. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to
inspect or cause to be inspected every taxicab as often as may be necessary to
see to the enforcement of the provisions of this section, but at least once a year
upon permit renewal or application. (1999 Code, § 9-205, modified)
9-106. Bond or liability policy required. No taxicab shall be operated
within the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, unless it is covered by a bond or
public liability policy of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the
injury or death of one (1) person or three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for two (2) or more persons, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
property damage resulting from any accident through or by reasons of the
operation of such taxicab, and such policy or certificate of insurance shall be
approved by the city administrator of said city and filed and left with the city
administrator at the time license is requested. Said policies shall not be
cancelled or surrendered except on written notice to the city administrator.
Failure of any permittee or licensee to procure and file the policies of insurance
as required by this section, shall immediately forfeit and make null and void
such permit and license and all rights thereunder shall at once cease.
Upon the depositing of such insurance policy with the city administrator,
the said city administrator shall, if satisfied that said policy complies in all
respects with this chapter, issue receipt therefor showing therein the number
of the policy; the name of the company, corporation or association by which
issued; the make, color, style and the motor or manufacturers serial number of
the vehicle or vehicles covered by such policy. Said receipt shall at all times be
either posted or displayed in such vehicle so insured, or be in possession of the
chauffeur or driver operating such vehicle so insured while on the streets, alleys,
public square, boulevards or other public places and thoroughfares and places
of the city, and when called for shall be exhibited by such chauffeur or driver to
any officer of the city charged with the enforcement of laws and ordinances of
the city and to any person injured or damaged or their agents. When a single
policy is filed with the city administrator under this chapter, insuring or
covering more than one vehicle, the city administrator shall issue a separate
receipt as to each vehicle insured thereunder or covered thereby. (1999 Code,
§ 9-206, modified)
9-107. Permits are non-assignable. Any license or permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall be non-assignable. (1999 Code,
§ 9-207, modified)
9-108. License required for drivers. No person shall be employed by
a taxicab licensee or be permitted by the licensee to drive unless he shall have
procured a chauffeur's license in compliance with the state laws; nor shall any
9-4
one be employed unless he has the qualifications as set out in § 9-103 hereof.
(1999 Code, § 9-208)
9-109. Revocation of license. The city administrator upon
recommendation of the police chief may revoke any licensee's permit to operate
a taxicab or conduct a taxicab business in said city for repeated violation of the
traffic laws or ordinances or of any ordinances regulating the conduct of drivers,
including any provisions of this chapter. And such permit may be revoked at
any time for cause, if the permittee's vehicle shall be used for immoral purposes
or in aiding and abetting in immoral conduct or purposes or for a violation of any
ordinance of the city or any state law.
It shall be unlawful for any person whose permit or license has been
revoked to thereafter operate a taxicab or conduct a taxicab business within the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 9-209, modified)
9-110. Violation and penalty. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) for each offense, and not more than
state authorized limit for each offense together with all costs. Each separate
operation of a taxicab on any trip or part thereof, by any operator of such
vehicle, without complying with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
considered a separate offense, and be punishable as such. (1999 Code, § 9-210,
modified)
9-5
CHAPTER 2
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-201. To be furnished under franchise.
9-201. To be furnished under franchise. Cable television service
shall be furnished to the City of Lawrenceburg and its inhabitants under
franchise as the Board of Mayor and Council shall grant. The rights, powers,
duties and obligations of the City of Lawrenceburg and its inhabitants and the
grantee of the franchise shall be clearly stated in the franchise agreement which
shall be binding upon the parties concerned.1 (1999 Code, § 9-301, modified,
and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
1For complete details relating to the cable television franchise agreement
see Ord. #813 dated April 28, 1995 in the office of the city recorder.
9-6
CHAPTER 3
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION
9-301. Purpose and intent.
9-302. Definitions.
9-303. Classification.
9-304. Permit and/or license required.
9-305. Issuance of permit and/or license.
9-306. Fees.
9-307. Inspection.
9-308. Expiration of permit and/or license.
9-309. Suspension.
9-310. Revocation.
9-311. Transfer of permit and/or license.
9-312. Location restrictions.
9-313. Non-conforming uses.
9-314. Additional regulations for adult motels.
9-315. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
9-316. Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.
9-317. Signage.
9-318. Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant
required.
9-319. Exemptions.
9-320. Notices.
9-321. Violation.
9-301. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Lawrenceburg, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location
and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of
Lawrenceburg. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. (1999 Code, § 9-401)
9-302. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following words
or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them.
9-7
(1) "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(2) "Adult bookstore" or "adult video store." An establishment having
as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines,
films, video cassettes, video reproductions or slides for sale or viewing on
premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin-operated means, and
other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their principal
emphasis on matters, depicting, describing or relating to specified "sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment
or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, for sale or rental to
patrons therein.
(3) "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
or
(d) Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or
performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an
audience or customers.
(4) "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment that:
(a) Offers accommodation to the public for any form of
consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
and has a sign visible from the public right of way that advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours; or
(c) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent
the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
(5) "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are
9-8
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
(6) "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure
of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities."
(7) "Director" means the chief of police and such employee(s) of the
police department as he may designate to perform the duties of the director
under this chapter.
(8) "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(9) "Escort agency" means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
(10) "Establishment" means and includes any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
(c) The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
(d) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
(11) "Licensed day-care center" means a facility licensed by the State
of Tennessee, whether situated within the city or not; that provides care,
training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12)
children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related
by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less
than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is
operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.
(12) "Permittee and/or licensee" means a person in whose name a
permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued,
as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit
and/or license.
(13) "Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the appearance of a human
bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a
fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
(14) "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
or other legal entity.
(15) "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
9-9
female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
(16) "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
(b) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons
of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
(17) "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.
(18) "Specified anatomical areas" means less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below
a point immediately above the top of the areola and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
(19) "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the
following:
(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breasts;
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above.
(20) "Substantial enlargement" of a sexually oriented business means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five
percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on December 15, 1995.
(21) "Transfer of ownership or control" of a sexually oriented business
means and includes any of the following:
(a) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(b) The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(c) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control. (1999 Code, § 9-402)
9-303. Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as
follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
9-10
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(1999 Code, § 9-403)
9-304. Permit and/or license required. (1) It shall be unlawful for a
person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid permit and/or
license, issued by the city recorder.
(2) An application for a permit and/or license must be made on a form
provided by the City of Lawrenceburg. The application must be accompanied by
a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accurate of
plus or minus six inches.
(3) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the law by the health department, fire department and building official.
(4) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he must sign the application for the permit and/or license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10%) percent or greater
interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit. and/or license
as applicant.
(5) The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit and/or license.
(6) Applications for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be
made to the city recorder by the intended operator of the enterprise.
Applications must be submitted by hand delivery to the office of the city recorder
or the city recorder's designee during regular working hours. Application forms
shall be supplied by the city recorder. The intended operator shall be required
to give the following information on the application form:
(a)(i) The name, street address (and mailing address if different)
and Tennessee driver's license number of the intended operator;
(ii) The name and street address (and mailing address if
different) of the owner(s).
(b) The name under which the establishment is to be operated
and a general description of the services to be provided;
9-11
(c) The telephone number of the establishment;
(d) The address, and legal description of the tract of land on
which the establishment is to be located;
(e) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the
owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the permit is sought, and
the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually
oriented business at the location for which the permit is sought; and
(f) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected
start-up date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date
of issuance of the permit). If the expected start-up date is to be more
than ten (10) days following the date of the issuance of the permit, then
a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or
other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time
schedule and plan for accomplishing the same.
(7) The application shall be accompanied by the following:
(a) Payment of the application fee in full;
(b) If the establishment is a Tennessee corporation, a certified
copy of the charter, together with all amendments thereto;
(c) If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy
of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together
with all amendments thereto;
(d) If the establishment be a limited partnership formed under
the laws of Tennessee, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership, together with all amendments thereto;
(e) If the establishment to a foreign limited partnership, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;
(f) If the establishment be a limited liability company, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited liability company and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;
(g) If the establishment is a limited liability partnership, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited liability partnership and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;
(h) If the establishment is a partnership, a certified copy of the
partnership agreement, together with all amendments thereto;
(i) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on
which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the
recorded deed;
(j) If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of
land in item (f) are not also the owners of the establishment, the lease,
purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or
other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners
or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and
9-12
possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the
establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment;
(k) Any of items (b) through (g), above shall not be required for
a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents
previously furnished the recorder with the original application or
previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
(8) The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
(a) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information
contained in the application and that the information contained therein
and furnished therewith to be true and correct; and
(b) The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
(9) A separate application and permit shall be required for each
sexually oriented business. (1999 Code, § 9-404, modified)
9-305. Issuance of permit and/or license. (1) The recorder shall
approve, based upon a recommendation from the director, the issuance of a
permit and/or license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an
application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
(a) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(b) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his
payment to the City of Lawrenceburg of taxes, fines, or penalties assessed
against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
(c) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit and/or license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(d) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied
a permit and/or license by the city of operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(e) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
have not been approved by the health department, fire department and
building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances.
(f) The permit and/or license fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.
(g) An application of the proposed establishment is in violation
of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and
the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(3) The health department, fire department and building official shall
complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in
9-13
compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the recorder.
The certification shall be promptly presented to the recorder.
(4) In the event that the recorder and/or director determines that an
applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in
writing of the reasons for the denial within forty five (45) days of the receipt of
its application by the recorder, provided that the applicant may request, in
writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than
ten (10) days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make
modifications necessary to comply with this chapter.
(5) An applicant may appeal the decision of the recorder regarding a
denial to the Board of Mayor and Council by filing a written notice of appeal
with the city administrator within fifteen (15) days after the applicant is given
notice of the recorder's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by
a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal
and all arguments in support thereof. The recorder may submit a memorandum
in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the Board
of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. After reviewing
such memoranda, as well as the recorder's written decision, if any, and exhibits
submitted to the recorder, the Board of Mayor and Council shall vote to either
uphold or overrule the recorder's decision. Such vote shall be taken within
twenty-one (21) calendar days after the date on which the city administrator
receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required to comply
with the recorder's decision during the pendency of the appeal. (1999 Code,
§ 9-405, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
9-306. Fees. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit
and/or license is five hundred dollars ($500.00). This fee is to be used to pay for
the cost of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. (1999 Code,
§ 9-406)
9-307. Inspection. An applicant, or permittee and/or licensee shall
permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire
department, building department, or other city of state departments or agencies
to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business. (1999 Code, § 9-407)
9-308. Expiration of permit and/or license. (1) Each permit and/or
license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only
by making application as provided in § 9-305. Application for renewal should
be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
permit and/or license will not be affected.
(2) When the recorder denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If,
9-14
subsequent to denial, the recorder finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
permit and/or license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since
the date denial became final. (1999 Code, § 9-408, modified)
9-309. Suspension. The recorder shall suspend a permit and/or license
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that permittee and/or
licensee or an employee of a permittee and/or licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
(2) Become impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic
beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises. (1999 Code, § 9-409, modified)
9-310. Revocation. (1) The recorder shall revoke a permit and/or
license if a cause of suspension in § 9-309 occurs and the permit and/or license
has been suspended within the proceeding twelve (12) months.
(2) The recorder shall also revoke a permit and/or license if he
determines that:
(a) A permittee and/or licensee gave false or misleading
information in the material submitted during the application process;
(b) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(c) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed prostitution on the premises;
(d) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee knowingly
operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's and/or licensee's permit and/or license was suspended;
(e) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted
and/or licensed premises;
(f) A permittee and/or licensee is delinquent in payment to the
city or state for any taxes or fees past due;
(g) The owner or operator of the permitted establishment
knowingly allowed a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter an
establishment; or
(h) That there was a change of owner or operator for which a
transfer application was not timely filed.
(3) When the recorder revokes a permit and/or license, the revocation
shall continue for one (1) year, and the permittee and/or licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented permit and/or license for one (1) year from the date
9-15
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the recorder finds that
the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated the applicant may be
granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
(4) After denial of an application by the recorder and Board of Mayor
and Council, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation
of a permit and/or license by the recorder, the applicant or licensee or permittee
may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed
by the court. (1999 Code, § 9-410, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March
2012)
9-311. Transfer of permit and/or license. A permittee and/or licensee
shall not transfer his permit and/or license to another, nor shall a permittee
and/or licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
permit and/or license at any place other than the address designated in the
application. (1999 Code, § 9-411)
9-312. Location restrictions. Sexually oriented businesses shall be
permitted in any district Zoned C-2, C-3 or C-4 provided that:
(1) The sexually oriented business may not be operated within 1,000
feet of:
(a) A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
(b) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(c) A boundary of any residential zoned district;
(d) A public park;
(e) A licensed day-care center;
(f) Another sexually oriented business;
(g) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use;
(h) Public library;
(i) A business licensed to sell beer or alcoholic beverages; or
(j) Funeral home.
(2) A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented
business.
(3) For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from and to
the nearest lot lines of said premises. (1999 Code, § 9-412)
9-313. Non-conforming uses. (1) Any business lawfully operating on
the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of the locational or
structural configuration requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a
non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be permitted to continue for
a period not to exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
9-16
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such
non-conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually
oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established
and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the
later-established business(es) is non-conforming.
(2) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a
church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or private
elementary or secondary school, licensed day-care center, public park, or
residential district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or
license, and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is
submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. (1999
Code, § 9-413)
9-314. Additional regulations for adult motels. (1) Evidence that
a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has
been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an
adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(2) It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have
a sexually oriented permit and/or license, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to
a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents
or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
(3) For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the terms "rent' or
"sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration. (1999 Code, § 9-414)
9-315. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos. (1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in
a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Upon application for a sexually oriented permit and/or
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be
9-17
permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not
be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches (6"). The recorder may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(b) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the recorder or his
designee.
(d) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video
reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's
stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patrol is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(f) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in subsection (e) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section.
(g) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.
(h) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
9-18
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0)
foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
(i) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times
that any patron is present in the premises. (1999 Code, § 9-415,
modified)
9-316. Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses.
(1) It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible
from a point outside the establishment.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have
flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or
pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented
business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color
other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually
oriented business if the following conditions are met:
(a) The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit
center; and
(b) The exterior portions of each individual unit in the
commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the
business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in
such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or
pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
(4) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting
of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
(1999 Code, § 9-416)
9-317. Signage. (1) Notwithstanding any other city chapter, code, or
regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain
any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign
and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein.
(2) Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces.
Each such display surface shall:
(a) Not contain any flashing lights;
(b) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(c) Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
(d) Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
9-19
(3) Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings
or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of
the enterprise.
(4) Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color,
and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color.
(5) Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such
display surface shall:
(a) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(b) Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
(c) Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width;
and
(d) Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
(6) The provisions of item (a) of subsection (2) and subsection (3) and
(4) shall also apply to secondary signs. (1999 Code, § 9-417)
9-318. Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry;
attendant required. (1) It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger
than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually
oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for
business.
(2) It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the
sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses'
regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented
business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the
age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
(a) A valid operators, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's
driver's license; or
(b) A valid personal identification certificate issued by the State
of Tennessee reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or
older. (1999 Code, § 9-418)
9-319. Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter
that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Tennessee; a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (1999 Code,
§ 9-419)
9-320. Notices. (1) Any notice required or permitted to be given by the
recorder or any other city office, division, department or other agency under this
9-20
chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of an establishment may be given
either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in
the application for the permit, or transfer application that has been received by
the recorder, or any notice of address change that has been received by the
recorder. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in
the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned
by the postal service, the recorder or his designee shall cause it to be posted at
the principal entrance to the establishment.
(2) Any notice required or permitted to be given to the recorder by any
person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the recorder.
(3) It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit
application and each operator to furnish notice to the recorder in writing of any
change or residence or mailing address. (1999 Code, § 9-420, modified)
9-321. Violation. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the City of Lawrenceburg
punishable by a fine not to exceed state authorized limits. Any person who
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit and/or license or otherwise violates this chapter is subject to a suit for
injunction. (1999 Code, § 9-421, modified)
9-21
CHAPTER 4
GARAGE OR YARD SALES
SECTION
9-401. Garage sales, yard sales, etc.
9-401. Garage sales, yard sales, etc. (1) "Garage sales, yard sales, etc."
means the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes,
antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of
business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined in this definition, by
a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do
not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term
"yard sale" shall include garage sales, estate sales, carport sales and similar
types of sales or events.
(2) Location and manner of yard sale. Yard sales may be held on a lot
or parcel of land upon which there is situated a house, apartment or other
structure which is utilized primarily for residential purposes. Persons
conducting sales held upon vacant lots or upon lots upon which there is situated
a structure that is utilized primarily for any use, other than residential purposes
must have the express written consent of the owner of the premises.
(3) Number and duration. Yard sales shall be allowed not more than
four (4) times in any calendar year for any premises. No sale may run more than
three (3) consecutive days. Property may only be displayed between the hours
of 5:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M.
(4) Display area. All displays of yard sale merchandise shall be limited
to that portion of the yard area which is at least five feet (5') back from the
property line on all sides, and at least ten feet (10') back from any curb or road
edge. Displays inside garage and carport areas are permitted. All items must be
removed from the yard sale display area at the end of each sale.
(5) Religious and charitable organizations. Religious and charitable
organizations may conduct yard sales on the property of the organization or at
other locations within the city with the expressed written consent of the owner
of the premises where the yard sale is being conducted.
(6) Signage. Yard sale signs located off-premises from the sale should
be free standing and shall not be placed on public utility poles, road signs, etc.
Signs may be placed on private property with the permission of the property
owner. All signage must be removed after the conclusion of the yard sale.
(7) Prohibited acts. No individual, firm, corporation or other
partnership shall be permitted to engage in the business of promoting or
conducting yard sales for others for a fee or other consideration.
No yard sale shall be held on premises other than the premises of at least
one (1) of the persons conducting the yard sale except with the express written
consent of the owner of the premises where the yard sale is being conducted.
9-22
(8) Enforcement. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon a first conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine. For second and third convictions, additional fines may be
added. (as added by Ord. #1139, Sept. 2014)
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. DOGS AND CATS.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Running at large prohibited.
10-102. Keeping near a residence or business restricted.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided.
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited.
10-106. Seizure and disposition of animals.
10-107. Violation and penalty.
10-101. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning or being in charge of any cows, sheep, horses, mules, goats, or
any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl, cattle, or livestock,
knowingly or negligently to permit any of them to run at large in any street,
alley, or unenclosed lot within the corporate limits.
Any person, including its owner, knowingly or negligently permitting an
animal to run at large may be prosecuted under this section even if the animal
is picked up and disposed of under other provisions of this chapter, whether or
not the disposition includes returning the animal to its owner.
10-102. Keeping near a residence or business restricted. Swine are
prohibited within the corporate limits. No person shall keep or allow any other
animal or fowl enumerated in the preceding section to come within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any residence, place of business, or public street, as measured in
a straight line.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean. When animals or fowls
are kept within the corporate limits, the building, structure, corral, pen, or
enclosure in which they are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided. No
animal or fowl shall be kept or confined in any place where the food, water,
10-2
shelter, and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of
its health and safety.
All feed shall be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box,
or receptacle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to beat or otherwise abuse or injure
any dumb animal or fowl.
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance
prohibited. No animal or fowl shall be kept in such a place or condition as to
become a nuisance because of either noise, odor, contagious disease, or other
reason.
10-106. Seizure and disposition of animals. Any animal or fowl
found running at large or otherwise being kept in violation of this chapter may
be seized by any police officer or other properly designated officer or official and
confined in a pound provided or designated by the board of mayor and council.
If the owner is known all reasonable effort will be made to locate and notify
them. If the owner is not known or cannot be located, a notice describing the
impounded animal or fowl will be posted in the local newspaper or local news
media web site. In either case the notice shall state that the impounded animal
or fowl must be claimed within five (5) days by paying the pound costs or the
same may be adopted or humanely destroyed.
Any owner of any animal so impounded may redeem the same upon the
payment of a service charge or fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars plus ten dollars
($10.00) per day for reasonable cost and expenses of maintenance of such
animal.
Any owner of an animal determined to be "special needs" so impounded
may redeem the same upon the payment of a service charge or fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) plus a twenty dollar ($20.00) per day fee during the period of
impoundment. (as replaced by Ord. #1089, Feb. 2012)
10-107. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed state authorized limits and costs for every act in
violation of said section. Each day the violation shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense. (as replaced by Ord. #1089, Feb. 2012)
10-3
CHAPTER 2
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required.
10-202. Dogs to wear tags.
10-203. Running at large prohibited.
10-204. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained.
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited.
10-206. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid.
10-207. Seizure and disposition of dogs.
10-208. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large.
10-209. Violation and penalty.
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat without having
the same duly vaccinated against rabies and registered in accordance with the
provisions of the "Tennessee Anti-Rabies Law" (Tennessee Code Annotated,
§§ 68-8-101 through 68-8-115) or other applicable law.
10-202. Dogs to wear tags. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
keep, or harbor any dog which does not wear a tag evidencing the vaccination
and registration required by the preceding section.
10-203. Running at large prohibited.1 It shall be unlawful for any
person knowingly to permit any dog owned by him or under his control to run
at large within the corporate limits.
Any person knowingly permitting a dog to run at large, including the
owner of the dog, may be prosecuted under this section even if the dog is picked
up and disposed of under the provisions of this chapter, whether or not the
disposition includes returning the animal to its owner.
10-204. Vicious dogs to be securely restrained. It shall be unlawful
for any person to own or keep any dog known to be vicious or dangerous unless
such dog is so confined and/or otherwise securely restrained as to provide
reasonably for the protection of other animals and persons. A violation of this
section shall subject the offender to a penalty under the general penalty
provision of this code.
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 68-8-108 and 68-8-109.
10-4
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited. No person shall own, keep, or harbor
any dog which, by loud and frequent barking, whining, or howling, disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood.
10-206. Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid. If any dog
has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person or is for any
reason suspected of being infected with rabies, the chief of police or any other
properly designated officer or official may cause such dog to be confined or
isolated for such time as he deems reasonably necessary to determine if such dog
is rabid.
10-207. Seizure and disposition of dogs. (1) Any dog found running
at large may be seized by any police officer or other properly designated officer
or official and placed in a pound provided or designated by the board of mayor
and council. If the dog is wearing a rabies tag or other identification all
reasonable effort will be made to locate and notify the owners who shall be
required to appear within five (5) days and redeem their dog by paying the
pound fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per day during
the period of impoundment or the dog will be adopted, or humanely destroyed.
If the dog is not wearing a tag it may be adopted or humanely destroyed unless
legally claimed by the owner within five (5) days. No dog shall be released in any
event from the pound unless such dog has been vaccinated or arrangements
have been made for said vaccination within seventy-two (72) hours of release
with tag evidencing such vaccination.
If owner cannot provide proof of vaccination the owner may provide a
deposit in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to ensure the dog will be
vaccinated for rabies within seventy-two (72) hours of release from the dog
pound. Upon proper proof of the rabies vaccination the deposit shall be
refunded to the owner. Should owner not provide proof of vaccination within the
seventy-two (72) hour period a citation may be issued against said owner to
appear in city court and shall require the animal be adopted or destroyed.
Any owner of any dog so impounded may redeem the same from the dog
pound upon the payment of a service charge or fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
plus ten dollars ($10.00) per day for reasonable cost and expenses of
maintenance of such dog.
Any owner of a dog determined to be "special needs" so impounded may
redeem the same from the dog pound upon the payment of a service charge or
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus a twenty dollar ($20.00) per day fee
during the period of impoundment.
The City of Lawrenceburg offers the voluntary surrender of dogs for
Lawrenceburg residents (proof of address required) to the Lawrenceburg Dog
Pound, for the purpose of adoption, or humane disposal of such dogs at the cost
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one (1) dog, forty-five dollars ($45.00) for two
to three (2 - 3) dogs and sixty dollars ($60.00) for four (4) or more dogs. Dogs
10-5
will be accepted on a case by case basis; certain restrictions apply. This section
does not relieve owners of humane responsibilities.
(2) Disposition of dogs through adoption. (a) No person shall adopt a
dog from the City of Lawrenceburg Dog Pound unless:
(i) Dog has already been spayed or neutered;
(ii) The dog has been spayed or neutered by a licensed
veterinarian while in the custody of the agency; or
(iii) The new owner signs a written agreement with the
agency (requiring a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) deposit) stating that
the new owner will have the dog spayed or neutered by a licensed
veterinarian:
(A) Within thirty (30) days of the date of the
adoption, if such dog is sexually mature; or
(B) Within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches
six (6) months of age, if the dog is not sexually mature at
the time of the adoption.
(C) The new owner may request and shall receive
a refund of the deposit from the dog pound upon providing
confirmation of the spaying or neutering.
(b) Nothing in this section shall preclude the spaying or
neutering of a sexually immature dog at the discretion of a licensed
veterinarian with the consent of the new owner.
(c) Adopter shall provide a deposit in the amount of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) to ensure the animal will be vaccinated for rabies within
seventy-two (72) hours of release from the pound. Upon proper proof of
the rabies vaccination the deposit shall be refunded to the owner. Should
owner not provide proof of vaccination within the seventy-two (72) hour
period a citation in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking compliance
shall be issued and shall require the animal be returned or destroyed. (as
replaced by Ord. #1089, Feb. 2012)
10-208. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large.
When, because of its viciousness or apparent infection with rabies, a dog found
running at large cannot be safely impounded it may be summarily destroyed by
any policeman or other properly designated officer.1
10-209. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed state authorized limits and costs for every act in
1State law reference
For a Tennessee Supreme Court case upholding the summary
destruction of dogs pursuant to appropriate legislation, see Darnell v.
Shapard, 156 Tenn. 544, 3 S.W.2d 661 (1928).
10-6
violation of said chapter. Each day the violation shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense. (as replaced by Ord. #1089, Feb. 2012)
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES1
CHAPTER
1. ALCOHOL.
2. FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
3. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
4. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL.
5. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
6. TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH
TRAFFIC.
7. MISCELLANEOUS.
8. LOITERING, ETC.
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOL2
SECTION
11-101. Drinking beer or liquor on streets or public places.
11-101. Drinking beer or liquor on streets or public places. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or have an open can or bottle
of beer or intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley, avenue, highway,
sidewalk, public park, public school ground or other public place unless the place
has a permit and license for on premises consumption of such beverage. Any
person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than state authorized limits and costs of each
offense. (1999 Code, § 11-101, modified)
1Municipal code references
Animals and fowls: title 10.
Housing and utilities: title 12.
Fireworks and explosives: title 7.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
2Municipal code reference
Sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer: title 8.
State law reference
See Tennessee Code Annotated § 68-24-203 (Arrest for Public
Intoxication, cities may not pass separate legislation).
11-2
CHAPTER 2
FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
SECTION
11-201. Fortune telling, carnivals, etc.
11-201. Fortune telling, carnivals, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or any other organization to
set up any street fair, carnival, circus, skating rink, fortune tellers' or palmistry
establishment, or any other similar enterprise within the City of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, and offer to the public such amusement or entertainment common
to street fairs, carnivals, circuses, skating rinks, fortune telling and palmistry,
or similar amusements without first obtaining from said City of Lawrenceburg,
through the city administrator, a permit for such operation within the city
limits.
Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed state
authorized limits and costs for every act in violation of said section. (1999 Code,
§ 11-201, modified)
11-3
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-301. Disturbing the peace.
11-302. Anti-noise regulations.
11-303. Violation and penalty.
11-301. Disturbing the peace. It shall be unlawful for any person or
persons, corporation or corporations, on any individually, or privately or
publicly-owned premises, or on the public square, or any public street, alley or
public thoroughfare, or at any other place within the corporate limits of the City
of Lawrenceburg, as the same now extend or may hereafter be extended, or in
any buildings or structures at or on any of such places, or within the police
jurisdiction of said City of Lawrenceburg extending for a distance of not more
than one (1) mile beyond said corporate limits, to make, or continue, or cause to
be made or continued, any loud, unusual, disturbing and/or unnecessary noise
or noises, which either annoy, disturb, interfere with, injure or endanger, on the
days and during the hours hereinafter provided, the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of other persons within said City of Lawrenceburg. (1999 Code,
§ 11-301)
11-302. Anti-noise regulations. (1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises
enumerated. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unusual,
disturbing and/or unnecessary noise or noises and the commission of any one or
more of such acts, shall be deemed prima facie, subject however to rebuttal, in
violation of the provisions of this section however, the following enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(a) Horns, signalling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn, or
signalling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle, street car, motor
bus or motor truck or other vehicle, except as a danger signal or warning;
the creation by means of any such horn or signalling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of such horn or
signalling device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time,
which unnecessary and unreasonable period of time is hereby declared to
be any period in excess of two (2) minutes; the use and sounding of any
horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust, or the use of
any horn, whistle or signalling device when traffic is, for any reason, held
up; and the use of any signalling device except one operated by hand,
electricity or compressed air.
(b) Radio, phonograph, television, etc. The playing, using or
operating, or permitting or causing to be played, used or operated, any
radio, radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph,
11-4
or other machine or device for the producing, or reproducing, of sound, in
such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and tranquillity of
the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with more or louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who
are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, machine or device between the hours 11:00 P.M.,
and 7:00 A.M., in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
fifty feet (50') from the building, structure, vehicle or place in which it is
located and operated shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
subsection.
(c) Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. The playing,
using or operating, or permitting or causing to be played, used or
operated any radio, radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other instrument, machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public
square, or any public street or alley, for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any business
establishment, building or structure.
(d) Sound trucks, loudspeakers, and amplifiers, etc. The use or
operation, or permitting or causing to be used and operated, any so-called
sound trucks, whether the machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound be attached to and used as a part of any automobile,
motor truck or other motor vehicle, or any loudspeakers, sound amplifier,
or other machine or device for producing or reproducing of sound,
between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M., on week days, and between
the hours of 8:00 P.M. on Saturday and 8:00 A.M. on the following
Monday, for the purpose of advertising any sale of property at auction,
advertising any political speaking, or advertising any athletic contest or
game, provided, that the machine so being used and operated shall at the
time thereof when such use or operation is permitted, shall be moving.
(e) Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling,
singing, applauding or hand-clapping, on the public square, the public
streets or thoroughfares, particularly between the hours of 11:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M., and at any time at any other place, so as to annoy, or
interfere with or disturb the quiet, comfort, tranquillity or repose of any
persons in any office or public building, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel,
or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(f) Animals, birds, etc. The owning, keeping and/or harboring
of any dog or dogs which by loud and frequent barking, whining, howling
or other unusual noises, annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood, family or person. And the keeping of cats and any other
animals or birds or fowls, which by causing frequent or continued noise
11-5
shall disturb the comfort, peace and quiet, and repose of any persons in
the vicinity.
(g) Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle and hogs. The braying of
horses, stallions, mules, donkeys and jacks, and other noises made by any
of such animals, the bellowing of cattle and squealing of hogs, and other
noises made by such animals, whether confined to stock-barns, pens, or
other enclosures.
(h) Steam, compressed air or electrical whistles. The blowing
of steam whistle, compressed air whistle, electrical whistle, or other
whistle, on any locomotive or engine pulling or pushing any train, except
as a danger warning, and except as required under the statutory
precautions under statutes of the General Assembly, and also any similar
whistle attached to any stationary boiler or other machinery except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or
danger, or upon request of proper municipal officials. Also, the
continuous blowing of any of such horns.
(i) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, any stationary or moving internal combustion engine,
or any engine powering a motor boat, or any kind of motor vehicle,
including motorcycles and motors attached to bicycles, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
(j) Cut-outs and racing of motors. Loud or explosive noises
from any motor vehicle being operated with a cut-out on the exhaust
being open, or with rusted or otherwise damaged exhausts and/or
mufflers. Also any loud or explosive noises from any motor vehicle being
operated with the engine thereof being "raced."
(k) Defects in vehicles or loads. The creation of loud, disturbing
and/or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises in or by the
use of any automobile, motorcycle, motorbike, other motor vehicle or
other vehicle, out of proper repair, improperly equipped to prevent such
noises, or improperly or defectively loaded.
(l) Loading, unloading. Loud, disturbing and/or excessive
noises created in or by the loading or unloading of any vehicle, or freight
car, or trailer, or the opening and/or destruction of bales, boxes, crates
and containers, except that freight cars may be loaded between the hours
of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
(m) Construction or repairing of buildings. The creation of loud,
disturbing and/or excessive noises in the course of or by reason of the
erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any
building other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official
(building inspector) or in his absence from the chief of police, which
11-6
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days while the
emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. But if the building
official (building inspector) should determine that the public health and
safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between
the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., on weekdays, and at all hours on
Sundays, and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience
would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the progress of the work.
(n) Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of loud,
unnecessary or excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or building in which any court may be
held, while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital or clinic,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or clinic,
provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that
same is a school or hospital zone, or is a court street.
(o) Hawkers, peddlers. Loud, continuous and/or excessive
shouting and crying of peddlers, crying or advertising the sale of their
products.
(p) Drums. The use of any drum or similar instrument or device
to attract attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale.
(q) Bands. The use of bands or other similar instruments or
devices between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M., to advertise any
athletic contest, or to provide musical entertainment at any such athletic
contest.
(r) Ambulances, fire engines, patrol cars, etc. Continuous
and/or excessive or unnecessary sounding of sirens on any ambulance, fire
engine or fire-fighting equipment, or on any motor vehicle used by a
fireman in going to the fire hall or to a fire in answer to a call to fight a
fire, or on any motor vehicle used by a member of the state highway
patrol, the sheriff's patrol, any constable, or any member of the police
department of the city, except when used in an emergency or answering
a call for such vehicle, or returning to a hospital, clinic or doctor's office
with a patient.
(s) Metal rails, pillars, and columns of iron, and transportation
thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or
other materials, or concrete or clay pipes, and masonry and building
products, including cement, mortar mix, lime, brick, concrete blocks,
lumber, logs, etc., over and along streets and other public ways and
places, upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other vehicles, or in any
11-7
other manner so loaded as to cause loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises, or so as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and tranquillity of
such public streets and other public places, and the citizens of said
municipality.
(t) Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The creation of loud and
unusual noise between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on
weekdays and all hours on Sundays, from the use and operation of any
pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric
noise, or any dirt-moving or stone-moving machinery, or other like
appliances or machinery, unless under an emergency situation involving
city or utility crews.
(u) Blowers. Any noise created by the operation of any noisecreating
blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the
operation of which causes noise from such blower or fan due to explosion
of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is
muffled and such engine or machine is equipped with a muffler device
sufficient to deaden such noise.
(v) Auto repairs in residential districts. Any excessive or
disturbing noise resulting from the repair of automobiles or other motor
vehicles in any district zoned for residential use under the zoning
ordinance, except in emergencies, and any such repairs being carried on
in such residential district as a business or for remuneration shall be
unlawful under this chapter. (1999 Code, § 11-302, modified)
11-303. Violation and penalty. Any violation of any provision of this
chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor, and the offender, upon conviction,
shall be fined not more than state authorized limits and costs for each offense.
(1999 Code, § 11-304, modified)
11-8
CHAPTER 4
INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION
11-401. False emergency alarms.
11-401. False emergency alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person
intentionally to make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police
or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. Anyone
found guilty of violating this section shall be fined no more than the state
authorized limit and costs. (1999 Code, § 11-402, modified)
11-9
CHAPTER 5
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-501. Throwing missiles.
11-501. Throwing missiles. Whosoever shall throw rocks, bricks, bats,
or other missiles so as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person or
persons or endangering public property within this corporation shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined no more than state
authorized limits. (1999 Code, § 11-501, modified)
11-10
CHAPTER 6
TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE
WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-601. Interference with traffic.
11-601. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person
to willfully obstruct, or to impede or interfere with any traffic or travel, either
pedestrian or by vehicle, on any public street, public alley, public square or other
public way in the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, or block or obstruct the use
of any private entrance or private driveway into any lot or real estate upon
which is located any residential structure, any business structure or any
industrial structure, by placing upon such public street or public way any
materials of any kind, or for such person or persons to willfully stand in such
public or private way, or walk along or across any such public or private way as
to obstruct or impede such traffic or travel thereon; provided, that no person
shall be amenable to provisions of this section by reason of obstructing any
street, alley, public way or public square with materials for building or repairing
buildings or grounds attached to same, if such public street, alley, public way is
not obstructed an unreasonable time, and if not more than one-half of the
passway shall be obstructed at any one time.
Any person or persons violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined no more than state authorized
limits and costs for each offense. (1999 Code, § 11-603, modified)
11-11
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-701. Objects on the public square.
11-702. Signs.
11-703. Posting notices, etc.
11-704. Disfiguring or destroying buildings prohibited.
11-705. Cellars or openings.
11-706. Public preaching, teaching, or advertising medicine.
11-707. Refrigerators, iceboxes, etc.
11-701. Objects on the public square. It shall be unlawful and is
hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person to place any object,
instrument, apparatus, device, implement or contrivance, or to keep or
undertake to keep or maintain such object, instrument, apparatus, device,
implement or contrivance upon or in the public square, streets, boulevards,
grassplots, alleys and sidewalks of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, such
as any instrument or object of any kind on which any advertisement may be
written or printed, or used in displaying any advertisement, including those
ordinarily called "taxi signs", "ice cream signs" or objects so advertising, and
including all objects, instruments, devices, apparatus, implements or
contrivances whatsoever, whether advertising anything or not, which blocks or
partially blocks, interferes with or impedes traffic or travel, or interferes with
the parking of motor vehicles.
A city sanctioned fair/event is excepted herefrom.
Garbage cans or containers are excepted herefrom for sanitary reasons.
Any person violating this section, upon conviction shall be fined not more
than state authorized limits together with costs for each offense. (1999 Code,
§ 11-702, modified)
11-702. Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to injure
or destroy any mile-stone or mile-post, or guide board, street sign, caution sign,
or any lights, streetlights, or lamps, or to erect any false sign-boards or caution
signs, within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, in Lawrence
County, Tennessee.
Any person or persons violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than state authorized
limits and costs for each offense. (1999 Code, § 11-703, modified)
11-703. Posting notices, etc. (1) It is hereby declared to be unlawful
for any person to, or for any person, persons, firm, partnership, group of persons,
11-12
or corporation, to procure, hire, secure or persuade any person to tack, nail or
otherwise place any poster, advertisement, circular, or paper or cardboard of any
kind, or any object whatever, on any pole on the public square, public streets,
alleys or public thoroughfare in the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, or to drive
tacks or nails or other objects into any pole at such places, or to in any way
injure or deface any pole at such places.
(2) The placing of any materials or equipment for use in the
construction, maintenance, repair or operation of the respective systems of the
electric or power system of the city, the telephone system, community antenna
system or cable T.V. system, is not and shall not be a violation of the provisions
of subsection (1) of this section.
(3) In any warrant issued by a police officer for alleged violation of the
provisions of this section, it shall not be necessary or required that the warrant
charge the ownership or use of such poles, and upon the trial of the offender it
shall only be necessary that the prosecutor, i.e., the City of Lawrenceburg, show
that the pole was a pole used for either of the purposes set out in subsection (2)
of this section and on the public square, public street, alley or public
thoroughfare in the City of Lawrenceburg.
(4) Any violation of any provision or provisions of this section shall be
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, the offender, whether a person, persons,
firm, partnership, group of persons or corporation, shall be fined not more than
state authorized limits, for each offense, together with costs, and also together
with actual costs or expenses of removing such posters, advertisements,
circulars, paper or cardboard, or other object so placed on any pole in violation
of this section; and the tacking, nailing or otherwise placing any such poster,
advertisement, circular, paper or cardboard or other object on, or driving tacks
or nails or other objects into, or injuring or defacing, each and anyone of such
poles shall be and constitute a separate offense and punishable as such.
(5) The police chief, code enforcement officer or his designee, has the
authority to remove, or cause to be removed, from any such pole or poles any
posters, advertisements, circulars, papers or cardboards or other objects, so
tacked, nailed or otherwise placed upon any such pole apparently in violation
of this section. (1999 Code, § 11-705, modified)
11-704. Disfiguring or destroying buildings prohibited. It shall be
unlawful and is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person to wantonly
injure, deface, disfigure, or destroy any building or fixture attached thereto, or
the enclosures thereof, belonging to the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, or to
any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, at any place within the
corporate limits of said city.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any
person found guilty of such violation shall be fined not more than state
authorized limits together with all costs for each violation. (1999 Code,
§ 11-706, modified)
11-13
11-705. Cellars or openings. It shall be unlawful for owners, renters
or agents of any lot or part of lot in this corporation to cause to be or permit to
remain open or uncovered so as to endanger the life or limb of any person, any
cellar or the doorway or opening to the same opening on, connecting with, or
adjacent to any public street, sidewalk, or alley. And every person so offending
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more
than state authorized limits with all costs. (1999 Code, § 11-708, modified)
11-706. Public preaching, teaching, or advertising medicine.
(1) It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person to preach, or teach or sing or undertake to preach or teach anything, or
to sing, publicly upon the public square, streets, boulevards or alleys of the City
of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, at any place thereon where congestion of or
blocking of traffic may result therefrom.
(2) It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any
person to advertise or undertake to advertise any medicine or alleged medicine
or any article whatever on the public square, streets, boulevards and alleys of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, publicly and by outcry or to play any musical
instrument for the purpose of bringing persons to hear and see such
advertisements, or cause a crowd to assemble on such public square, streets,
boulevards and alleys where congestion of or blocking of traffic may result
therefrom.
(3) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined no
more than state authorized limits and costs for each offense. (1999 Code,
§ 11-709, modified)
11-707. Refrigerators, iceboxes, etc. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
person, persons, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation, or any agent,
employee, servant or representative of any of same, to store, pile, stock-pile or
place in or on any unenclosed portion of any building or structure, or upon any
portion of any lot or premises not occupied by a building or structure, or to
discard, throw away or dump, at any place, within the corporate bounds of the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, any used refrigerator, icebox, or any other
appliance customarily used for cooking, washing and/or drying clothes, or for
storage of foods and/or other articles, without having first removed therefrom
the door or doors thereto.
(2) It shall also be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership,
association or corporation, occupying and/or having charge or control of any
building or structure or lot or premises within the corporate bounds of the City
of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, to permit the storage, piling, stock-piling or
placing in or on the unenclosed portion of any such building or structure, or
upon any portion of any lot or premises not occupied by a building or structure,
any used refrigerator or icebox, or any other appliance as mentioned and defined
11-14
in subsection (1) above, from which the door or doors have not first been
removed.
(3) The police chief and/or any policeman of the City of Lawrenceburg
upon observing, or having received a report of, any such used refrigerator or
icebox or other appliance, as mentioned in subsection (1) above, being stored,
piled, stock-piled or placed on or in any unenclosed portion of a building or
structure or upon any portion of any lot or premises not occupied by a building
or structure, has the authority to enter upon the premises to examine such
refrigerator, icebox or other appliance to determine if the door or doors thereto
have been removed; and if the door or doors of such used refrigerator, icebox or
other appliance have not been removed, the person, firm, co-partnership,
association or corporation occupying and/or having charge or control of such
unenclosed portion of such building or structure or of the lot or premises, shall,
prima facie, be deemed to have permitted the storage, piling stock-piling or
placing of such used refrigerator, icebox or other appliance thereon.
(4) The violation of any of the provisions of this section are declared
to be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, not to exceed state authorized limits
and costs for each offense. (1999 Code, § 11-710, modified)
11-15
CHAPTER 8
LOITERING, ETC.
SECTION
11-801. Loitering.
11-802. Curfew for minors.
11-801. Loitering. It shall be unlawful for any person without
legitimate business or purpose to loaf, loiter, wander or idle in, upon, or about
any way or place customarily open to public use.
Any person violating this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed state authorized limits and costs of
each offense. (1999 Code, § 11-801, modified)
11-802. Curfew for minors. (1) It shall be unlawful for a minor under
eighteen (18) years of age to loiter, idle, wander or play in or upon the public
streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, schools or public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant
lots, or any unsupervised place within the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, between the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 5:00
A.M., official time, provided however, that this section shall not apply to any
child accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care and custody of said minor.
(2) When any child is in violation of this section, the apprehending
officer shall act in one of the following ways:
(a) If a first violation, and if in the opinion of the officer such
action shall be effective, take the child to his or her home and warn and
counsel with the parents or guardians.
(b) Issue a summons to the child and/or parents or guardians to
appear at the Juvenile Court.
(c) Bring the child into the custody of the Juvenile Court for
disposition.
(3) With the exception of the provisions contained in (1) hereof, no
parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of a child who has
not reached his eighteenth birthday shall knowingly permit such child to loiter,
idle, wander or play in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, schools or other public grounds, public places and public buildings,
places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or any unsupervised place
in said city, between the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 5:00 o'clock A.M.,
official time.
(4) A minor or any parent, guardian, or other person having the care
and custody of a minor violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than state authorized limits for each
11-16
offense; each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
(5) The Judge of the Juvenile Court shall be vested with power to hear
all cases coming within the provisions of this section. (1999 Code, § 11-802,
modified)
12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
4. RESIDENTIAL CODE.
5. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
6. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
7. MECHANICAL CODE.
8. EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE.
9. RESIDENTIAL (ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS) CODE.
10. FIRE CODES.
11. ASSOCIATED CODES AND STANDARDS.
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE1
SECTION
12-101. Building code adopted.
12-102. Modifications.
12-103. Available in city administrator's office.
12-104. Violations.
12-101. Building code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted
by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the
purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use,
occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or
structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to any building or
structure, the International Building Code2, 2012 edition, as prepared and
adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-2
by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the building
code. (1999 Code, § 12-101, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002, Ord. #991,
April 2005, Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-102. Modifications. (1) Definitions. When reference is made to the
duties of a certain official named herein, that designated official of the City of
Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in the building code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the building code are
concerned.
(2) Permit fees. The recommended schedule of permit fees set forth
in Appendix "B" of the building code is adopted.
(3) Any matters in the building code which are contrary to existing
ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee shall
prevail and all ordinances in conflict are hereby amended to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and to that extent any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only.
(4) Repeal all requirements of sprinklers in 1 and 2 family dwellings.
(1999 Code, § 12-102, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002, and Ord. #1141, Aug.
2014)
12-103. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
building code has been placed on file in the city administrator's office and shall
be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1999 Code, § 12-103,
modified)
12-104. Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate
or fail to comply with any provision of the building code as herein adopted by
reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty of no more than state authorized limits and costs. Each
day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The
building official or his or her deputy or assistant is empowered to issue citations
to answer in the municipal court of the city by any person, firm or corporation
found to be in such violation. (1999 Code, § 12-104, modified)
12-3
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Plumbing code adopted.
12-202. Modifications.
12-203. Available in city administrator's office.
12-204. Violations.
12-201. Plumbing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the purpose
of regulating plumbing installations, including alterations, repairs, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings, and the appurtenances thereto, within or without
the city, when such plumbing is or is to be connected with the city water or
sewerage system, the International Plumbing Code,2 2012 edition, as prepared
and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as
the plumbing code. (1999 Code, § 12-201, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002,
Ord. #991, April 2005, Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-202. Modifications. (1) Definitions. When reference is made to the
duties of a certain official named herein, that designated official of the City of
Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in the plumbing code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the plumbing code are
concerned.
(2) Permit fees. The schedule of permit fees as recommended in
"Appendix H" of the plumbing code is hereby adopted.
(3) Any matters in the plumbing code which are contrary to existing
ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee shall
prevail and all ordinances in conflict are hereby amended to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and to that extent any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only.
1Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-4
(4) Amend IPC 2903.3 from 40 psi to 20 psi. (1999 Code, § 12-202, as
amended by Ord. #955, July 2002, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-203. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
plumbing code has been placed on file in the city administrator's office and shall
be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1999 Code, § 12-203,
modified)
12-204. Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate
or fail to comply with any provision of the plumbing code as herein adopted by
reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty of no more than state authorized limits and costs. Each
day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The
building official or his or her deputy or assistant is empowered to issue citations
to answer in the municipal court of the city by any person, firm or corporation
found to be in violation. (1999 Code, § 12-204, modified)
12-5
CHAPTER 3
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE1
SECTION
12-301. International Fuel Gas Code adopted.
12-302. Modifications.
12-303. Violations and penalties.
12-304. Nonliability.
12-301. International Fuel Gas Code adopted. The International
Fuel Gas Code,2 2012 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as though it was
copied herein fully. (Ord. #955, July 2012, as amended by Ord. #991, April 2005,
Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-302. Modifications. Any matters in the gas code which are contrary
to existing ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee shall prevail and
all ordinances in conflict are hereby amended to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and to that extent any existing ordinances to the contrary are
hereby repealed in that respect only. (Ord. #955, July 2002)
12-303. Violations and penalties. It shall be a civil offense for any
person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the gas code as herein
adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter
shall be punishable by a penalty of no more than state authorized limits and
costs. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. The building official or his or her deputy or assistant is empowered to
issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by any person, firm
or corporation found to be in such violation. (1999 Code, § 12-411, modified)
12-304. Nonliability. This chapter shall not be construed as imposing
upon the municipality any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by
installation thereof, nor shall the municipality, or any official or employee
thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the
inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the
inspector. (1999 Code, § 12-412)
1Municipal code reference
Gas system administration: title 19, chapter 3.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-6
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION
12-401. Residential code adopted.
12-402. Modifications.
12-403--12-404. [Deleted.]
12-401. Residential code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, the International
Residential Code,1 2012 edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code. (1999 Code, § 12-501, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002,
and replaced by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-402. Modifications. Repeal all requirements of sprinklers in 1 and
2 family dwellings. (1999 Code, § 12-502, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002,
and replaced by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-403. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 12-503, as deleted by Ord. #1141, Aug.
2014)
12-404. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, § 12-504, as deleted by Ord. #1141, Aug.
2014)
1 Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-7
CHAPTER 5
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE1
SECTION
12-501. Energy code adopted.
12-502. Modifications.
12-503. Available in city administrator's office.
12-504. Violations and penalty.
12-501. Energy code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating the design of buildings for adequate thermal resistance and low air
leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, water-heating
and illumination systems and equipment which will enable the effective use of
energy in new building construction, the International Energy Conservation
Code2 2009 edition, as prepared and maintained by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code,
and is hereinafter referred to as the energy code. (1999 Code, § 12-601, as
amended by Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-502. Modifications. Whenever the energy code refers to the
"responsible government agency," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the City
of Lawrenceburg. When the "building official" is named it shall, for the purposes
of the energy code, mean such person as the city administrator shall have
appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the energy
code. (1999 Code, § 12-602, modified)
12-503. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-19-106 requires Tennessee cities
either to adopt the Model Energy Code, 1992 edition, or to adopt local
standards equal to or stricter than the standards in the energy code.
Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-8
energy code has been placed on file in the city administrator's office and shall
be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1999 Code, § 12-603,
modified)
12-504. Violations and penalty. It shall be a civil offense for any
person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the energy code as
herein adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this
chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of no more than state authorized limits
and costs. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. The building official or his or her deputy or assistant is empowered to
issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by any person, firm
or corporation found to be in violation. (1999 Code, § 12-604, modified)
12-9
CHAPTER 6
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
12-601. Property maintenance code adopted.
12-602--12-604. [Deleted.]
12-601. Property maintenance code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 the
International Property Maintenance Code,1 2012 edition is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code. (1999 Code, § 12-701, as
amended by Ord. #991 April 2005, and Ord. #1063, April 2010, and replaced by
Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-602--12-604. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, §§ 12-702--12-704, as deleted by
Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
1 Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-10
CHAPTER 7
MECHANICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-701. Mechanical code adopted.
12-702. Modifications.
12-703. Available in city administrator's office.
12-704. Violations.
12-701. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-516 and for the purpose of
regulating the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs,
replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances
thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning, and
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, the
International Mechanical Code2, 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the mechanical code. (1999
Code, § 12-801, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002, Ord. #991 April 2005,
Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-702. Modifications. (1) When reference is made to the duties of a
certain official named herein, that designated official of the City of
Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in the mechanical code shall be deemed to be the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the mechanical code are
concerned.
(2) Any matters in the mechanical code which are contrary to existing
ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee shall
prevail and all ordinances in conflict are hereby amended to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and to that extent any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (1999 Code, § 12-802, as
amended by Ord. #955, July 2002)
1Municipal code references
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-11
12-703. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the
mechanical code has been placed on file in the city administrator's office and
shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1999 Code,
§ 12-802, modified)
12-704. Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate
or fail to comply with any provision of the mechanical code as herein adopted by
reference and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty of no more than the state authorized limits and costs.
Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
The building official or his or her deputy or assistant is empowered to issue
citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by any person, firm or
corporation found to be in such violation. (1999 Code, § 12-804, modified)
12-12
CHAPTER 8
EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE1
SECTION
12-801. Existing buildings code adopted.
12-802. Modifications.
12-803. Available in city administrator's office.
12-804. Violations.
12-801. Existing buildings code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-516, and for the
purpose of providing a concise set of regulations and procedures to effect safety
in occupancy, the International Existing Buildings Code2 2012 edition, as
prepared by the International Code Council, is adopted and the same is
incorporated herein by reference, subject to modifications as hereinafter
provided, and shall be known and referred to as the standard existing buildings
code. (1999 Code, § 12-901, as amended by Ord. #955, July 2002, Ord. #991,
April 2005, Ord. #1063, April 2010, and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-802. Modifications. (1) When reference is made to the duties of a
certain official named herein, that designated official of the City of
Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee who has duties corresponding
to those of the named official in the existing buildings code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the existing
buildings code are concerned.
(2) Any matters in the existing buildings code which are contrary to
existing ordinances of the City of Lawrenceburg, County of Lawrence, Tennessee
shall prevail and all ordinances in conflict are hereby amended to comply with
the provisions of this chapter and to that extent any existing ordinances to the
contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only. (1999 Code, § 12-902, as
amended by Ord. #955, July 2002)
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-13
12-803. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of the Tennessee Code Annotated § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
standard existing buildings code shall be placed on file in the office of the city
administrator and the same shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the
public. (1999 Code, § 12-903)
12-804. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the standard existing buildings code or any final
order made pursuant thereto. Such violation is declared an offense against the
city and for which punishment shall be a fine of not more than state authorized
limits for each such violation. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed
a separate offense. The building official or his or her deputy or assistant is
empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by any
person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation. (1999 Code, § 12-904,
modified)
12-14
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL (ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS) CODE
SECTION
12-901. Residential code adopted.
12-902. Modifications.
12-903. Available in city administrator's office.
12-904. Violations.
12-901. Residential code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating the fabrication, erection, construction, enlargement, alterations,
repair, location, and use of detached one and two family dwellings and their
appurtenances and accessory structures, the International Residential Code,1
(one and two family dwellings) 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the dwelling code. (1999
Code, § 12-1001, as amended by Ord. #991, April 2005, Ord. #1063, April 2010,
and Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-902. Modifications. (1) Whenever the words "building official" are
used in the dwelling code, they shall refer to the person designated by the city
administrator to enforce the dwelling code. Section R-106 of the dwelling code
is hereby deleted.
(2) Exceptions. (a) Adjustment to section R403-Footers: Single story
swelling requires a minimum of thirteen (13) inch depth, eighteen inches
wide with a minimum of eight inches concrete depth. Two (2) story
dwellings requires a minimum of thirteen (13) inch depth, twenty-four
(24) inches wide with two (2) runs of No. 5 rebar and eight (8) inches
concrete depth.
(b) Sprinkler requirements for Townhouses: An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required if a 2 hour fire
resistance rated wall exists between units, if such walls do not contain
plumbing and/or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the common
wall. (Section R313.1)
Chapter 11 Energy Conservation - for energy conservation
standards refer to International Energy Conservation Code, 2009. (1999
Code, § 12-1002, modified, as amended by Ord. #991, April 2005,
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-15
Ord. #1063, April 2010, Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014, and Ord. #1204, July 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
12-903. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
dwelling code has been placed on file in the city administrator's office and shall
be kept there for the use and inspection of the public. (1999 Code, § 12-1003,
modified)
12-904. Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or
fail to comply with any provision of the one and two family dwelling code as
herein adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section of this
chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of no more than the state authorized
limits and costs. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a
separate offense. The building official or his or her deputy or assistant is
empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by any
person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation. (1999 Code, § 12-1004,
modified)
12-16
CHAPTER 10
FIRE CODES
SECTION
12-1001. Fire codes adopted.
12-1002. Modifications.
12-1003--12-1004. [Deleted.]
12-1001. Fire codes adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, the International Fire
Code (NFPA 1), 2012 edition, and the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101), 2012
edition, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code.
(1999 Code, § 12-1101, as replaced by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-1002. Modifications. Removing all sprinkler requirements for one
and two family dwellings. (1999 Code, § 12-1102, as replaced by Ord. #1141,
Aug. 2014)
12-1003--12-1004. [Deleted.] (1999 Code, §§ 12-1103--12-1104, as
deleted by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-17
CHAPTER 11
ASSOCIATED CODES AND STANDARDS1
SECTION
12-1101. Associated codes and standards adopted.
12-1102. Modifications.
12-1103. Available in city administrator's office.
12-1104. Violations and penalty.
12-1101. Associated codes and standards adopted. Pursuant to
authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506,
the Associated Codes and Standards,2 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by
the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as
the associated codes and standards. (as added by Ord. #991, April 2005,
amended by Ord. #1063, April 2010, and replaced by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
12-1102. Modifications. Definitions. Whenever the associated codes and
standards refer to the "chief appointing authority," "authority having
jurisdiction," or the "chief administrator," it shall be deemed to be a reference
to the city administrator. When the "building official," "sound control official,"
"housing official," or "administrative authority," is named it shall, for the
purposes of the associated codes and standards, mean such person as the city
administrator has appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the associated codes and standards. (as added by Ord. #1141, Aug.
2014)
12-1103. Available in city administrator's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the
associated codes and standards has been placed on file in the city
administrator's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the
public. (as added by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2 Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-18
12-1104. Violations and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the associated codes and
standards as herein adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any
section of this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty not to exceed state
authorized limits for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The building official or his or her deputy or
assistant is empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the
city by any person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation. (as added
by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
13-1
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. POOL REGULATIONS.
3. MINIMUM PROPERTY MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES.
4. SLUM CLEARANCE.
5. JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
13-101. Health and sanitation nuisances.
13-102. Overgrown and dirty lots.
13-101. Health and sanitation nuisances. The following are hereby
declared to be public nuisances, unlawful and dangerous to the health and
welfare of the public:
(1) Every pool, pond, privy, privy vault, cow pen, pig pen, horse lot,
stable, chicken house or other lot, house or enclosure within the city limits
which becomes filthy, offensive or acts as a breeding place of disease or
disease-carrying pests, such as flies, mosquitoes etc.
(2) Every house or structure of any kind which has fallen into decay,
or into heaps and piles.
(3) Every lot, premise, enclosure or other place, on which filth, tin
cans, garbage, slops, manure, human excreta, dead fowls, dead animals, or other
foul matter is thrown and allowed to accumulate so as to become offensive or
spread disease, or endanger the health of the inhabitants of any part of the City
of Lawrenceburg.
Where any such nuisance or any other public nuisance is brought to the
attention of the city building official, he shall give the owner of said property,
if the owner is known and in the City of Lawrenceburg, if not, then to the
occupant of the property, notice to abate such nuisance within a stipulated
period not exceeding fourteen (14) days from the service of such notice and if the
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Littering streets, etc.: § 16-104.
Toilet facilities in beer places: § 8-114(9).
13-2
same be not begun within said time and completed as rapidly as possible, then
the city building official, shall have said nuisance abated and report the cost of
same to the city attorney, who shall institute an action against the owner of the
property in the name and for the use of the City of Lawrenceburg to recover
same in some court having jurisdiction thereof.
Anyone violating any of the provisions of §§ 13-101 and 13-102 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined not more than state authorized
limits for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (1999 Code, § 13-102, modified)
13-102. Overgrown and dirty lots. (1) Prohibition. Pursuant to the
authority granted to municipalities under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 6-54-113, it shall be unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create,
maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the growth of trees,
vines, grass, underbrush and/or the accumulations of debris, trash, litter, or
garbage or any combination of the preceding elements so as to endanger the
health, safety, or welfare of other citizens or to encourage the infestation of rats
and other harmful animals.
(2) Limitation on application. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to any parcel of property upon which an owner-occupied residence is
located.
(3) Designation of public officer or department. The Board of Mayor
and Council shall designate an appropriate department and the city
administrator shall designate appropriate personnel to enforce the provisions
of this section.
(4) Notice to property owner. It shall be the duty of the designated
department or personnel to enforce this section to serve notice upon the owner
of record in violation of subsection (1) above, a notice in plain language to
remedy the condition within ten (10) days (or twenty (20) days if the owner of
record is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a utility
transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other
materials), excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. The notice shall
be sent by registered or certified United States Mail, addressed to the last
known address of the owner of record. The notice shall state that the owner of
the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the
following additional information:
(a) A brief statement that the owner is in violation of § 13-102
of the Lawrenceburg Municipal Code, which has been enacted under the
authority of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-113, and that the property
of such owner may be cleaned-up at the expense of the owner and a lien
placed against the property to secure the cost of the clean-up;
(b) The person, office, address, and telephone number of the
department or person giving the notice;
13-3
(c) A cost estimate for remedying the noted condition, which
shall be in conformity with the standards of cost in the city; and
(d) A place wherein the notified party may return a copy of the
notice, indicating the desire for a hearing.
(5) Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of
record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten (10) days after
receiving the notice (twenty (20) days if the owner is a carrier engaged in the
transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications,
electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials), the designated
department or personnel shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied
or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable standards, and the cost
thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the property. Upon the filing of
the notice with the office of the register of deeds in Lawrence County, the costs
shall be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens
of the state, county, and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for
special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly
recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs
shall be placed on the tax rolls of the municipality as a lien and shall be added
to property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, the costs may
be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property
taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as
delinquent property taxes.
(6) Appeal. The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination
and order of the public officer may appeal the determination and order to the
board of zoning appeals. The appeal shall be filed with the building official
within ten (10) days following the receipt of the notice issued pursuant to
subsection (3) above. The failure to appeal within this time shall, without
exception, constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.
(7) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by an order or act of the
building official under subsection (5) above may seek judicial review of the order
or act. The time period established in subsection (4) above shall be stayed
during the pendency of judicial review.
(8) Supplemental nature of this section. The provisions of this section
are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision in the municipal charter, this municipal code of ordinances or other
applicable law which permits the city to proceed against an owner, tenant or
occupant of property who has created, maintained, or permitted to be
maintained on such property the growth of trees, vines, grass, weeds,
underbrush and/or the accumulation of the debris, trash, litter, or garbage or
any combination of the preceding elements, under its charter, any other
provisions of this municipal code of ordinances or any other applicable law.
(1999 Code, § 13-104, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
13-4
CHAPTER 2
POOL REGULATIONS
SECTION
13-201. Title.
13-202. Fencing requirements.
13-203. Gates and doors.
13-204. Modifications of regulations.
13-205. Pool defined.
13-206. Penalty.
13-201. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Family Pool
Ordinance" of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 13-201)
13-202. Fencing requirements. Every outdoor family swimming pool
shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in
height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps
larger than four (4) inches in any dimension except for doors and gates; and if
a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not
exceed four (4) inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as
part of such enclosure.
This requirement shall be applicable to all new family pools constructed
after August 5, 1976, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all existing
pools which have a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches of water. No person
in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant
or a licensee, upon which is situated a family swimming pool having a minimum
depth of eighteen (18) inches shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or
wall as herein provided. (1999 Code, § 13-202)
13-203. Gates and doors. All gates or doors opening through such
enclosures shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use,
except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of enclosure need not be
so equipped. (1999 Code, § 13-203)
13-204. Modifications of regulations. The planning and development
department may make modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good
cause with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates, or
latches, or the necessity therefor, provided the protection as sought hereunder
is not reduced thereby. The planning and development department shall allow
a reasonable period within which to comply with the requirements of this
section. (1999 Code, § 13-204, modified)
13-5
13-205. Pool defined. "Family pool" is a swimming pool used or
intended to be used solely by the owner, operator, or lessee thereof and his
family and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee; and is
considered a body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other
container, whether located indoors or outdoors, but is not to include swimming
pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels,
community associations, or private clubs. (1999 Code, § 13-205)
13-206. Penalty. It is hereby declared a misdemeanor for any person to
own, operate, or lease a family pool that does not comply with the above sections
of this chapter; and every person guilty of such misdemeanor shall on conviction
be fined not more than state authorized limits with each day constituting a
separate offense. (1999 Code, § 13-206, modified)
13-6
CHAPTER 3
MINIMUM PROPERTY MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES
SECTION
13-301. International property maintenance code adopted.
13-302. Modifications.
13-303. Violations.
13-301. International property maintenance code adopted. The
International Property Maintenance Code,1 2012 edition, is hereby adopted by
reference as though it was copied herein fully. (Ord. #955, July 2002, as
amended by Ord. #1141, Aug. 2014)
13-302. Modifications. Any matters in the international property
maintenance code which are contrary to existing ordinances of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee shall prevail and all ordinances in conflict are hereby
amended to comply with the provisions of this chapter and to that extent any
existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only.
(Ord. #955, July 2002)
13-303. Violations. It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate
or fail to comply with any provision of the international property maintenance
code as herein adopted by reference and modified. The violation of any section
of this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty of no more than the state
authorized limits and costs. Each day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The building official or his or her deputy or
assistant is empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the
city by any person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation.
1Municipal code reference
International Property Maintenance Code: title 12, chapter 6.
13-7
CHAPTER 4
SLUM CLEARANCE1
SECTION
13-401. Findings of building official.
13-402. Definitions.
13-403. "Public officer" designated; powers.
13-404. Initiation of proceedings; hearings.
13-405. Orders to owners of unfit structures.
13-406. When building official may repair, etc.
13-407. When building official may remove or demolish.
13-408. Lien for expenses; sale of salvage materials; other powers not limited.
13-409. Basis for a finding of unfitness.
13-410. Service of complaints or orders.
13-411. Enjoining enforcement of order.
13-412. Additional powers of building official.
13-413. Powers conferred are supplemental.
13-401. Findings of building official. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-21-101, et seq., the building official of the City of Lawrenceburg
finds that there exists in the city structures which are unfit for human
occupation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident
or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or insanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the city. (1999 Code, § 13-401, modified)
13-402. Definitions. (1) "Municipality" shall mean the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, and the areas encompassed within existing city
limits or as hereafter annexed.
(2) "Governing body" shall mean the Board of Mayor and Council
charged with governing the city.
(3) "Public officer" shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-101, et seq.
(4) "Public authority" shall mean any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health,
fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning structures in the city.
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13, chapter 21.
13-8
(5) "Owner" shall mean the holder of title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(6) "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
(7) "Structures" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used for human occupation and intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
(1999 Code, § 13-402, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
13-403. "Public officer" designated; powers. There is hereby
designated and appointed a "public officer," to be the building official of the city,
to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, which powers shall be
supplemental to all others held by the building official. (1999 Code, § 13-403,
modified)
13-404. Initiation of proceedings; hearings. Whenever a petition is
filed with the building official by a public authority or by at least five (5)
residents of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy
or use, or whenever it appears to the building official (on his own motion) that
any structure is unfit for human occupation or use, the building official shall, if
his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the zoning board of appeals (or its designated agent)
at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30)
days after the service of the complaint; and the owner and parties in interest
shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person,
or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint;
and the rules of evidence prevailing in court of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the public officer. (1999 Code, § 13-404, modified)
13-405. Orders to owners of unfit structures. If, after such notice
and hearing as provided for in the preceding section, the building official
determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his finding of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof
an order:
(1) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding
fifty percent [50%] of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, during the
time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to render
it fit for human occupancy or use or to vacate and close the structure for human
occupancy or use; or
13-9
(2) If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed
fifty percent [50%] of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. (1999 Code,
§ 13-405, modified)
13-406. When building official may repair, etc. If the owner fails to
comply with the order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the
structure as specified in the preceding section hereof, the building official may
cause such structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and
closed; and the building official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of
any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building for
human occupancy or use is prohibited and unlawful." (1999 Code, § 13-406,
modified)
13-407. When building official may remove or demolish. If the
owner fails to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish
the structure, the building official may cause such structure to be removed and
demolished. (1999 Code, § 13-407, modified)
13-408. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other
powers not limited. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the building
official shall, upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds
of Lawrence County, be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality,
second only to liens of the state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of
the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest
in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of
such notice. These costs shall be placed upon the tax rolls of the City of
Lawrenceburg as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected
at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the
owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. If the structure is
removed or demolished by the building official, he shall sell the materials of
such structure if in his individual judgment a sale of the materials is practical
or feasible and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the
removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Chancery Court of Lawrence County by the building official, shall be secured in
such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such
court provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Lawrenceburg to define and
13-10
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. (1999 Code, § 13-408, modified)
13-409. Basis for a finding of unfitness. The building official defined
herein shall have the power and may determine that a structure is unfit for
human occupation and use if he finds that conditions exist in such structure
which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants
or users of such structure, the occupants or users of neighboring structures or
other residents of the City of Lawrenceburg; such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; and uncleanliness. (1999 Code, § 13-409, modified)
13-410. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued
by the building official pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons,
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the building official shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also
be filed for record in the Register's Office of Lawrence County, Tennessee, and
such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices
provided by law. (1999 Code, § 13-410, modified)
13-411. Enjoining enforcement of order. Any person affected by an
order issued by the building official served pursuant to this chapter may file a
suit in chancery court for an injunction restraining the building official from
carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon the filing of
such suit, issue a temporary injunction restraining the building official pending
the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days
after the posting and service of the order of the building official, such person
shall file such suit in the court.
The remedy provided herein shall be the exclusive remedy and no person
affected by an order of the building official shall be entitled to recover any
damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the building official, or
because of noncompliance by such person with any order of the building official.
(1999 Code, § 13-411, modified)
13-11
13-412. Additional powers of building official. The building official,
in order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter,
shall have the following powers in addition to those otherwise granted herein:
(1) To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate. (1999 Code, § 13-412, modified)
13-413. Powers conferred are supplemental. This chapter shall not
be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of its charter or any other ordinances or
regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers
conferred by the charter and other laws. (1999 Code, § 13-413)
13-12
CHAPTER 5
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION
13-501. Definitions.
13-502. Violations a civil offense.
13-503. Exceptions.
13-504. Enforcement.
13-505. Penalty for violation.
13-501. Definitions. For the purpose of the interpretation and
application of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall the indicated
meanings:
(1) "Person" shall mean any natural person, or any firm, partnership,
association, corporation or other organization of any kind and description.
(2) "Private Property" shall include all property that is not public
property, regardless of how the property is zoned or used.
(3) "Traveled portion of any public street or highway " shall mean the width
of the street from curb to curb, or where there are no curbs, the entire width of
the paved portion of the street, or where the street is unpaved, the entire width
of the street in which vehicles ordinarily use for travel.
(4) "Vehicle" shall mean any machine propelled by power other than
human power, designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads,
self-laying tracks, runners, slides or skids, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, go-carts, campers, tractors,
trailers, tractor-trailers, buggies, wagons, and earth-moving equipment, and any
part of the same.
(5) "Junk Vehicle" shall mean a vehicle of any age that is damaged or
defective in any one or combination of any of the following ways that either
makes the vehicle immediately inoperable, or would prohibit the vehicle from
being operated in a reasonable safe manner upon the public streets and
highways under its own power if self-propelled or while being towed or pushed,
if not self-propelled:
(a) Flat tires, missing tires, missing wheels, or missing or
partially or totally disassembled tires and wheels.
(b) Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential part
or parts of the vehicle's drive train, including, but not limited to, engine
transmission, transaxle, drive shaft, differential, or axle.
(c) Extensive exterior body damage or missing or partially or
totally disassembled essential body parts, including, but not limited to,
fenders, doors, engine hood, bumper or bumpers, windshield, or windows.
13-13
(d) Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential
interior parts, including, but not limited to, driver's seat, steering wheel,
instrument panel, clutch, brake, or gear shift lever.
(e) Missing or partially or totally disassembled parts essential
to the starting or running of the vehicle under its own power, including,
but not limited to, starter, generator or alternator, battery, distributor,
gas tank, carburetor or fuel injection system, spark plugs, or radiator.
(f) Interior is a container for metal, glass, paper, rags or other
cloth, wood, auto parts, machinery, waste or discarded materials in such
quantity, quality and arrangement that a driver cannot be properly
seated in the vehicle.
(g) Lying on the ground (upside down, on its side, or at other
extreme angle), sitting on block or suspended in the air by any other
method.
(h) General environment in which the vehicle sits including, but
not limited to vegetation that has grown up around, in or through the
vehicle, the collection of pools of water in the vehicle, and the
accumulation of other garbage or debris around the vehicle. (as added by
Ord. #1210, Aug. 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
15-502. Violations a civil offense. It shall be unlawful and a civil
offense for any person:
(1) To park and or in any other manner place and leave unattended on
the traveled portion of any public street or highway a junk vehicle for any period
of time, even if the owner or operator of the vehicle did not intend to
permanently desert or forsake the vehicle.
(2) To park or in any other manner place or leave unattended or the
untraveled portion of any street or highway, or upon any other public property,
a junk vehicle for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours, even if the owner
or operator of the vehicle did not intend to permanently desert or forsake the
vehicle.
(3) To park, store, keep, maintain on private property a junk vehicle
for more than sixty (60) days. (as added by Ord. #1210, Aug. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
13-503. Exceptions. It shall be permissible for a person to park, store,
keep and maintain a junked vehicle on private property under the following
conditions:
(1) The junk vehicle is completely enclosed within a building where
neither the vehicle nor any part of it is visible from the street or from any
abutting property. However, this exception shall not exempt the owner or
person in possession of the property from any zoning, building, housing,
property maintenance, and other regulations governing the building in which
such vehicle is enclosed.
13-14
(2) The junk vehicle is parked or stored on property lawfully zoned for
business engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles. However, this
exception shall not exempt the owner or operator of any such business from any
other zoning, building, fencing, property maintenance and other regulations
governing business engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles.
(3) No person shall park, store, keep and maintain on private property
a junk vehicle for any period of time if it poses an immediate threat to the health
and safety of citizens of the city. (as added by Ord. #1210, Aug. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
13-504. Enforcement. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 7-63-101, the building inspector is authorized to issue ordinance summons for
violators of this ordinance on private property.
(1) The building inspector shall upon the complaint of any citizen, or
acting on his/her own initiative, investigate complaints of junked vehicles on
private property. If after such investigation the building inspector finds a
junked vehicle on private property, he/she shall issue an ordinance summons.
(2) The ordinance summons shall be served upon the owner or owners
of the property, or upon the person or persons apparently in lawful possession
of the property, and shall give notice to the same to appear answer the charges
against him or them.
(3) If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to appear, the building
inspector may:
(a) Request the city judge to issue a summons, or
(b) Request a police officer to witness the violation. The police
officer who witnessed the violation may issue the offender a citation in
lieu of arrest as authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101
et. seq., or if the offender refuses to sign the citation, may arrest the
offender for failure to sign the citation in lieu of arrest. (as added by
Ord. #1210, Aug. 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
13-505. Penalty for violation. Any person violating this ordinance
shall be subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs for each
separate violation of this ordinance. Each day the violation of this ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate violation. (as added by Ord. #1210, Aug.
2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
14-1
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. REGIONAL MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
3. MUNICIPAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE.
4. GRADING OPERATIONS.
CHAPTER 1
REGIONAL MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-101. Membership.
14-102. Organization, rules, staff and finances.
14-103. Powers and duties.
14-101. Membership. The Lawrenceburg Regional Municipal Planning
Commission shall consist of not less than five (5) members and not more than
ten (10) members. One of the members of said municipal planning commission
shall be the mayor of the municipality or a person designated by the mayor.
One of the members of the municipal planning commission shall be a member
of the Board of Mayor and Council selected by the Board of Mayor and Council
to serve on the municipal planning commission. All other members of the
municipal planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor. All members
of the municipal planning commission may serve as such without compensation,
except membership in the zoning board of appeals.
The terms of the appointed members shall be for a period of three (3)
years except for the first commission members appointed after the adoption of
Ordinance #759. Up to three (3) members' terms shall expire on June 30, 1990;
up to three (3) members' terms shall expire on June 30, 1991; and up to three
(3) members' terms shall expire on June 30, 1992. All subsequent appointed
member's terms shall be for a three (3) year period beginning with the expired
term of previous members. Planning commission members may succeed
themselves. Pursuant to Article IV, Section (G)(1) of the city charter, no
commission member may serve more than twelve (12) consecutive years in the
same appointed position. As the terms of such appointed member as aforesaid
expire, the mayor may appoint successors, who may be the same person, to serve
for a period of three years. The terms of the mayor or the mayor's designee, and
of the one commissioner selected by the Board of Mayor and Council of the City
of Lawrenceburg, shall run concurrently with their term of office on the Board
of Mayor and Council of said city. The mayor shall have the power to fill the
14-2
unexpired term of any vacancy on said membership of the planning commission;
and the mayor shall have the power to remove any appointed member at his
pleasure. (1999 Code, § 14-101, modified, and amended by Ord. #1091, March
2012)
14-102. Organization, rules, staff and finances. The regional
municipal planning commission shall elect its chairman from amongst its
appointive members. The term of chairman shall be one year with eligibility for
re-election. The commission shall adopt rules for the transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission may
appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may
contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may
require. The expenditures of the commission, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Mayor and Council of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 14-102, modified, and amended by
Ord. #1091, March 2012)
14-103. Powers and duties. From and after the time when the regional
municipal planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers,
together with the adoption of its rules or procedure, then said commission shall
have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in Pub. Acts 1935,
ch. 34, ch. 44 and ch. 45 or other acts relating to the duties and powers of
regional municipal planning commissions adopted subsequent hereto. (1999
Code, § 14-103, modified)
14-3
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use
within the City of Lawrenceburg shall be governed by Ordinance #789, titled
"Zoning Ordinance, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee," and any amendments thereto.1
1Ordinance #789, and any amendments thereto, are published as
Appendix 1, Volume II of this code. Refer to APP-1 Table of Contents for specific
provisions relating to zoning.
14-4
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-301. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives.
14-302. Definitions.
14-303. General provisions.
14-304. Administration.
14-305. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
14-306. Variance procedures.
14-307. Legal status provisions.
14-301. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objective. (1) Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of
Tennessee has in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Lawrenceburg, Tennessee Mayor and Board of Council,
does ordain as follows:
(2) Findings of fact. (a) The Lawrenceburg Mayor and its Legislative
Body wishes to maintain eligibility in the national flood insurance
program and in order to do so must meet the requirements of 60.3 of the
Federal Insurance Administration Regulations found at 44 C.F.R. ch. 1
(10-1-04 edition).
(b) Areas of Lawrenceburg are subject to periodic inundation
which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(c) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and
velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or
construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
(3) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This ordinance is
designed to:
(a) Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood
heights, or velocities;
14-5
(b) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community
facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(c) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(d) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion; and
(e) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.
(4) Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To protect human life, health and property;
(b) To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood
control projects;
(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and
bridges located in floodable areas;
(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize blight in flood areas;
(g) To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that
property is in a floodable area; and
(h) To maintain eligibility for participation in the national flood
insurance program. (Ord. #664, May 1978, as amended by Ord. #1001,
Feb. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-302. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this ordinance shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application
given its stated purpose and objectives.
(1) "Accessory structure" shall represent a subordinate structure to the
principal structure and, for the purpose of this section, shall conform to the
following:
(a) Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation.
(b) Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
(c) Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.
14-6
(d) Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(e) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed.
(2) "Act" means the statutes authorizing the national flood insurance
program that are incorporated in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
(3) "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by
a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent
perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction."
(4) "Appeal" means a request for a review of the local enforcement
officer's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
(5) "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent (1%) or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (1' - 3')
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
(Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.)
(6) "Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" is the land within a
community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary
Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further
refined.
(7) "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM,
Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
(8) "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of
being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
(9) "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
(10) "Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
(11) "Building" means any structure built for support, shelter, or
enclosure for any occupancy or storage (see "structure").
(12) "Development" means any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
14-7
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling
operations, or permanent storage of equipment or materials.
(13) "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by
means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or
shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a base flood event.
(14) "Emergency flood insurance program" or "emergency program"
means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with
section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer
amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the
initial FIRM.
(15) "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of
landmasses. This peril is not per se covered under the program.
(16) "Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this ordinance
which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order
or other determination made or issued pursuant to this ordinance.
(17) "Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start
of construction" commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that
community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(18) "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by
the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(19) "Existing structures." See "existing construction."
(20) "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision"
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
(21) "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(22) "Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the
administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood
14-8
level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given
year.
(23) "Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards.
(24) "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of
a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
(25) "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, delineating
the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
(26) "Flood insurance study" is the official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, evaluating flood hazards and
containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood.
(27) "Floodplain" or "flood prone area" means any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood" or
"flooding").
(28) "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works
and floodplain management regulations.
(29) "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works
for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which
have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
(30) "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
(31) "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding.
(32) "Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area"
means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which
14-9
due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or
wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
(33) "Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain
management regulations.
(34) "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
(35) "Floor" means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building
(including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.
(36) "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
(37) "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
(38) "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of
the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure.
(39) "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic
places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
14-10
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(i) By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
(40) "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
(41) "Levee system" means a flood protection system, which consists of
a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.
(42) "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
(43) "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1)
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle," unless
such transportable structures are placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days or longer.
(44) "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
(45) "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the agency.
(46) "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages
of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within
the floodplain. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
(47) "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
(48) "New construction" means any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced after the effective date of this ordinance or the
effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
14-11
(49) "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after
the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the first floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
(50) "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" as corrected in 1988 is
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
(51) "100-year flood." See "base flood."
(52) "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and
local governments and agencies.
(53) "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
(b) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
(54) "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
(55) "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
(56) "Special hazard area" means an area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
(57) "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include
initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
14-12
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
(58) "State coordinating agency." The Tennessee Department of
Economic and Community Development's Local Planning Assistance Office, as
designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of the
administrator to assist in the implementation of the national flood insurance
program for the state.
(59) "Structure," for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed
building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid
storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
(60) "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
(61) "Substantial improvement" means any repairs, reconstructions,
rehabilitations, additions, alterations or other improvements to a structure,
taking place during a five (5) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the structure
should be:
(a) The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the
initial repair or improvement; or
(b) In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage,"
regardless of the actual repair work performed.
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include
either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair
project; or
14-13
(b) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(62) "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.
(63) "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
(64) "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(65) "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where
specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas. (Ord. #664, May 1978, as amended by Ord. #1001, Feb. 2006,
and replaced by Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-303. General provisions. (1) Application. This ordinance shall
apply to all areas within the incorporated area of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas
of special flood hazard identified on the Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 47099C0145C,
47099C0163C, 47099C0164C, 47099C0165C, 47099C0168C, 47099C0170C,
47099C0235C, 47099C0251C, 47099C0252C, 47099C0253C, 47099C0256C,
47099C0265C, dated January 2, 2009, along with all supporting technical data,
are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
(3) Requirement for development permit. A development permit shall
be required in conformity with this ordinance prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(4) Compliance. No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(5) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another
regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
14-14
(6) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under Tennessee statutes.
(7) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(8) Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance
or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided
by law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee
from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. #664, May 1978, as amended by Ord. #1001, Feb. 2006, and replaced by
Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-304. Administration. (1) Designation of ordinance administrator.
The building official is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement the
provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be
made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any
development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited
to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and
drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
(a) Application stage. (i) Elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all
buildings where BFEs are available, or to the highest adjacent
grade when applicable under this ordinance.
(ii) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
non-residential building will be floodproofed where BFEs are
available, or to the highest adjacent grade when applicable under
this ordinance.
14-15
(iii) Design certificate from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the proposed non-residential
floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in
§ 14-304(2).
(iv) Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(b) Construction stage. Within unnumbered A Zones, where
flood elevation data are not available, the administrator shall record the
elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. The elevation of
the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest
floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade.
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the
regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the
lowest floor or floodproofing. Within unnumbered A Zones, where flood
elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be
determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building
relative to the highest adjacent grade.
Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a
non-residential building said certification shall be prepared by or under
the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified
by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall
be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the
above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.
(3) Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the
administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Review of all development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(b) Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits
may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are
known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained
on file with the development permit. This shall include section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
1334.
(c) Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee
Department of Economic and Community Development, Local Planning
14-16
Assistance Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submission of evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(d) For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit
engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to ensure accuracy of community flood
maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure that the flood
carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(e) Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the
highest adjacent grade, where applicable of the lowest floor including
basement of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance
with § 14-304(2).
(f) Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level or
the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new or
substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 14-304(2).
(g) When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the
administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a
registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with
§ 14-304(2).
(h) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
ordinance.
(i) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not
been provided by the federal emergency management agency then the
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as
criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development in Zone A on the community FIRM meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
Within unnumbered A Zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in
§ 14-302 of this ordinance). All applicable data including elevations or
floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in § 14-304(2).
14-17
(j) All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance
shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open
for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited
retrieval within combined files. (Ord. #664, May 1978, as amended by
Ord. #1001, Feb. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-305. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. (1) General
standards. In all flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure;
(b) Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with
applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
(c) New construction and substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;
(d) New construction or substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage;
(e) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
(f) New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;
(g) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(h) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding;
(g) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
ordinance; and
(h) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is not in compliance with the provision of this ordinance
shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended
or replaced.
14-18
(2) Specific standards. These provisions shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard as provided herein:
(a) Residential construction. Where base flood elevation data
is available, new construction or substantial improvement of any
residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than one foot (1') above the base
flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls and to ensure unimpeded
movement of floodwater shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of § 14-305(2).
Within unnumbered A Zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in
§ 14-302 of this ordinance). All applicable data including elevations or
floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in § 14-304(2).
(b) Non-residential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
non-residential building, when BFE data is available, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed no lower than
one foot (1') above the level of the base flood elevation.
Within unnumbered A Zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in
§ 14-302 of this ordinance). All applicable data including elevations or
floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in § 14-304(2).
Buildings located in all A Zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of
being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required
elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and are built with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall
provide such certification to the administrator as set forth in § 14-304(2).
(c) Elevated building. All new construction or substantial
improvements to existing buildings that include any fully enclosed areas
formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
14-19
elevation, or required height above the highest adjacent grade, shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.
(i) Designs for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet
the following minimum criteria.
(A) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having
a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above the finish grade; and
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(ii) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the elevated living
area (stairway or elevator); and
(iii) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a way as to
impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall
comply with the provisions of § 14-305(2) of this ordinance.
(d) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles. (i) All manufactured homes placed, or substantially
improved, on:
(A) Individual lots or parcels;
(B) In expansions to existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions; or
(C) In new or substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
Must meet all the requirements of new construction, including
elevations and anchoring.
(ii) All manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that either:
(A) When base flood elevations are available the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a
permanent foundation no lower than one foot (1') above the
level of the base flood elevation; or
(B) Absent base flood elevations the manufactured
home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers
14-20
(or other foundation elements) at least three feet (3') in
height above the highest adjacent grade.
(iii) Any manufactured home, which has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood or that has
substantially improved, must meet the standards of § 14-305(2)(d)
of this ordinance.
(iv) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(v) All recreational vehicles placed on identified flood
hazard sites must either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed,
on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached structures or additions.
(C) The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including the anchoring
and elevation requirements of this section above if on the
site for longer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days.
(e) Standards for subdivisions. Subdivisions and other proposed
new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be
reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development is in a flood prone area, any such proposals shall be
reviewed to ensure that:
(i) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.
(ii) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(iii) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(iv) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
fifty (50) lots and/or five (5) acres in area.
(3) Standards for areas of special flood hazard with established base
flood elevations and with floodways designated. Located within the areas of
special flood hazard established in § 14-303(2) are areas designated as
floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
14-21
of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain
free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without
increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill
material, new construction, substantial improvements or other
developments within the regulatory floodway. Development may be
permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or
new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not result in any increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood level, velocities or floodway widths during the occurrence
of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A registered
professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and
certification thereof.
(b) New construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
§ 14-305.
(4) Standards for areas of special flood hazard Zones AE with
established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. Located
within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 14-303(2), where
streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been
designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply:
(a) No encroachments, including fill material, new structures
or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood
hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(b) New construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance
with § 14-305(2).
(5) Standards for streams without established base flood elevations or
floodways (A Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 14-303, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been
provided (A Zones), or where a floodway has not been delineated, the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not
been provided in accordance with § 14-303, then the administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood
14-22
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of § 14-305. Only if data is
not available from these sources, then the following provisions (b) and (c)
shall apply:
(b) No encroachments, including structures or fill material,
shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream
bank, unless certification by registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot (1') at any point within the community. The engineering certification
should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
(c) In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation
data, new construction or substantial improvements of existing shall have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated
no less than three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade at the
building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
§ 14-305(2) and "elevated building."
(6) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 14-303(2) are
areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1' - 3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to at least one foot (1') above the flood depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above
the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least three feet (3')
above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance
with standards of § 14-305(2) and "elevated building."
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The
structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be
floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at
least one foot (1') above the specified FIRM flood level, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is
14-23
specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be floodproofed to at
least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance and shall provide
such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required
in § 14-304(2).
(c) Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(d) The administrator shall certify the elevation or the highest
adjacent grade, where applicable, and the record shall become a
permanent part of the permit file.
(7) Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A99
Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 14-303
are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but
where base flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been determined.
Within these areas (A99 Zones) all provisions of §§ 14-304 and 14-305(1) shall
apply.
(8) Standards for unmapped streams. Located within Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are
neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no
encroachments including fill material or structures shall be located
within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream,
measured from the top of each stream bank, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point
within the locality.
(b) When new elevation data is available, new construction or
substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed
to elevations established in accordance with § 14-304. (Ord. #664, May
1978, as amended by Ord. #1001, Feb. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #1045,
Aug. 2008)
14-306. Variance procedures. The provisions of this section shall
apply exclusively to areas of special flood hazard within Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee.
(1) Board of zoning appeals. (a) The Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this ordinance.
14-24
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures (see definition) upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(c) In passing upon such applications, the board of zoning
appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this ordinance; and
(i) The danger that materials may be swept onto other
property to the injury of others;
(ii) The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion;
(iii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage;
(iv) The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;
(v) The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location,
in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
(vi) The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(vii) The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area;
(viii) The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(ix) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(x) The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
(d) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the
purposes of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes of this ordinance.
(e) Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(2) Conditions for variances. (a) Variances shall be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary,
considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building,
a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary so as
not to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
14-25
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(c) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(d) The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request. (Ord. #664, May 1978, as amended by Ord. #1001,
Feb. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-307. Legal status provisions. (1) Conflict with other ordinances.
In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or
part of any existing or future ordinance of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, the most
restrictive shall in all cases apply.
(2) Validity. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or
unconstitutional.
(3) Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately
after its passage, in accordance with the Charter of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
and the public welfare demanding it. (as added by Ord. #1045, Aug. 2008)
14-26
CHAPTER 4
GRADING OPERATIONS
SECTION
14-401. Establishment and purpose.
14-402. Definitions.
14-403. Scope.
14-404. Application.
14-405. Duration of permit.
14-406. Denial of permit.
14-407. Inspection of work.
14-408. Surety for permitted work in public rights-of-way, etc.
14-409. Permit fees.
14-410. Maintenance.
14-411. Sign prohibition.
14-412. Violations and penalties.
14-401. Establishment and purpose. There are established for the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, the following regulations and requirements
for permitting of grading operations:
(1) This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The
Lawrenceburg Grading Ordinance."
(2) The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard persons, to protect property, and to promote the public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use,
location, and maintenance of grading, excavation, and fill without infringing on
the rights of property owners to accomplish minor "yard improvement"
measures. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001)
14-402. Definitions. Wherever used in this chapter, the following words
shall have the meaning indicated:
(1) "Building permit" shall mean a permit issued by the codes director
pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
for the construction, correction, or alteration of a structure or building.
(2) "Excavation" shall mean any act by which topsoil, earth, and
gravel, rock, or any similar material is cut into, dug, marred, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting from such considerations.
(3) "Fill" shall mean any act by which topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock,
or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported,
or moved to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting from such
considerations.
14-27
(4) "Existing grade" shall mean the elevation of the existing ground
surface at the location of any proposed excavation or fill.
(5) "Grading" shall mean excavation or fill or any combination thereof
and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
(6) "Grading permit" shall mean any permit required under this
chapter.
(7) "Person" shall mean an individual but can also include a
partnership, corporation, or any other legally recognized entity.
(8) "Site" shall mean a lot, tract, or parcel of land, or a series of lots,
tracts, or parcels of land, joined together, where grading work is continuous and
performed at the same or different times.
(9) "Topsoil" is that upper portion or layer of naturally occurring
terrain (2" - 10" deep) that is composed of mostly organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
(10) "Stripping" shall mean the removal, by mechanical means, of the
topsoil layer of a proposed excavation. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-403. Scope. (1) New grading, excavations, and fills, or changes,
additions, repairs, or alterations made to existing excavations and fills shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter, except that this chapter shall not apply
to:
(a) Operations involved in mining, quarrying, excavating,
processing, or stockpiling of rock, sand, aggregate, or clay unless such
work affects the support of adjacent or contiguous property or structures;
and provided such operations are duly permitted by the proper state
agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
(b) Residential landscaping, top dressing and cosmetic works by
private individuals or firms contracted by private individuals.
(c) Construction which is the implementation of plans for
development(s) duly reviewed and approved by the Lawrenceburg
Regional Municipal Planning Commission.
(d) Grading or excavation pursuant to a permit for excavation
in public streets.
(e) Grading in connection with a public improvement or public
work for which inspection is provided by the city.
(f) Grading or excavation by a public utility company in private
easements or public rights-of-way.
(g) An excavation below finished grade for basements and
footings of a building, swimming pool, or underground structure
authorized by a valid building permit where the cost of such excavation
is included in the building permit valuations. This exception shall not
affect the applicability of this chapter to, nor the requirement of a grading
permit for, any fill made with the material from such excavation.
14-28
(h) Farming or other accepted agricultural uses, as identified in
the Tennessee Right to Farm Act.1
(i) The construction of a single residence or addition to an
existing single family residence.
(2) Permits will be required for any other grading operation not noted
above and covered in one (1) or more of the following situations:
(a) Topsoil stripping or sod removal having a single or combined
area coverage on one site of 2500 square feet (equivalent 50' square).
(b) Excavation or placement of fill material having a volume of
100 cubic yards or more on one site.
(c) Areas of excavation or fill having a coverage of 1000 square
feet and a maximum cut or fill depth, at any point, of three (3) feet or
more on one (1) site.
(d) An excavation from existing grade three (3) feet or more
below a two (horizontal) to one (vertical) descending slope from any
property line, or a fill on existing grade three feet or more above a two
(horizontal) to one (vertical) ascending slope from any property line.
(e) A grading operation in preparation for a paving project that
will be used for any other purpose than a residential driveway and/or
parking area.
(f) An excavation or fill within a public sewer, water main,
storm drain, or power line easement.
(g) An excavation or fill which will encroach on or alter a
natural drainage channel or water course.
(3) No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair or install any
structure in any natural water course without a permit from the codes director.
(4) A separate permit shall be required for each separate noncontiguous
site. One permit may cover both an excavation and a fill on the same
site made with excavated materials. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-404. Application. The permit application shall include but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
(1) Basic information. (a) The purpose of the work and a statement
as to whether the purpose of the grading is for private or commercial
reasons;
(b) The nature and amount of material proposed to be excavated
and the amount of fill in cubic yards;
(c) The street address at the point of access to the property
where the work is to be performed;
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 43-26-103.
14-29
(d) The name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed;
(e) A description of the equipment and methods to be used in
performing the work;
(f) The name of the firm that will haul excavated material to or
from the property where the work is to be performed;
(g) The name, address and phone number of the person to have
effective control of the work;
(h) The estimated dates for starting and completing the work to
be done;
(i) Report of a soils engineer if required by the codes director;
(j) Such further applicable information as the codes director
may require in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Detailed information. (a) A sketch by the applicant or his agent
showing existing conditions and the proposed work if required by the
codes director;
(b) Such further engineering or soils data as may be required by
the codes director to fully assess the scope and consequences of the
proposed work.
(3) Drainage considerations. (a) Adequate provisions shall be made
to prevent any surface waters from damaging the cut face of an
excavation or the sloping surface of a fill;
(b) All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural
water course approved by the codes enforcement officer or his/her
designee as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters;
(c) The codes officer or his/her designee may require such
drainage structures or pipes to be constructed or installed which in his
opinion are necessary to prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily
carry off surface waters. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-405. Duration of permit. As stated in § 2-304(1)(i), the estimated
time frame for this work will be submitted with the permit application. The
codes enforcement officer or his/her designee will, at the time the permit is
issued, set a completion schedule. If, due to circumstances beyond the control
of the applicant, the work takes longer than originally scheduled, an extension
of time may be granted by the codes officer or his/her designee. In no case shall
the schedule exceed one (1) year after initial date of the issuance of a permit.
If however, the work is not completed on time as called for in the permit due to
lack of pursuit of the work, the permit will expire and the application process
for a new permit must be initiated. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-406. Denial of permit. An application for work under the provisions
of this chapter may be denied for any of the following reasons:
14-30
(1) Insufficient or inadequate information submitted to determine
scope of project;
(2) Proposed work will endanger or be detrimental to adjacent
properties or existing features such as streets, utilities, buildings, etc.
(Ord. #937, Aug. 2001)
14-407. Inspection of work. Monitoring of the work will be
accomplished by the codes director or his representative as follows:
(1) Before project is commenced;
(2) Upon completion of the project;
(3) At any other time(s) the codes director may deem necessary.
(Ord. #937, Aug. 2001)
14-408. Surety for permitted work in public rights-of-way, etc.
Public performance bonds will be posted by the applicant at the time the permit
is granted for any and all works and incidental activities to be done within or on
public rights-of-way or private property easements. The form and amount of
bond will be set by the codes director at the time of the permit application and
will cover the amount deemed necessary to complete the proposed work and/or
potential damages to existing public facilities. Bond will be held until
satisfactory restoration or replacement of all damaged or impaired public
facilities are completed. This includes but is not limited to roadways, drainage
improvements, sanitary sewer lines and water lines. Bonds will be released
upon final inspection and approval of the completed work, or when the permit
expires. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-409. Permit fees. Permit fees will be charged based upon the nature
and magnitude of the work. Work to be performed will be categorized as to
nature and magnitude at the time of permit application and a fee charged on the
following schedule:
(1) Area coverage of less than 2500 square feet or less than 100 cubic
yards of material (minimum fee) -- $10.00.
(2) Area coverage of more than 2500 square feet and more than 100
cubic yards of material -- $25.00.
(3) Holding escrow agreements and/or bonds -- $10.00 each.
(Ord. #937, Aug. 2001)
14-410. Maintenance. The project site(s) is to be maintained in an
orderly and safe condition at all times as noted by the following:
(1) The project site will at all times during construction, be kept in a
condition that is safe to the general public and adjacent properties;
(2) The project will have sedimentation control incorporated in its
work plan and a provision for natural storm water removal so as to pose no
threat of danger to life or property;
14-31
(3) Upon completion, the project must be left and maintained as
conceived, and posing no liability whatsoever in regard to slope stabilization,
drainage, improved structures, etc.
(4) Prevent transport of construction debris and/or sediment onto
surfaces of adjacent properties or public rights of way. (Ord. #937, Aug. 2001)
14-411. Sign prohibition. It shall be construed to be a violation of this
chapter to solicit public or "at large" dumping of materials on any site by
placement of "Dump Dirt and Rock Only," "Dump Here" or any other similar
signs. No signs of any nature requesting removal from or placement of material
on a site will be allowed unless it meets the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
14-412. Violations and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge,
alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation, fill or cause the same to be
done contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter. When written
notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has been served by
the codes director on any person, such violation shall be discontinued
immediately. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of
this chapter or any lawful regulation of the superintendent of streets shall be
subject to a penalty of not more than state authorized limits for each offense and
each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. #937, Aug. 2001, modified)
15-1
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
3. SPEED LIMITS.
4. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
5. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
6. PARKING.
7. ENFORCEMENT.
8. TRAFFIC CONTROL CODE.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS2
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Reckless driving.
15-103. Persons entering automobiles, etc., prohibited.
15-104. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-105. Coasting on streets prohibited.
15-106. Vehicles and operators to be licensed.
15-107. Passing school bus, etc.
15-108. Passing.
15-109. Vehicles with trailers operated on streets.
15-110. Trucks operated on streets; regulations.
15-111. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
1Municipal code reference
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16.
2State law references
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, the following offenses
are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a state court or a
court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or drugged,
as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-401; failing to
stop after a traffic accident, as prohibited by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 55-10-101, et seq.; driving while license is suspended or
revoked, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-7-116; and
drag racing, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-501.
15-2
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such
vehicle is equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and
such other equipment as is prescribed and required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapter 9. (1999 Code, § 15-101)
15-102. Reckless driving. Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no
person, including operators of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (1999 Code,
§ 15-102)
15-103. Persons entering automobiles, etc., prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter any car, automobile, motor truck, motor bus or
any other vehicle, while parked within the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, or to sit on or stand on such car, motor truck, motor
bus, automobile or other vehicle, or on any part of same, while it is so parked,
without first having obtained permission from the owner thereof, or from one
lawfully in charge and control of same. (1999 Code, § 15-103)
15-104. Driving through funerals or other processions. Funeral
processions may move in a continuous procession through the streets and public
square without the inconvenience of stopping at any stopping place or signal, by
first notifying the chief of police of the time of such funeral procession and by
placing a watcher who shall first be approved by the chief of police, at such
street intersections or points where stops would otherwise be necessary, whose
duty it shall be to fail to stop and give way for the passage of any such funeral
procession, and it shall also be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or
persons to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle of whatsoever nature, across
or through any such funeral procession. (1999 Code, § 15-104, modified)
15-105. Coasting on streets prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a motor vehicle with the gears in neutral. (1999 Code,
§ 15-105)
15-106. Vehicles and operators to be licensed. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of the "Tennessee Motor
Vehicle Title and Registration Law" or the "Uniform Motor Vehicle Operators'
and Chauffeurs' License Law." (1999 Code, § 15-106)
15-107. Passing school bus, etc. (1) Any driver of a motor vehicle,
automobile, motor truck, motorcycle or any vehicle powered by a petroleum
derivative, in the vicinity of any public or private school in the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, shall, and is hereby required to stop such vehicle not
less than fifty feet (50') from any school bus parked in the vicinity of such school
15-3
on a public street or thoroughfare, and is prohibited from passing any school bus
so parked, whether such bus is loading or unloading pupils, or waiting for the
school to be dismissed. The driver of such motor vehicle or other vehicle shall
remain stopped until any and all such school buses have been driven away from
the vicinity of such schools.
(2) Any driver of such motor vehicle or other vehicle mentioned in
subsection (1) above, is prohibited from driving such vehicle over any curbing or
sidewalk along and in the same block of the public street in which such school
bus is parked, or across any privately owned property in the vicinity of such
school, any such acts upon the part of such driver being hereby declared to be
to avoid stopping such vehicle not less than fifty feet (50') from such parked
school bus, and also with the intention of passing such parked school bus.
(3) Any driver of such motor vehicle and other vehicle on any public
street in the vicinity of any public or private school in the City of Lawrenceburg
where a member of the school patrol, or any policeman, of the police department
of the City of Lawrenceburg is on duty, is required to comply with the orders and
directions of any such members of said patrol or policeman relating to traffic in
the vicinity of such school.
(4) Any driver of a motor vehicle, automobile, motor truck, motorcycle
or any vehicle powered by a petroleum derivative, on any public street or
thoroughfare within the City of Lawrenceburg upon approaching any street
intersection where there is a traffic light regulating vehicular traffic, or where
there is a stop sign for stopping on the street being travelled at a street
intersection, is prohibited from leaving the street being travelled, and cutting
across the grounds or yards of any gasoline or filling station abutting such
streets, or any other privately owned property in the vicinity of such street
intersection, any such acts upon the part of any such driver being hereby
declared to be to avoid stopping at such traffic light or stop sign, when such light
or signs indicate the driver shall stop on approaching the intersection. (1999
Code, § 15-107)
15-108. Passing. (1) The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left
side of the center of a street or boulevard in overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visable
and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be made in safety.
(2) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction upon the crest of a grade or upon a curve in any
street or boulevard where the driver's view along the street or boulevard is
obstructed within a distance of three hundred feet (300').
(3) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other
vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any railway grade crossing nor at
any intersection of streets, boulevards or alleys. (1999 Code, § 15-108)
15-4
15-109. Vehicles with trailers operated on streets. No motor vehicle
or trailer whose width, including any part of the load, exceeds eight feet (that
is, four feet on each side of the center line of the vehicle) shall be operated upon
the streets boulevards, alleys or the public square of the City of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, without an appropriate permit. (1999 Code, § 15-109, modified)
15-110. Trucks operated on streets; regulations. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any motor vehicle, whether a single self-contained, self-propelled
unit, or a truck, tractor and trailer, or truck which has a rated capacity of one
ton or more to travel upon any streets or alleyways within the corporate limits
of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, except as provided herein.
(2) The motor vehicles as are defined in subsection (1) herein are
allowed to travel upon all federal and state designated highways within the
corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee as follows:
U. S. Highway 43 (Locust Avenue)
U. S. Highway 64 (Gaines Street)
Tennessee Highway #241 (Buffalo Road and West Point Rd)
Travel is also authorized on any streets located in the Lawrenceburg
Industrial Park, namely Remke Avenue, Helton Drive, Mt. Arat Road, and
Liberty Avenue on the North side of Thomas Street.
(3) If the motor vehicles as defined in subsection (1) herein be engaged
in local delivery, or begin their travels from a point within the corporate limits
where they are normally garaged, and must use streets and alleyways upon
which their travel is otherwise prohibited herein in order to travel to said
authorized streets, then notwithstanding such prohibition, said vehicles may use
unauthorized alleyways and streets to travel to and from the authorized streets
by the shortest possible route when making said local deliveries or when
embarking from or returning to a local garaging point to or from points outside
the corporate limits; provided, however, that said vehicles shall use the
designated routes as much as possible when engaging in said deliveries or
traveling to and from a local garaging point, and said vehicles shall use the
authorized streets until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point,
and then return by the most direct route.
(4) The prohibitions to vehicular travel in this section shall not
prohibit:
(a) Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles
upon any street in the city.
(b) Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated
by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialman which is and
while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street
improvements, or utilities within the city.
(c) Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially
designated detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be
operated upon the street for which such detour is established.
15-5
(d) School buses. The operation of school buses; buses used to
transport persons to and from a place of worship, which runs a
designated route, except for public carriers of persons for hire.
(5) Any person, firm, corporation, federal, state, county or local
agencies violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed state
authorized limits. (1999 Code, § 15-110, modified)
15-111. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
(1) Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in
compliance with the financial responsibility law.
(2) At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any
moving violation under title 55, chapters 8 and 10, parts 1-5, chapter 50; any
provision in this title of this municipal code; or at the time of an accident for
which notice is required under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the
officer shall request evidence of financial responsibility as required by this
section. In case of an accident for which notice is required under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall request such evidence from all
drivers involved in the accident, without regard to apparent or actual fault.
(3) For the purposes of this section "financial responsibility" means:
(a) Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance
policy, an insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance
company authorized to do business in Tennessee, stating that a policy of
insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial
Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated,
chapter 12, title 55, has been issued;
(b) A certificate, valid for one (1) year, issued by the
commissioner of safety, stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount
required by the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled
in Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55, has been paid or filed
with the commissioner, or has qualified as a self-insurer under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-12-111; or
(c) The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation
was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the department of
safety or the interstate commerce commission, or was owned by the
United States, the State of Tennessee, or any political subdivision
thereof, and that such motor vehicle was being operated with the owner's
consent.
(4) Civil offense. It is a civil offense to fail to provide evidence of
financial responsibility pursuant to this section. Any violation of this section is
punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed state authorized limits. The civil
penalty prescribed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty
prescribed by the laws of this state or by the city's municipal code of ordinances.
15-6
(5) Evidence of compliance after violation. On or before the court date,
the person charged with a violation of this section may submit evidence of
compliance with this section in effect at the time of the violation. If the court is
satisfied that compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the charge of
failure to provide evidence of financial responsibility may be dismissed.
(Ord. #664, May 1998, modified)
15-7
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
SECTION
15-201. Failure to yield to emergency vehicles.
15-202. Following emergency vehicles.
15-203. Parking vehicles where fires are located.
15-204. Removal of vehicles around fire areas.
15-201. Failure to yield to emergency vehicles. When an emergency
vehicle siren or signal is sounded, it shall be unlawful for any owner and/or
driver of any automobile, auto, truck, or other vehicle of any kind, using the
streets of the City of Lawrenceburg, to fail to turn such automobile, auto truck,
or other vehicle to the curb of the street and out of the regular line of traffic,
and/or to fail to keep such automobile, auto truck or other vehicle parked at the
curb of the street until the emergency vehicles shall have passed on their way,
or until it shall have been ascertained that the emergency vehicles shall not
pass over such street on its way. (1999 Code, § 15-201, modified)
15-202. Following emergency vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
owner and/or driver of any automobile, auto truck or other vehicle to follow an
emergency vehicle at a closer proximity than one (1) block. (1999 Code,
§ 15-202, modified)
15-203. Parking vehicles where fires are located. It shall be
unlawful for any owner and/or driver of any automobile, auto truck or other
vehicle to park such automobile, auto truck or other vehicle closer than one (1)
block to any building or other property that is on fire, which is being fought or
put out by the fire department. (1999 Code, § 15-203)
15-204. Removal of vehicles around fire areas. It shall be unlawful
for any owner and/or driver or person in charge of any automobile, auto truck
or other vehicle, which at the time of the sounding of the fire siren or signal is
parked closer than one (1) block to any building or other property that is on fire,
to fail to remove the same to a greater distance than one (1) block from such
building or other property at the request of any member of the fire department
or of any member of the police department of said municipality. (1999 Code,
§ 15-204)
15-8
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-301. Uniform speed limits.
15-302. In general.
15-303. In school zones.
15-304. Penalty.
15-301. Uniform speed limits. To achieve uniform speed limits, the
speed limits on the following streets are changed as indicated:
(1) Highway 43 from Hood Lakes Road to Plummer Street  forty-five
(45) mph.
(2) Highway 43 from Plummer Street to Remke Lane  thirty-five (35)
mph.
(3) Highway 43 from Remke Lane to City Limits  forty-five (45) mph.
(4) The Square and one (1) block off square in all directions  twenty
(20) mph.
(5) East Gaines Street (U.S. Highway 64) from Springer Road to
eastern city limits  forty-five (45) mph, with the exception of the precautionary
thirty-five (35) mph zone on each side of Annie Rooney Road.
(6) Old Florence Road and South Military Avenue to city limits thirty
(30) mph  except as otherwise signed for dangerous curve.
(7) Fall River Road  thirty-five (35) mph  except as otherwise signed
for dangerous curve.
(8) West Taylor Street West of South Military Avenue through
Gallaher Boulevard  twenty (20) mph.
(9) Springer Road  thirty-five (35) mph.
(10) West Point Road  thirty-five (35) mph  except as otherwise signed
for dangerous curve. (1999 Code, § 15-301, as replaced by Ord. #1048, Jan.
2009, and amended by Ord. #1053, Aug. 2009)
15-302. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating
other speed limits, in which case the posted speed limit shall apply.
However, the same shall not apply to any fire truck and/or fire engines
en route to the scene of a fire in answer to a fire call, or to any police or highway
patrol car, in answer to a police call, or to any ambulance en route to a hospital
with a sick or injured person or persons, or en route to the scene of an accident,
or any emergency vehicle en route to assistance in any emergency, local or
national; but the drivers of such fire engine, police or highway patrol car,
ambulance or other emergency vehicles shall use reasonable care and caution
15-9
in the operation thereof. (1999 Code, § 15-302, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #1048, Jan. 2009)
15-303. In school zones. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-8-152, the city shall have the authority to enact special speed limits in
school zones. Such special speed limits shall be enacted based on an engineering
investigation; shall not be less than fifteen (15) miles per hour; and shall be in
effect only when proper signs are posted with a warning flasher or flashers in
operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such special speed
limit enacted and in effect in accordance with this section.
In school zones when the board of mayor and council has not established
special speed limits as provided for above, any person who shall drive at a speed
exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour when passing a school during a recess
period when a warning flasher or flashers are in operation, or during a period
of ninety (90) minutes before the opening hour of a school, or a period of (90)
minutes after the closing hour of school, while children are actually going to or
leaving school, shall be prima facie guilty of reckless driving. (as added by
Ord. #1048, Jan. 2009)
15-304. Penalty. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not
more than state authorized limits plus court cost for each offense. (as added by
Ord. #1048, Jan. 2009)
15-10
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-401. Generally.
15-402. Right turns.
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-401. Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any
turning movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any
other vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in
safety and signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.1 (1999 Code, § 15-401)
15-402. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1999 Code, § 15-402)
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. (1999 Code,
§ 15-403)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
15-11
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-501. At railroad crossings.
15-502. At crosswalks.
15-501. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1999 Code, § 15-501)
15-502. At crosswalks. (1) The driver of any vehicle upon the streets,
boulevards, or public square, within a business or residence district shall yield
the right of way to pedestrians crossing such streets, boulevards or public
square within any clearly marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian-crossing
included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent
sidewalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of
traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices. Every
pedestrian crossing a street or boulevard or public square within a business or
residence district at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk, or
intersection, shall yield the right of way to vehicle upon such street, boulevard
or public square.
(2) Pedestrians shall not use the streets and boulevards, other than
the sidewalks thereon or thereof, for traffic except when obliged to do so by the
absence of sidewalks, reasonable, suitable, and passable for their use, in which
case they shall keep as near as reasonably possible to the extreme left side of
edge of same. (1999 Code, § 15-502)
15-12
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION
15-601. Loading and unloading zones.
15-602. Generally.
15-603. Where prohibited.
15-601. Loading and unloading zones. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, corporation or partnership owning or in control of, either
directly or indirectly, any bus line, or motor driven vehicle used as a public
carrier and having a regular schedule and operating any motor driven vehicle
or vehicles for the purpose of carrying passengers or baggage from the said City
of Lawrenceburg, or into the said City of Lawrenceburg, to use the public square
or any public street or passways in said City of Lawrenceburg, or any part of
same as a depot or loading station or loading place for the purpose of assembling
or loading passengers. It shall be unlawful also for any one to park any such
aforesaid motor driven vehicle commonly referred to as "bus" at any place on the
public square or upon any street in said city, except at such place or places as
may be designated, and for only such time as is reasonably necessary for the
purpose of discharging passengers. The drivers of any and all aforesaid vehicles,
and each and every person connected with the operation, management, or
control of said vehicles, shall be equally guilty of each and every violation of this
section. (1999 Code, § 15-601)
15-602. Generally. No person having control of a motor vehicle shall
allow such vehicle to stand on any street, boulevard, alley or public square,
unattended without first effectively setting the brakes thereon and stopping the
motor of said vehicle, and when standing on any grade without turning the front
wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of the street, alley or boulevard. (1999
Code, § 15-602)
15-603. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation
of any sign placed or erected by the state or city, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk; provided, however, a bicycle may be parked on a
sidewalk if it does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of
pedestrian or other traffic;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
15-13
(7) Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(9) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted;
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(11) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
(12) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(13) In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being
reserved for the physically handicapped, unless, however, the person driving the
vehicle is (a) physically handicapped, or (b) parking such vehicle for the benefit
of a physically handicapped person. A vehicle parking in such a space shall
display a certificate of identification or a disabled veteran's license plate issued
under Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter 21. (1999 Code, § 15-603)
15-14
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-702. Failure to obey citation.
15-703. Illegal parking.
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-705. Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles.
15-706. Deposit of driver license in lieu of bail.
15-707. Violation and penalty.
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.1 When a police officer halts a
traffic violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take
such person into custody under arrest, he shall take the name, address, and
operator's license number of said person, the license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall
issue to him a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him in the city court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving the
written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. It shall be a civil offense for any alleged
violator to give false or misleading information as to his name or address. (1999
Code, § 15-701)
15-702. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1999 Code, § 15-702)
15-703. Illegal parking. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver
is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner
to answer for the violation within thirty (30) days during the hours and at a
place specified in the citation.
When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision
of this chapter, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq.
15-15
owner of the vehicle is responsible for such illegal parking. (1999 Code,
§ 15-703, modified)
15-704. Impoundment of vehicles. (1) Members of the police
department are hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary for the security
of the vehicle or to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the streets and
impound any vehicle whose operator is arrested or any unattended vehicle
which is parked, so as to constitute an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic.
Police may also tow and impound vehicles pursuant to all relevant portions of
Tennessee Code Annotated allowing for seizure of vehicles.
(2) Any impounded vehicle shall be stored until the owner or other
person entitled thereto claims it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership or
right to possession, and pays all applicable fees and costs or until it is otherwise
lawfully disposed of.
(3) The fee for impounding a vehicle shall be equal to the fee charged
by the storage cost of the impounded vehicle shall be forty dollars ($40.00) a day
for each motor vehicle stored in the impoundment lot. Any part of a day shall
count as a whole day. (1999 Code, § 15-704, as replaced by Ord. #1134, June
2014)
15-705. Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. "Abandoned motor
vehicles," as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-16-103, shall be
impounded and disposed of by the police department in accordance with the
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-16-103 through 55-16-109. (1999
Code, § 15-705)
15-706. Deposit of driver license in lieu of bail. (1) Deposit allowed.
Whenever any person lawfully possessing a chauffeur's or operator's license
theretofore issued to him by the Tennessee Department of Safety, or under the
driver licensing laws of any other state or territory or the District of Columbia,
is issued a citation or arrested and charged with the violation of any city
ordinance or state statute regulating traffic, except those ordinances and
statutes, the violation of which call for the mandatory revocation of a operator's
or chauffeur's license for any period of time, such person shall have the option
of depositing his chauffeur's or operator's license with the officer or court
demanding bail in lieu of any other security required for his appearance in the
city court of this city in answer to such charge before said court.
(2) Receipt to be issued. Whenever any person deposits his chauffeur's
or operator's license as provided, either the officer or the court demanding bail
as described above, shall issue the person a receipt for the license upon a form
approved or provided by the department of safety, and thereafter the person
shall be permitted to operate a motor vehicle upon the public highways of this
state during the pendency of the case in which the license was deposited. The
receipt shall be valid as a temporary driving permit for a period not less than
15-16
the time necessary for an appropriate adjudication of the matter in the city
court, and shall state such period of validity on its face.
(3) Failure to appear - disposition of license. In the event that any
driver who has deposited his chauffeur's or operator's license in lieu of bail fails
to appear in answer to the charges filed against him, the clerk or judge of the
city court accepting the license shall forward the same to the Tennessee
Department of Safety for disposition by said department in accordance with the
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-50-803. (1999 Code, § 15-706)
15-707. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this title shall be a
civil offense punishable as follows: (1) Traffic citations. Traffic citations shall
be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed state authorized limits for each
separate offense.
(2) Parking violations excluding handicapped parking. For parking
violations, excluding handicapped parking violations, the offender may, within
thirty (30) days, have the charge against him disposed of by paying to the
Lawrenceburg Police Department a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) provided he
waives his right to a judicial hearing. If he appears and waives his right to a
judicial hearing after thirty (30) days but before a warrant is issued for his
arrest, his civil penalty shall be no more than state authorized maximum. (1999
Code, § 15-707, modified)
15-17
CHAPTER 8
TRAFFIC CONTROL CODE
SECTION
15-801. Title.
15-802. Purpose and scope.
15-803. Adoption of state traffic statutes.
15-804. Use and application.
15-805. Violations and penalties.
15-806. Enforcement.
15-801. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Traffic Control Code"
of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee and may be cited as such. (1999 Code,
§ 15-801)
15-802. Purpose and scope. (1) The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to the operation of all motor vehicles including automobiles, trucks of all
weights, bicycles, motorcycles, trailers, and buses and all or any other matters
relating to the operation of any vehicle operated by independent power or
human power on the streets, parking areas, alleys or access roads in the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
(2) No provision of this chapter shall be held to deprive any federal or
state agency, or any applicable governing body having concurred jurisdiction of
any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the ordinance
comprising this chapter or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of
its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation or partnership of its
legal rights as provided by law. (1999 Code, § 15-802)
15-803. Adoption of state traffic statutes. By the authority granted
under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 16-18-302, the City of Lawrenceburg adopts
by reference as if fully set forth in this section, the "Rules of the Road," as
codified in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-8-101 through 55-8-131, and
§§ 55-8-133 through 55-8-180. Additionally, the City of Lawrenceburg adopts
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-8-181 through 55-8-193, §§ 55-9-601 through
55-9-606, § 55-12-139 and § 55-21-108 by reference as if fully set forth in this
section. (1999 Code, § 15-803, as replaced by Ord. #1012, Sept. 2006)
15-804. Use and application. (1) This chapter shall be applied to all
individuals, partnership and/or corporations operating and using motor vehicles
upon the streets, parking areas, alleys, or access roadways within the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee and from the date on which the ordinance comprising
this chapter took effect the provisions herein shall be controlling in controlling
15-18
and regulating the operation of motor vehicles, equipment and lighting
regulations of motor vehicles, accidents, arrests and crimes involving motor
vehicles, intoxicated or drugged persons prohibited from driving motor vehicles,
chemical tests for drugged or intoxicated persons operating motor vehicles, and
drag racing.
(2) Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any
rights acquired or liability incurred, or any use or causes of the action accrued
or existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (1999
Code, § 15-804)
15-805. Violations and penalties. Any person, partnerships,
corporation or companies that shall fail to comply with or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined in the same manner as set forth in the statute governing each
separate offense, as though copied herein verbatim, however and in no event,
shall any fine be more than state authorized limits but in addition thereto the
costs for providing a chemical test for drugged or intoxicated persons operating
a motor vehicle shall be borne, as part of the court costs, by the person so
charged and convicted said charge not to exceed the actual cost of the chemical
test. (1999 Code, § 15-805, modified)
15-806. Enforcement. The enforcement of this chapter shall rest with
the Chief of Police and the Police Department of the City of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee. (1999 Code, § 15-806)
16-1
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
3. EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Parades, etc. regulated.
16-102. Littering streets, alleys, sidewalks prohibited.
16-103. Obstruction of sidewalks, alleys, boulevards prohibited.
16-104. Burning on sidewalks prohibited.
16-105. Limbs, trash, debris on streets prohibited.
16-106. Removal of dirt, rubbish, trash from sidewalks, etc.
16-101. Parades, etc. regulated. (1) Definitions. The following
definitions shall apply in the interruption of this section:
(a) "Parade" shall mean a procession of five or more persons in
a public place for display, or a body of five or more promenaders in a
public place.
(b) "March" shall mean the advancing in step of an organized
body of five or more persons, or walking in a deliberate manner by five or
more persons.
(c) "Procession" shall mean the proceeding or moving along in
orderly succession, in a formal or ceremonious manner, of a line or body
of five or more persons, animals, five or more vehicles or other things.
(d) "Person" shall include any natural person or persons, and
where the context permits, any corporation, incorporated or
unincorporated association or organization of persons, and the officials
and members of any such incorporated or unincorporated association or
organization, and the driver of any vehicle.
(e) "Vehicle" shall any gasoline-propelled or other
power-propelled vehicle, such as automobile, motor car, motor truck,
1Municipal code reference
Related motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
16-2
motorcycle, or similar vehicles, as well as bicycles, buggies, wagons or
other animal-drawn vehicles.
(f) "Public places" shall include the public square, any public
street or avenue or alley, and any public park, playground or recreation
place in the bounds of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(2) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as the
sponsor of any parade, march or procession, or as a participant in same, or
directing, countenancing or assisting therein, to conduct or carry out any
parade, march or procession within the City of Lawrenceburg as the same are
herein described, without first having obtained therefor a permit as hereinafter
provided, or for any such person to conduct or carry out such parade, march or
procession in violation or contrary to the terms of such permit; provided, that
the provisions of this section shall not apply to any funeral procession, any
employees of any industry going to or returning from employment at such
industry, any persons in a congregation going to or leaving any place of worship,
any parade advertising an athletic contest, or any procession going to or
returning from any athletic contest or the public fair held at Rotary Park.
(3) Application. Any sponsor or director of any proposed parade,
march or procession regulated by this section, shall in advance thereof make
written application to the Police Chief of the City of Lawrenceburg, in writing
in duplicate, giving the purpose of such parade, march or procession, with its
beginning and ending points, the route to be traveled, and the time same shall
begin and shall end, and the approximate number of persons and of vehicles to
participate therein and if granted, the police chief shall endorse on the duplicate
of such application the approval thereof and return same to the applicant, which
shall constitute the permit for such parade, march or procession. If not granted,
the applicant may appeal to the City Administrator of the City of Lawrenceburg,
who may either approve or disapprove such application. There shall be no
charge for such permit.
(4) Violation and penalty Any person violating any of the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined no more than state authorized limits for each offense together with all
costs. (1999 Code, § 16-101, modified)
16-102. Littering streets, alleys, sidewalks prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any one personally or collectively or at the issuance of others to
throw, deposit or place the sweepings from stores, business and public buildings
and dwellings any paper, scraps of paper, ashes, tin cans, boxes, straw, excelsior
or any rubbish of any kind or character, material and glass upon any street,
alley, boulevard, or the public square within the City of Lawrenceburg, and to
do any of the above prohibited things is declared a nuisance and a violation of
this section, and the person or persons, firms or corporations so violating same
shall be declared guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction for each and
16-3
every offense shall be fined no more than state authorized limits. (1999 Code,
§ 16-102, modified)
16-103. Obstruction of sidewalks, alleys, boulevards prohibited.
(1) It is unlawful and the same is hereby declared to be a nuisance for
any person or persons, firm or corporations to obstruct in any way the free
passage and use necessarily and street, alley, boulevard, or the public square in
the City of Lawrenceburg, and violation of this section shall be declared a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined no more than state authorized
limits with all costs.
(2) It is unlawful for any person or persons, firms, individuals, or
through agents or representatives to place upon the public square or sidewalk,
alleys or boulevards any implements, garden tools, or farming tools, or to make
any obstruction by using the sidewalks, pavements, streetways or the public
square to exhibit any of their wares, merchandise, hardware, chinaware,
groceries, fruits, poultry, bread boxes, fish, feed stuff, baled or otherwise upon
any street, sidewalks, alley, boulevard, or the public square within the City of
Lawrenceburg, without first getting a written permit from the Police Chief of
the City of Lawrenceburg and said written permit to specify the use and space
to be taken etc., and the length of time to be used and any person or persons,
firm or corporations violating this section shall be fined no more than state
authorized limits for each and every offense together with all costs. (1999 Code,
§ 16-103, modified)
16-104. Burning on sidewalks prohibited. It shall be unlawful to
burn any trash, rubbish or build any fire for any purpose on the sidewalk, public
square or any paved or macadamized streets or alleys in the City of
Lawrenceburg and the violation of this section shall be declared a misdemeanor,
and any person or persons found guilty shall be fined no more than state
authorized limits together with all costs. (1999 Code, § 16-104, modified)
16-105. Limbs, trash, debris on streets prohibited. (1) It is hereby
declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner or
operator, or as an agent, representative or employee of the owner engaged in the
business of landscaping, tree trimming, any construction or other related
business to place limbs, trash, or other debris on the city streets or state
highway or right-of-ways within the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
(2) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined
no more than state authorized limits and costs for each offense. (1999 Code,
§ 16-1005, modified)
16-4
16-106. Removal of dirt, rubbish, trash from sidewalks, etc.
(1) It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation, either as owner or operator, or as an agent, representative or
employee of the owner or operator, of any machinery, used in moving dirt,
rubbish, trash, chert, etc., such as bull-dozers, grader, loaders, lowboys, trucks
and similar machinery; when removing such dirt, rubbish, trash, chert, etc.,
from the premises of any off-street lots or property, including
governmental-owned property, by the use of any such machinery, or to any such
off-street lots or property, to push or cause to be pushed or dropped any such
dirt, trash, rubbish, chert, etc., to or on any public street, including sidewalks
and gutters and paving thereof, or the dropping of mud, dirt, etc., in such work,
on any such public street or part thereof, unless such dirt, trash, rubbish, chert,
etc., so pushed or dropped on such street or part thereof shall be by any such
person, firm, or corporation removed from such street or part therof before
sundown on the day same is pushed or dropped on such public street or part
thereof, and/or for such person, firm or corporation in dismantling or wrecking
any building or structure, or making excavations for any building or structure,
to place or permit to be placed on any such public street or part thereof any
timbers, dirt, or other materials from such work, if same is not immediately
removed by such person, firm or corporation from such public street or part
thereof; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to street
improvements by the City of Lawrenceburg or any contractor of it for such
purpose, or to the construction of such public utilities as electricity transmission
lines, natural gas lines, telephone lines, water lines and sewer lines.
(2) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined
no more than state authorized limits and costs for each offense. (1999 Code,
§ 16-106, modified)
16-5
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
SECTION
16-201. Public works department created.
16-202. Duties.
16-203. Effective date.
16-201. Public works department created. The Public Works
Department of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee is hereby created and made
a separate unit in its operation, maintenance, extension, equipment, earning
capacity and expenses and shall be operated and administered separate and
apart from the other facilities and functions of the City of Lawrenceburg.
Further the public works department shall replace the street department. (as
added by Ord. #1082, Aug. 2011)
16-202. Duties. The public works department shall be assigned such
duties as are determined by the Board of Mayor and Council or the City
Administrator of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. It is the current
intention that the functions of the street department shall now be administered
by the public works department and certain areas of work currently performed
by employees of the parks and recreation departments and EMA departments
shall be performed by the public works department. (as added by Ord. #1082,
Aug. 2011)
16-203. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect from and after its
passage, the public welfare requiring it and the welfare of the City of
Lawrenceburg requiring it. All ordinances, resolutions or parts of ordinances
or resolutions in conflict herewith are hereby modified or repealed to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #1082, Aug. 2011)
16-6
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS1
SECTION
16-301. Permit required.
16-302. Applications.
16-303. Fee.
16-304. Deposit or bond.
16-305. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary sidewalks.
16-306. Restoration of streets, etc.
16-307. Insurance.
16-308. Time limits.
16-309. Supervision.
16-310. Driveway curb cuts.
16-301. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others, to make any excavation in any street, alley,
road, sidewalk, or public place, or to tunnel under any street, alley, road,
sidewalk, or public place without having first obtained a permit as herein
required, and without complying with the provisions of this chapter; and it shall
also be unlawful to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit; provided,
however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground facilities in
or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a permit
when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately and
a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained beforehand. The person
shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the public works director is open for business, and said permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun. (as added by Ord. #1100, July
2012)
16-302. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the public works director, or such person as he may designate to receive such
applications, and shall state thereon the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation,
association, or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws. Such application shall be rejected or approved by the public works director
within twenty-four (24) hours of its filing. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
1Ord. #1100 also contains procedures for excavations and cuts by the
Lawrenceburg Utility Systems and is of record in the recorder's office.
16-7
16-303. Fee. The fee for such permits shall be five dollars ($5.00) for
driveway, curb cuts, and excavations. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-304. Deposit or bond. The public works director may require a cash
deposit in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any excavation on
public property including all public rights of way, to insure the property
restoration of the ground, except that where the amount of the deposit is clearly
inadequate to cover the cost of restoration, the public works director may
increase the amount of the deposit to an amount considered by him to be
adequate to cover the cost. From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to
the municipality of relaying the surface of the ground or pavement, and of
making the refill if this is done by the municipality or as its expense. The
balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or
excavation is completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored. In lieu
of a cash deposit the applicant may deposit with the public works director a
surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to cover the costs
to the municipality if the applicant fails to make proper restoration. (as added
by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-305. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary
sidewalks. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done. Sufficient and proper
barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and property from
injury by or because of the excavation being made. If any sidewalk is blocked by
any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed and provided which
shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. All cuts shall be done by sawcut
when feasible. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-306. Restoration of streets, etc. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, utility or others making any excavation in any street, alley, road,
sidewalk or public place in this municipality shall restore said street, alley,
road, sidewalk, or public place to the specifications hereinafter set out, except
for the surfacing, which shall be done by the municipality, but shall be paid for
by such person, firm, corporation, association, utility or others promptly upon
the completion of the work for which the excavation was made. The city may
authorize a duly licensed contractor who is performing excavations on the
streets, alleys, roads, sidewalks, or public ways to complete the surfacing to the
city's specifications, provided the contractor guarantees in writing the surfacing
for one year. In case of unreasonable delay in completion of work, the city shall
give notice to the person, firm, corporation, association, utility or others that
unless the excavation is refilled properly, within a specified period of time, the
municipality will do the repair or contract said repair and charge the expense
to the particular party.
16-8
Street repair specifications are as follows:
(1) From six inches (6") above tops of pipe or minimum standards up
to within seven inches (7") of finished grade. Backfill with crushed stone no
larger than #57. Dispose of all excavated materials.
(2) After seven (7) days settling, weather permitting and availability
of asphalt, the city shall fill remaining trench or hole with hot mix. This asphalt
shall be level with existing surface. The city shall be notified of all cuts at least
weekly. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-307. Insurance. Each person or entity applying for an excavation
permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against
claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims for property
damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether
such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive
hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations. The amount of the
insurance shall be prescribed by the public works director in accordance with
the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance
for bodily injury shall not be less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for each person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
for each accident, and for property damages not less than twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for any one (1) accident, and a seventy-five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) aggregate. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-308. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the length
of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the
restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill is made
ready for the pavement to be put on by the municipality if the municipality
restores such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this
time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the
public works director. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-309. Supervision. The public works director or his designee shall
from time to time inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under
any public street, alley, road, sidewalk, or other public place in the municipality
and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be
given to him at least ten (10) hours before the work of final resurfacing any such
excavation or tunnel commences. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
16-310. Driveway curb cuts. No one shall cut, build, or maintain a
driveway across a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the city
clerk. Such a permit will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be
so located or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian
16-9
and/or vehicular traffic. No driveway shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') in width
at its outer or street edge and when two (2) or more adjoining driveways are
provided for the same property a safety island of not less than ten feet (10') in
width at its outer or street edge shall be provided. Driveway aprons shall not
extend out into the street. (as added by Ord. #1100, July 2012)
17-1
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. REFUSE.
2. DELETED.
3. SANITATION DEPARTMENT.
CHAPTER 1
REFUSE
SECTION
17-101. Definitions.
17-102. Premises to be kept clean.
17-103. Garbage containers.
17-104. Location of carts.
17-105. Disturbing containers.
17-106. Exclusive city function.
17-107. Frequency of collection.
17-108. Contracts with private firms.
17-109. Billing of service fee.
17-110. Disposal sites; rules and regulations; fees.
17-111. Special rules, regulations, and charges authorized for certain refuse.
17-112. Exceptions.
17-113. Implementing authority of superintendent of sanitation.
17-114. Deleted.
17-115. Service fees for collection and removal.
17-116. Incorrect billing.
17-117. Violations.
17-101. Definitions. (1) "Apartment units." The term "apartment
units," as hereinafter referred to in this chapter shall mean and include all
multi-family dwellings where more than one (1) family unit is in one complex
located in the city limits of the City of Lawrenceburg and shall include duplexes
and triplexes as well as multi unit apartments and shall include government
subsidized apartments.
1Municipal code reference
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
17-2
(2) "Bulk rubbish." The term "bulk rubbish," as hereinafter referred
to in this chapter shall include but not be limited to wooden and cardboard
boxes, crates, furniture, bedding, appliances, and certain other household items,
such as stoves, water tanks, washing machines, furniture bedding and other
refuse items which by their size and shape can not be readily placed in city
approved containers.
(3) "Cart." The term "cart," as hereinafter referred to in this chapter
shall mean containerized carts purchased and owned by the City of
Lawrenceburg and provided to the residents of the City of Lawrenceburg,
pursuant to the containerized garbage system implemented on or about May 1,
2000.
(4) "Collector." The term "collector," as hereinafter referred to in this
chapter shall mean the Lawrenceburg Sanitation Department, its designee, or
private collecting company, that collects, transports, or disposes of any refuse
within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
(5) "Construction waste." The term "construction waste," as
hereinafter referred to in this chapter shall include but not be limited to
materials from construction, demolition, remodeling, construction site
preparation, including but not limited to rocks, brick, dirt, roofing, wood, debris,
fill, plaster, guttering and all types of scrap materials.
(6) "Cooking waste." The term "cooking waste," as hereinafter referred
to in this chapter shall include putrescible and non-putrescible materials
originating from the preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
(7) "Dumpster." The term dumpster, as hereinafter referred to in this
chapter shall mean 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 yard capacity receptacles commonly on wheels,
usually constructed primarily of steel.
(8) "Ferrous metal." The term "ferrous metal," as hereinafter referred
to in this chapter shall include but not be limited to metals, white goods,
appliances, including, but not limited to stoves, metal roofing, siding and other
metal items.
(9) "Garbage." The term "garbage," as hereinafter referred to in this
chapter shall include putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but
excluding recognizable industrial by-products.
(10) "Recyclables." The term "recyclables," as hereinafter referred to in
this chapter shall include cardboard, glass, plastic, white paper, tin cans,
aluminum, newsprint or others that may from time to time be added by the City
of Lawrenceburg as markets and innovations allow.
(11) "Refuse." The term "refuse," as hereinafter referred to in this
chapter shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, and all other combustible and
non-combustible materials, market refuse, waste from the handling and sale of
17-3
produce and other similar unwanted materials, but shall not include sewage,
body wastes or recognizable industrial by-products. Refuse shall also mean and
include all garbage, rubbish and waste as those terms are generally defined
except that dead animals, fowls and body wastes are expressly excluded
therefrom and shall not be stored there within.
(12) "Residential units." The term "residential units," as hereinafter
referred to in this chapter shall mean and include all single family dwellings,
and mobile homes located in the city limits of the City of Lawrenceburg.
(13) "Rubbish." The term "rubbish," as hereinafter referred to in this
chapter shall include non-putrescible waste materials that are not recyclable.
(14) "Small commercial customers." The term "small commercial
customers" as hereinafter referred to shall mean commercial customers not
requiring dumpster service.
(15) "Yard waste." The term "yard waste," as hereinafter referred to in
this chapter shall include but not be limited to grass clippings, leaves, tree and
shrubbery trimmings, and other related yard waste materials. (Ord. #941, June
2001, as amended by Ord. #1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-18)
17-102. Premises to be kept clean. All persons within the City of
Lawrenceburg are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from accumulations of refuse, garbage, and rubbish except when
stored as provided in this chapter.
All persons are hereby required to store such refuse in garbage containers
between the intervals of collection or to dispose of such material in a manner
prescribed by the provisions of this chapter so as to not cause a nuisance or
become injurious to the public health and welfare. (Ord. #941, June 2001)
17-103. Garbage containers. Each owner, occupant, or other
responsible person using or occupying any building or other premises within the
City of Lawrenceburg where garbage, refuse, or trash accumulates or is likely
to accumulate, shall provide and keep covered an adequate number of garbage
or refuse containers or carts for the storage of such refuse.
(1) Policy for containerized garbage collection system. The City of
Lawrenceburg hereby establishes a policy for the collection of refuse through the
use of a semi automated/automated garbage system. The policy of placement of
the containers and contents shall be as follows:
(a) This policy shall apply for all single family residential
customers, condominiums, town homes, multi-family dwellings, certain
aprtment units and government subsidized apartment units and small
commercial establishments that can be served by the regular residential
collection trucks as follows:
17-4
(i) All refuse must be placed in the cart and placed at the
curb on public city street before 7:00 A.M. on the designated
collection day and removed the same day.
(ii) One pick up per week will be provided.
(iii) Carts will be furnished at no cost as follows and
additional cart(s) can be purchased until at the current market
price of seventy five dollars ($75.00) each. The cost of additional
carts will be at the then market price and will change from time to
time as the city's cost changes. If the allowable number of carts is
insufficient, other arrangements must be made for the removal
and disposal of the refuse. The following table shows the number
of carts furnished by the city and the number of carts that can be
purchased for single family dwelling, multi-family dwellings and
small commercial customers;
Customer Furnished Purchase
Single family, town homes, separatelyowned
condominiums
1 1
Small Commercial 1 1
2, 3 or 4 Family Units 2 2
(iv) Single family dwelling, town homes and separatelyowned
condominiums will be furnished one (1) cart and they may
purchase one (1) additional cart. Small commercial shall be
furnished one (1) cart and may purchase one (1) additional cart.
(v) All carts furnished by the city will remain the
property of the city.
(vi) Additionally, there are weight limitations and certain
items that cannot be stored in plastic carts. The restricted uses
are as follows:
(A) Weight not to exceed 200 pounds.
(B) Any hazardous or caustic waste.
(C) Petroleum products, including crankcase oil.
(D) Sharp metal objects that might puncture the
plastic cart.
(E) Construction waste, large stones, dirt, sand,
concrete blocks, bricks, etc.
(F) Any heavy or free falling object that may cause
an imbalance during dumping procedure.
(G) No garbage outside the carts will be picked up.
17-5
(vii) The final authority on the placement of containers
shall be the superintendent of streets and sanitation.
(viii) The cost of the containers will be subject to change
based on market conditions.
(ix) All refuse must be placed within the garbage carts
provided hereunder for disposal. No private garbage cans or other
containers shall be used. No refuse shall be picked up by the City
of Lawrenceburg except from the carts provided by the City of
Lawrenceburg.
(x) All garbage and refuse should be free and drained of
all liquids as possible.
(2) Policy for dumpster collection system. (a) Any premises from
which a charge is paid for dumpster pick-up, dumpster containers shall
be placed in a location mutually agreeable to the customer and the
sanitation supervisor or foreman.
(b) Dumpster containers will be emptied on a schedule provided
by the sanitation supervisor.
(c) Charges for the customers with dumpsters shall be based on
the size dumpster and the number of times the dumpster is emptied per
week. (Ord. #941, June 2001, modified, as amended by Ord. #1160, Aug.
2015 Ch4_03-28-18)
17-104. Location of carts. Carts shall be placed adjacent to and back
of the curb, or adjacent to and back of the ditch or street line if there is no curb,
at such times as shall be scheduled by the city for the collection of refuse
therefrom. As soon as practicable after such carts have been emptied they shall
be removed by the owner to within, or to the rear of, the premises and away
from the street line until the next scheduled time for collection. On any
premises from which a charge is paid for non-curb pickups, carts shall be placed
in a location mutually agreeable to the customer and the sanitation supervisor
or foreman. Persons with handicap should contact the sanitation department to
be assisted with their service requirements. (1999 Code, § 17-104, modified, as
amended by Ord. #1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-18)
17-105. Disturbing containers. No person except the owner or person
lawfully in control of any premises, or his agent, or any authorized employee of
the city, shall in any way interfere in any manner with a garbage container on
the premises of the owner or person lawfully in control of the premises, or his
agent. The term "interfere" shall include, but not be limited to, depositing in or
removing from a container any garbage, rubbish, waste, recyclable material,
dead animal and fowls, and any other material of every kind or description;
moving the container from its location on the premises; opening the container;
17-6
or uncovering, rifling, pilfering, digging into, turning over, and rummaging
through, or inspecting the contents of the container. The term garbage
container for this section shall include but not be limited to, carts, dumpsters,
fenced in areas, receptacles or other containers used for storage or disposal of
garbage, rubbish or waste. (1999 Code, § 17-105, modified)
17-106. Exclusive city function. Except as otherwise herein provided
only the city shall engage in the business of collection, removing, or disposing
of refuse within the corporate limits. The city may provide such service either
with its own forces or by contractors.
The superintendent of sanitation may require that certain types of refuse
to be picked up by private haulers at the sole and exclusive expense of the
property owner or tenant. The decision concerning requiring commercial or
industrial establishments to dispose of certain types of waste at their own
expense shall be at the sole discretion of the superintendent of the sanitation
department subject to the approval of the city administrator. (1999 Code,
§ 17-106, modified)
17-107. Frequency of collection. The superintendent of sanitation is
authorized and directed to prepare schedules for regular collection of refuse
throughout the city. Refuse shall be collected from residences once weekly and
from businesses and other non-residential producers as often as reasonably
necessary to protect against health and fire hazards. (1999 Code, § 17-107,
modified)
17-108. Contracts with private firms. When the volume or any
condition is such that the sanitation department personnel and equipment
cannot provide normal garbage services, the city administrator may elect not to
collect and/or dispose of the refuse. In this event, the refuse producer shall be
required to contract with a private firm, which must be approved by the city, to
collect and dispose of the refuse. The refuse producer may collect and dispose
of its own generated refuse, if approved by the city and if the refuse is disposed
of, in accordance with local, state and federal regulation, at state permitted
disposal facilities. Refuse collection and disposal services provided by the city
may be with its own forces or by contracts with private service providers. (1999
Code, § 17-108, modified)
17-109. Billing of service fee. The service fee for collection and
removal of refuse, garbage and trash by the City of Lawrenceburg shall be
included as a separate item each month on the bill issued by the City of
Lawrenceburg for any utilities services including but not limited to water, sewer
or gas. The service fee shall be due and payable monthly at the same time that
17-7
utility bills are due and payable. Utility services provided to the recipient shall
be discontinued for failure to pay the refuse service fee by the delinquency date
prescribed for the utility bill.
In the case of premises that contain more than one (1) dwelling unit or
place of business and each is billed separately for utilities by the city, such fees
shall be billed to each person in possession, charge or control who is a utility
customer of the City of Lawrenceburg. In the case of premises containing more
than one (1) dwelling unit or place of business, which are served through a
single utility meter, so that the occupants or tenants can not be billed separately
by the city, the customer responsible for the utility bill shall be responsible for
refuse service fees for the premises. (Ord. #941, June 2001)
17-110. Disposal sites; rules and regulations; fees. It shall be
unlawful for any person to dispose of refuse at any place other than a refuse
disposal site designated by the municipal governing body. Refuse disposal sites
shall be available for use subject to reasonable rules and regulations and
disposal fees recommended by the superintendent of sanitation and approved
by resolution of the municipal governing body. (1999 Code, § 17-111, modified)
17-111. Special rules, regulations, and charges authorized for
certain refuse. (1) Collection, removal, and disposal of the following types of
refuse shall be subject to reasonable rules and regulations and special charges
recommended by the superintendent of the sanitation department and approved
by resolution of the municipal governing body:
(a) Yard waste.
(b) Bulk rubbish.
(c) Ferrous metals.
(d) Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids,
or caustics or refuse which is highly infectious or combustible.
(2) Procedure for collection of bulk rubbish or ferrous metals or
construction or building waste.
(a) The City of Lawrenceburg will not be responsible for
collection or disposal of construction of building waste, bulk rubbish or
ferrous metals. The property owner or producer of such waste shall be
responsible for disposal of the bulk rubbish, ferrous metals or
construction or building waste. Failure by the domestic producer or
property owner to dispose of bulk rubbish, ferrous metals or construction
or building waste shall be a violation of this ordinance and subject the
violator to a fine or civil penalty not to exceed fifty and 00/100 dollars
($50.00) per violation. Each day the ordinance is violated shall be
considered a separate offense and subject to a new fine or civil penalty
not to exceed fifty and 00/100 dollars ($50.00).
17-8
(i) All yard waste must be placed adjacent to a street or
public alley at the front, rear, or side of the property where the
same shall be easily accessed by the city's collection equipment.
Accumulations of such items shall be easily accessible to and
within reach of the city's sanitation equipment, shall not be placed
beneath overhead utility lines or placed behind a parked
automobile or obstruction. Accumulation of such material shall
not damage, obstruct the access to or reduce the effectiveness of
any utility meter, utility valve, fire hydrant, utility pole, catch
basin, draining way, storm sewer, or other such item. The city
may require discarded refrigerated appliances to be purged of
freon or other gases. All items for disposal shall be prepared in
accordance with any and all federal, state, and local regulations
related to their disposal.
(ii) Piling of yard waste for collection. All yard waste
shall be neatly stacked in an unscattered manner in one location.
Small trimmings should be stacked on top of larger ones with butt
ends pointed in the same direction. Yard waste shall not be made
where it is loosely scattered.
(iii) Length and size of brush. No brush put out for
collection shall be of such size or weight, or piled or stacked in any
manner that exceeds the capability of the city's solid waste
collection equipment. All tree limbs longer than twelve (12) feet in
length must be cut in half and stacked with larger limbs on the
bottom with butt ends pointed in the same direction. Small
trimmings must be stacked on top of larger ones.
(iv) Grass clippings and leaves. Shall be placed in plastic
bags or other disposable containers.
(b) Procedure for collection of bulk rubbish or ferrous metals.
Service fees for demolition roll-off dumpsters for disposal of bulk rubbish,
construction waste and ferrous metal.
The set-up service fee for use of a roll-off dumpster is one hundred
dollars ($100.00), which entitles the user to seven (7) consecutive
business days' usage. Each additional day's usage will be ten dollars
($10.00) per day.
Service fees will be at the rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
dump of the roll-off dumpster plus thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per ton of
waste disposed of. Customers shall be responsible for properly sorting
the waste items in the dumpster pursuant to the rules adopted for sorting
of waste as determined by the sanitation department. If waste is not
properly sorted, the city will charge two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
hour for time expended in sorting dumpsters that were not properly
sorted.
17-9
Service fees for the disposal of demolition debris and waste at the
Lawrenceburg Transfer Station.
The service fee for disposal of demolition debris and waste at the
Lawrenceburg Transfer Station will be charged at the rate of thirty-two
dollars ($32.00)/ton. (Ord. #941, June 2001, modified, as amended by
Ord. #1022, June 2007, and Ord. #1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-112. Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any refuse
producer from collecting, removing, and disposing of his own refuse, provided he
does so in a manner that does not violate any laws or Lawrenceburg City
Ordinances or Resolutions, and provided further all applicable disposal,
collection and service fees are paid. (Ord. #941, June 2001)
17-113. Implementing authority of superintendent of sanitation.
The collection, removal, and disposal of refuse from premises in the city shall be
under the supervision and control of the superintendent of sanitation. He shall
recommend to the city administrator such reasonable rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, as he deems to be necessary or
desirable, which shall become effective when approved by resolution of the
governing body. (1999 Code, § 17-114, modified)
17-114. Deleted. (1999 Code, § 17-116, modified, as deleted by Ord.
#1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-115. Service fees for collection and removal. The following
monthly fees are hereby affixed and established as the service fees to be charged
and collected each month for the collection and removal of trash, refuse and
garbage:
(1) Residential unit (single family) $ 12.95
(2) Apartment unit $ 12.95 per unit
(3) Government subsidized apartment unit $ 12.95 per unit
(4) Commercial and industrial rates shall be charged on the following
schedule based upon the number of services provided per week and the number
and type of containers used by the commercial user.
Description Times per week Adjusted price
1 cart 1 $ 13.14
2 carts 1 $ 26.28
3 cart 1 $ 39.42
4 carts 1 $ 52.56
5 cart 2 $ 65.70
17-10
Description Times per week Adjusted price
COMMERCIAL MINIMUM FEE -- NO SERVICE $ 13.14
SHARED DUMPSTERS 1 (per customer sharing) $ 13.14
3YD dumpster 1 $ 36.00
3YD dumpster 2 $ 72.00
3YD dumpster 3 $ 108.00
3YD dumpster 4 $ 144.00
3YD dumpster 5 $ 180.00
4YD dumpster 1 $ 48.00
4YD dumpster 2 $ 96.00
4YD dumpster 3 $ 144.00
4YD dumpster 4 $ 192.00
4YD dumpster 5 $ 240.00
6YD dumpster 1 $ 72.00
6YD dumpster 2 $ 144.00
6YD dumpster 3 $ 216.00
6YD dumpster 4 $ 288.00
6YD dumpster 5 $ 360.00
8YD dumpster 1 $ 96.00
8UD dumpster 2 $ 192.00
8YD dumpster 3 $ 288.00
8YD dumpster 4 $ 384.00
8YD dumpster 5 $ 480.00
The department head of the sanitation department or designee shall place
each commercial or industrial establishment in a particular group based upon
the average number of collections per week. The department head or designee
may from time to time change classification of commercial or industrial
establishments from one (1) group to another. (1999 Code, § 17-117, as amended
by Ord. #941, June 2001, and replaced by Ord. #1034, Dec. 2007, Ord. #1038,
July 2008, and Ord. #1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-116. Incorrect billing. Should a customer of the City of
Lawrenceburg Sanitation Department feel he/she has been billed incorrectly,
17-11
he/she shall first notify the Lawrenceburg Public Utility Systems of the alleged
discrepancy. The Lawrenceburg Utility Systems shall request the sanitation
superintendent to investigate the claim. If the sanitation superintendent
confirms the billing is correct and the customer refuses to pay the charges, that
customer shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
17-117. Violations. Any person violating or failing to comply with any
provision of this chapter or any lawful regulation of the superintendent of
sanitation shall be subject to a penalty of not more than state authorized limits
for each offense and each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense. (1999 Code, § 17-115, modified, as amended by Ord. #1160,
Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-12
CHAPTER 2
(this chapter was deleted by Ord. #1160, Aug. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19
17-13
CHAPTER 3
SANITATION DEPARTMENT
SECTION
17-301. Sanitation department created.
17-302. Duties.
17-303. Effective date.
17-301. Sanitation department created. The Sanitation Department
of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee has been created and made a separate
unit in its operation, maintenance, extension, equipment, earning capacity and
expenses and shall be operated and administered separate and apart from other
facilities and functions of the City of Lawrenceburg. (as added by Ord. #1033,
Nov. 2007, and replaced by Ord. #1167, Dec. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-302. Duties. The sanitation department shall be assigned such
duties as are determined by the Board of Mayor and Council or the City
Administrator of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #1033,
Nov. 2007, amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012, and replaced by Ord. #1167,
Dec. 2015 Ch4_03-28-19)
17-303. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect from and after its
passage, the public welfare requiring it and the welfare of the City of
Lawrenceburg requiring it. All ordinances, resolutions or parts of ordinances or
resolutions in conflict herewith are hereby modified or repealed to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #1033, Nov. 2007)
18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. SUPPLEMENTARY SEWER REGULATIONS.
2. REGULATION OF SEWER USE.
3. WATER SERVICE CONNECTION REGULATIONS.
4. CROSS CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.
5. WATER AND SEWERS.
6. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
SUPPLEMENTARY SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION
18-101. Miscellaneous.
18-102. Protection from damage.
18-103. Penalties.
18-101. Miscellaneous. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City of Lawrenceburg, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
1Municipal code references
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Refuse disposal: title 17.
Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
18-2
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended
or used for the disposal of sewage. (1999 Code, § 18-202, modified)
18-102. Protection from damage. No unauthorized person shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (1999 Code, § 18-206)
18-103. Penalties. (1) Any person found to be violating any provision
of this chapter except § 18-102 shall be served by the Lawrenceburg Public
Utility Systems with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
(2) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the preceding subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
on conviction thereof may be fined in the amount not exceeding state limits for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the Lawrenceburg Public Utility Systems for any expense, loss,
or damage occasioned the Lawrenceburg Public Utility Systems by reason of
such violation. (1999 Code, § 18-208, modified)
18-3
CHAPTER 2
REGULATION OF SEWER USE1
SECTION
18-201. Wastewater discharge.
18-201. Wastewater discharge. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
nondomestic user located outside the city limits to discharge or continue to
discharge to the POTW except as provided in this section.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge
wastewater, either directly or indirectly into the city's sanitary sewer system
without first obtaining an industrial user permit from the Lawrenceburg Public
Utility Systems. (1999 Code, § 18-307, modified)
1Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
18-4
CHAPTER 3
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION REGULATIONS1
SECTION
18-301. General provisions.
18-301. General provisions. A patron shall not have water utilities
services furnished and water therefor measured through one meter only to
furnish such water utilities service to more than one principal building or
structure including necessary and usual customary detached garage or other
out-buildings and other facilities including outside water hydrant, swimming
pool and the like, on the same or adjacent premises. If any patron is or
hereafter may secure water utilities services and have the water measured
through one meter to furnish water to more than one such principal building or
structure with garage, out-buildings and other facilities as aforesaid, on the
same or adjacent premises, the Lawrenceburg Public Utility Systems is
authorized and directed to, upon giving ten (10) days written notice to such
patron thereof with request to make other necessary water service connections
and pay the fees or charges therefor as provided under this chapter, and upon
the failure, neglect or refusal of such patron to make such other water service
connections and pay the fees or charges therefor, to disconnect such water
utilities services of such patron and discontinue water utilities services to such
patron, including, if necessary the removal of the water meter. Thereafter water
utilities service shall not be reconnected and such patron be furnished water
utilities service until such additional water service connection or connections are
made, and the proper fees or charges therefor paid, and the patron also pays the
fees for reconnection as provided under other applicable regulations of the
Lawrenceburg Public Utility Systems. And it is hereby declared to be unlawful
for any patron to violate the provisions of this subsection, and upon conviction,
the patron as the offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
an amount not exceeding state authorized limits for each violation. Each day
1Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
18-5
in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1999 Code, § 18-602, modified)
18-6
CHAPTER 4
CROSS CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.1
SECTION
18-401. Construction, operation, and supervision.
18-402. Violations.
18-401. Construction, operation, and supervision. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass, or
interconnection to be made, or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever,
unless the construction and operation of same have been approved by the
Tennessee Department of Health and the operation of such cross connection,
auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection is at all times under the direct
supervision of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities. (1999 Code, § 18-703,
modified)
18-402. Violations. Anyone violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding state
authorized limits for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
1Municipal code references
Plumbing code: title 12.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
18-7
CHAPTER 5
WATER AND SEWERS1
SECTION
18-501. Water meters.
18-502. Raw water supply protection.
18-501. Water meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper
with the water meters of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities; to remove
the lid or top from a meter box; to change or alter any meter in any way so that
it will not properly register the amount of water used; or to tamper with a water
meter in any way after it has registered the amount of water used, or in any way
make the meter show an incorrect amount. Provided, that the above shall not
apply to utility employees performing their duty.
Anyone violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding state authorized limits for
each violation. (1999 Code, § 18-801, modified)
18-502. Raw water supply protection. (1) It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to swim, bathe, dive, or to commit any other acts which
may cause a disturbance of the silt in the creek, in that portion of Shoal Creek
between the weir or dam across said creek at the raw water in-take for the
water system of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities, and a point about
one hundred seventy-five (175) feet eastwardly of same; and such acts are
hereby prohibited.
(2) It shall also be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or
corporation, to dump or throw, or cause to be dumped or thrown, into said Shoal
Creek and its tributaries above the weir or dam across said creek at the water
in-take for the water system of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities, any
refuse, garbage, raw sewage, dead animals, or any other matter or items which
may contaminate said creek or the water in same; and such acts are hereby
prohibited.
1Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
18-8
(3) The violation of any of the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of
this section shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction the offender shall be
punished by an amount not exceeding state authorized limits for each violation;
provided, that if the offender be a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years,
any policeman of the City of Lawrenceburg is empowered and authorized to take
into custody such minor offender and take him or her before the Juvenile Judge
of said County of Lawrence, to be dealt with under juvenile court procedure, and
if such offender be past eighteen (18) years of age, to cite such offender to city
court for proper action under the laws of Tennessee, and the ordinances of the
City of Lawrenceburg.
(4) It is hereby declared that the object and purpose of this chapter is
to protect the water supply of the City of Lawrenceburg, and the health, peace
and comfort of the citizens of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, and other users of
water from the water system of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities.
(1999 Code, § 18-805, modified)
18-9
CHAPTER 6
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION
18-601. Purpose.
18-602. Method.
18-603. Technical guidelines.
18-604. Submittal requirements.
18-605. Validity.
18-606. Ordinance in force.
18-601. Purpose. To provide a site specific approach to storm water
management considering the effects of proposed land development and the
defined uses of the down stream property. The approaches utilized to control
runoff will be examined on a case-by-case basis with consideration for public
safety and welfare. The designs utilized will be selected with consideration for
protection of property and quality of runoff to promote the overall good of the
community both now and in the future. In all cases structures will have their
finished floors located a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation
as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA). (as
added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005)
18-602. Method. The accepted method of quantifying changes in runoff
has been selected to provide a simple yet effective means of estimating the
impact of development on a site. The excess runoff created by the proposed
development will be compared to the predevelopment runoff by means of the
following calculations. Should disturbed areas in excess of one hundred (100)
acres be encountered the method of quantifying runoff will be subject to review
and approval by the city.
(1) Rational method. The method utilizes a worst-case condition at the
point of discharge during a design storm of fixed intensity. The formula for
quantifying runoff utilizing the rational formula is given as:
Q= CIA where:
Q= quantity of runoff in cubic feet per second.
C= coefficient of runoff dimensionless.
I= rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a given storm event
A= size of the disturbed area in acres.
(a) Runoff coefficient. The runoff coefficient will vary depending
on the slope and surface materials for the site. A weighted coefficient can
be obtained for predevelopment and post development conditions by
selecting values from Table 1 and averaging them according to the size
of contribution in the disturbed area.
18-10
(b) Rainfall intensity. The rainfall intensity is derived by
calculating the time of concentration. Time of concentration is the time
it takes runoff water to reach the downstream point of discharge in the
disturbed area from the farthest point upstream in the disturbed area
The method for calculating this time in minutes is given by Figure 11. In
no case will time of concentration be less than five (5) minutes Once a
time of concentration has been determined the rainfall intensity can be
selected from the chosen storm event curve. Rainfall intensity curves are
shown in Figure 2.
(c) Area. This is the disturbed area in acres. It will be the same
value for both the predevelopment and post development conditions. (as
added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005)
18-603. Technical guidelines. (1) Drainage system. The city consists
of four main drainage basins that have different degrees of runoff sensitivity
depending on the current or proposed land use. The design storm interval for
runoff in each basin is defined as follows for purposes of runoff calculations:
Drainage basin 1 10-year storm event
Drainage basin 2 10-year storm event
Drainage basin 3 10-year storm event
Drainage basin 4 25-year storm event
The definition of these drainage basins is shown in Figure 3. The drainage
system within a drainage basin is made up of major and minor components
defined as follows:
(a) Major drainage components. Drainage components with
fifty (50) cubic feet per second or greater capacity are considered major
and will be designed to pass a 100-year storm event. Development is
encouraged to utilize natural drainage as major components wherever
possible to prevent the disturbance of existing runoff patterns.
(b) Minor drainage components. Minor drainage components
are those with a capacity of less than fifty (50) cubic feet per second.
These components will be designed to pass a 10-year storm including an
overflow design in the event of failure to be diverted to the major
drainage system with no damage to property.
(2) Design storm. All storm events utilized for design are based on the
National Weather Service records for Nashville, Tennessee for a 24-hour rain
event (see Figure 2). The design frequency interval utilized will vary depending
on the function and location of the drainage: component as defined elsewhere in
this ordinance.
(3) Retention/detention ponds. The use of drainage ponds is
encouraged where excessive runoffs from newly developed property threaten the
1Figures are included at the end of this chapter.
18-11
capacity of downstream drainage structures Ponds are designed to delay runoff
until sufficient time has elapsed to provide the needed capacity to pass the
design storm downstream. Utilization of the retention/detention pond as a storm
water control feature is subject to the following rules and regulations.
(a) Residential, commercial or industrial site developers are
responsible for the overall development of site detention/retention.
Detention/retention improvements must be completed or the developer
must post a performance bond or a letter of credit approved by the
Lawrenceburg Regional Planning Commission before the developer can
transfer ownership
(b) Sites wit a developed increase of less than ten (10) percent,
not exceeding ten (10) cubic feet per second total runoff are not required
to have detention/detention ponds as a storm water control feature.
(c) Sites with direct discharge to a USGS blueline stream are
not required to have detention/retention ponds as a storm water control
feature.
(d) Detention/retention ponds will have a warranty period of one
(1) year from date of completion and successful operation.
(e) Detention/retention outlet structures will be designed to
provide water polishing in cases where potential pollutants may be
discharged.
(f) Detention/retention ponds will be provided with spillway
structures sized to pass the 100-year storm event.
(g) All detention/retention ponds will have an outlet structure
that is designed to accommodate downstream flow without increased
erosion.
(h) If the drainage way downstream of the point of discharge a
distance of one tenth of the longest reach of the developed property is
shown to have a capacity for the increased runoff then the site is not
required to have detention/retention pond as a storm water control
feature.
(i) Modifications to detention/retention ponds will require
design calculations by a design professional to verify proper performance
under this ordinance and approval by the Lawrenceburg Regional
Planning Commission.
(4) Offsite improvements. Existing offsite drainage system
improvements rnay be utilized to accommodate increases in runoff. These
improvements are subject to the written approval of the affected property owner
and the city.
(5) Exemptions. The following sites are exempt from the conditions of
this ordinance:
(a) Sites with less than one half (1/2) acre of disturbed area.
(b) Single lot residential sites.
18-12
(6) Voluntary drainage improvement. Sites that voluntarily provide
additional capacity for storm water runoff improvements within the corporate
limits may be eligible for monetary relief. All relief is subject to a
recommendation by the Lawrenceburg Regional Planning Commission to the
Lawrenceburg Board of Mayor and Council for approval on a case-by-case basis.
(7) Maintenance. Drainage ways and structures, including
detention/retention ponds, will be contained within permanent easements for
maintenance access. The property owner will have the responsibility of
maintaining all drainage system components contained within the site. For
residential sites within the corporate limits, the property owner has the option
of deeding drainage easements to the city after one year of successful operation.
Transfer of ownership will relieve the property owner of all responsibilities
pertaining to the drainage system including maintenance.
(8) Drainage structures under public roads. Culverts are to be sized
to pass the specified storm without overtopping the roadway. The design storm
event will be as follows for all minor drainage components.
(a) Minor Residential Streets - 10-year storm;
(b) Collector Streets - 25-year storm;
(c) Arterial Streets - 50-year storm.
A drainage easement will be required to accommodate backwater created
during the 100-year storm in the above listed conditions.
(9) Open channel drainage structures. (a) Ditches lined with grass
are to have a maximum side slope of 3: 1 to allow proper maintenance.
(b) Ditches will be lined according to the velocity of the water
conveyed as follows:
Grass 0-4 fps;
Riprap 4-8 fps;
Concrete >8 fps. (as added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005, and
amended by Ord. #1091, March 2012)
18-604. Submittal requirements. (1) Other Sources. All information
requested by the city subdivision regulations.
(2) Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. All calculations shall be
submitted by a state approved design professional and organized in such a
manner that each submittal shall contain:
(a) A drainage map with contours clearly outlining all pertinent
drainage areas.
(b) The acreage of each drainage area
(c) Pre-development and post-development runoff coefficients
(show calculations).
(d) Pre-development and post-development time of
concentrations (show calculations) corresponding rainfall intensities or
amounts.
(e) Predevelopment and post development peak flows.
18-13
(f) Detention calculations with emergency spillway calculations.
(g) Hydraulic calculations (submit copies of drainage charts
showing results if nomographs are used) for each proposed drainage
structure and/or open channel and for each immediate downstream
structure.
(h) Invert and over-topping elevations on all previously
mentioned culverts.
(i) Lowest Floor Elevation (LFE) for each building adjacent to
a major drainage system (submit open channel flow calculations
justifying LFE's).
(j) Lowest floor elevation for each building adjacent to a
designated floodplain area (submit flood map and flood profile map with
development delineated). (as added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005)
18-605. Validity. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed. The invalidation of any section, clause, sentence,
or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of
this ordinance that can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. (as
added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005)
18-606. Ordinance in force. This ordinance shall take effect
immediately after its passage on second reading, the public welfare requiring it
At such time as current planned improvements are made to the major drainage
components in basin 4 the requirement for 25-year storm interval will be revised
to 10-year storm interval. (as added by Ord. #998, Oct. 2005)
18-14
APPENDIX A
DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
the provisions of these regulations in addition to those terms defined in the
Ordinance, unless specifically stated otherwise:
Closed Condit - Pipes, tiles, boxes, arches or tunnels used to carry storm water
runoff.
Culverts - Pipes, tiles, boxes, arches or tunnels used to carry storm water runoff
underground to improve safety or comfort. Culverts are constructed from
concrete or corrugated metals.
Detention - A water impoundment that temporarily contains storm water runoff
to reduce the peak flow and pollutants entering the receiving waters.
Drainage - The action or method of draining storm water runoff.
Drainage area - A part of the surface of the earth that is occupied by and
provides surface water runoff into a drainage System.
Drainage basin - A drainage area or a group of drainage areas that consist of a
surface stream or a body of impounded surface water together with all tributary
surface streams and bodies of impounded surface water.
Drainage network - A combination of culverts and/or open channels used in
conjunction to conduct flowing water (usually storm water runoff) to an
adequate discharge point.
Drainage structure - Consists of a variety of components in the drainage system
ranging from culverts, catch basins and manholes to emergency spillways.
Drainage Way - A natural or artificial watercourse, with definite or indefinite
boundaries to confine or conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Emergency spillway - Usually a concrete structure used to safely discharge
temporarily stored storm water runoff over a berm or dam into a receiving
channel.
Invert elevation - The elevation of the bottom of a culvert at the opening, "Invert
In" is the upstream invert elevation, and "Invert Out" is the downstream invert
elevation of a culvert.
18-15
Lowest floor elevation - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage and in an area other than the basement
area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.
Nomograph - A chart used to graphically determine engineering design values.
Nomographs are commonly used to size culverts, predict time-of-concentrations,
and to estimate peak flows.
One hundred-year design flow - The peak flow of storm water runoff that is
produced by the precipitation of a storm that has a one percent (1%) probability
of occurring any given year.
One hundred-year flood elevation - For the City of Lawrenceburg, this is the
highest floodwater elevation as a result of the one hundred-year design flow at
each point along the major storm drainage system.
Oven channel - A storm water runoff conduit flowing by the forces of gravity.
Open channels consist of rivers, creeks, swales or depressions, roadway gutters
and possibly culverts.
Over-topping elevation - The elevation where storm water runoff first crosses a
road, berm, dam or emergency spillway.
Peak Flows - The highest volume of storm water runoff over a constant time
interval to pass through a known location, usually measured in cubic feet per
second (cfs).
Point of discharge - The downstream location at which runoff leaves the
property Post Development The site as it exists after full development has
occurred.
Pre-development - The site as it exists before any development or additional
development has taken place.
Rainfall intensities - The amount of rainfall over a specific time period, usually
measured in inches per hour (in./hr.).
Retention - A Water impoundment that permanently contains water, but also
temporarily stores storm water runoff to reduce the peak flow and pollutants
entering the receiving waters.
18-16
Runoff - The actual amount of precipitation that does not infiltrate into the
ground or get stored naturally in depressions, and eventually reaches receiving
waters.
Runoff coefficients - A variable used in hydrology equations to predict the
amount of storm water runoff produced from a given amount of precipitation.
Site - All contiguous land and bodies of water in one ownership, graded or
proposed for grading or development as a unit, although not necessarily at One
time.
Storm frequency - A probability of a certain amount of precipitation to occur
from a storm in any given year. (i.e. 10-year storm frequency defines a storm of
having a 1/10 probability of occurring any given year; 100-year storm frequency
defines a storm of having a 1/100 probability of occurring any given year .
Storm water - A measurable amount of rainfall.
Storm water runoff - The volume of rainfall which is not absorbed or stored over
a specific time interval, usually measured in cubic feet per second (cfs).
Ten-year design flow - The peak flow of storm water runoff that is produced by
the precipitation of a storm that has a ten percent (10%) probability of occurring
any given year.
Time of concentration - Is estimated from the drainage areas characteristics and
description of the drainage way. It is the time required for runoff to travel from
the most remote point in the drainage area to the point in the drainage basin
that is being analyzed. The most remote point is usually the furthest point in
the drainage area from the point being analyzed.
Water impoundments - A permanent or temporary body of water with definite
limits such as lakes, ponds, detention or retention facilities.
Watershed - A drainage area or a group of drainage areas that consist of a
surface stream or a body of impounded surface water together with all tributary
surface streams and bodies of impounded surface water.
18-17
APPENDIX B
References:
Hydrology - Research, Development and technology, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, October 1984.
Brentwood zoning ordinance - Developed by the City of Brentwood, Tennessee
and its consultants.
Storm water management manual Volume 1, Regulations, Metropolitan
Government of Nashville and Davidson County and its consultants, July 1988.
Storm water management - Volume 2, Procedures, Metropolitan Government
of Nashville arid Davidson County and its consultants, July 1988.
18-18
Figure 1
18-19
Figure 2
18-20
Figure 3
18-21
Table 1
19-1
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS1
CHAPTER
1. ELECTRICITY.
2. GAS SERVICE.
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICITY2
SECTION
19-101. Electric meters; tampering prohibited.
19-101. Electric meters; tampering prohibited. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to tamper with the meters
used for measuring the electric current and power furnished and distributed by
the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities as to cause any such meter or meters
to register and show an incorrect amount of current and power used; and for any
one in any way to wire a meter, or in any way to attach a wire or wires to the
distribution lines of the electric light and power system of the Lawrenceburg
Board of Public Utilities in order to stop or which may stop such meter from
running and measuring or registering the correct amount of current used and
consumed; or to use a scheme, artifice or device in interfering with the correct
measuring of electric current and power by such meter or meters.
(2) Any person, persons, firm or corporation, violating the provisions
of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
fined an amount not exceeding state authorized limits for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense. (1999 Code, § 19-101, modified)
1Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
2Municipal code reference
Electrical code: title 12.
19-2
CHAPTER 2
GAS SERVICE1
SECTION
19-201. Gas meters.
19-202. Penalty.
19-201. Gas meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with
the gas meters of the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities; to remove the lid
or top from a meter box; to change or alter any meter in any way so that it will
not properly register the amount of gas used; or to tamper with a gas meter in
any way after it has registered the amount of gas used, or in any way make the
meter show an incorrect amount. Provided, that the above shall not apply to
utility employees performing their duty.
Anyone violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined no more than the state authorized limits for each
violation.
19-202. Penalty. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or failing to comply with the rules and regulations of the gas system
made pursuant to the powers herein granted, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense. Violation of this chapter on more than two (2) occasions during any
thirty (30) day period shall result in the discontinuance of gas service. (1999
Code, § 19-314)
1Municipal code reference
Gas code: title 12.
Ord. #943, July 2001, § 1 states:
"The Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-52-111, do hereby
transfer to and confer upon the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities the
jurisdiction over the City of Lawrenceburg's water department, sewage
department and gas department, and does hereby transfer the responsibility for
supervision and administration of the City of Lawrenceburg's water, sewer and
gas departments to the Lawrenceburg Board of Public Utilities of the City of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee."
Section 5 of Ord. #943 provides:
"Title 19, Chapter 3 of the Lawrenceburg Municipal Code entitled <Gas
Service' is amended to comply with the provisions of this ordinance."
20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS.
2. EMERGENCY ALARM ORDINANCE.
3. LAWRENCEBURG MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM.
4. PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY.
5. BOBBY BREWER MEMORIAL PARK BALLFIELD RESERVATION.
CHAPTER 1
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
SECTION
20-101. Definitions.
20-102. Unlawful acts.
20-103. Exception.
20-104. Access to multiple-listing services, etc.
20-105. Complaints.
20-106. Violations.
20-107. Exhaustion of remedies.
20-101. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following
words and terms shall have the following meanings unless the context
necessarily requires otherwise:
(1) "Dwelling" means any building, structure, or portion thereof which
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of any such building.
(2) "Family" includes a single individual.
(3) "Person" includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, trust, unincorporated organizations, trustee,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
(4) "To rent" includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant. (1999 Code, § 20-101)
20-102. Unlawful acts. Subject to the exceptions hereinafter set out,
it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer to do
so or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
20-2
unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion,
or national origin.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, or national
origin.
(3) To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination
based on race, color, sex, religion, or national origin.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental
when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion,
or national origin. (1999 Code, § 20-102)
20-103. Exception. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy
of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or
national origin. (1999 Code, § 20-103)
20-104. Access to multiple-listing services, etc. It shall be unlawful
to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation on account of race, color, sex, religion, national
origin. (1999 Code, § 20-103)
20-105. Complaints. Any person who claims to have been injured by an
act made unlawful by this chapter, or who claims that he will be injured by such
an act, may file a complaint with the Housing Authority Board. A complaint
shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged unlawful act occurred.
Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in
such form as required by the board. Upon receipt of a complaint, the board
shall promptly investigate it and shall complete its investigation within fifteen
(15) days. If a majority of the board finds reasonable cause to believe that a
violation of this chapter has occurred, or if a person charged with a violation of
this chapter refused to furnish information to said board, that board may
20-3
request the city attorney to prosecute an action in the city court against the
person charged in the complaint. Such request shall be in writing.
Upon receiving such written request and with the assistance of the
aggrieved person and designated board, within fifteen (15) days after receiving
such request, the city attorney shall be prepared to prosecute an action in the
city court, provided a warrant is sworn out by the aggrieved person and served
upon the person or persons charged with the offense. (1999 Code, § 20-106,
modified)
20-106. Violations. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a penalty not to
exceed state authorized limits for each offense. (1999 Code, § 20-107)
20-107. Exhaustion of remedies. Nothing in this chapter requires any
person claiming to have been injured by an act made unlawful by this chapter
to exhaust the remedies provided herein; nor prevent any such person from
seeking relief at any time under the Federal Civil Rights Act or other applicable
legal provisions. (1999 Code, § 20-108)
20-4
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY ALARM ORDINANCE
SECTION
20-201. Title.
20-202. Definitions.
20-203. False emergency alarms.
20-204. Schedule of notice, warning, penalties and service costs.
20-205. Enforcement.
20-206. Penalty for offenses.
20-201. Title. This chapter shall be known as the emergency alarm
ordinance." (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug. 2010)
20-202. Definitions. Unless it is apparent from the context that
another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this chapter
shall have the meanings indicated herein:
(1) "Alarm system" means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or
electrical, arranged to signal the police and/or fire department that an
emergency exists or that the services of either or both of these departments are
needed. "Alarm system" shall also mean any alarm device which automatically
emits an audible, visual or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard or
emergency and is intended to alert persons outside the building to the existence
of a hazard or emergency.
(2) "Alarm user" means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained,
installed, or located.
(3) "Automatic telephone dialing alarm system" means any alarm
system which is a device which automatically or electronically transmits by
telephone or telephone line connected to the central dispatch facility a recorded
message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system
which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to
transmit to the police and/or fire department a need for emergency response.
(4) "Central dispatch facility" means the central communications
center designated by the board of mayor and council to receive, route and
otherwise handle all incoming police, fire or other emergency service
communications traffic.
(5) "False emergency alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting a
response by the police and/or fire department when the situation requiring a
response by the police and/or fire department does not in fact exist; but, this
definition does not include an alarm signal which was caused by unusually
violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. Also this
20-5
definition does not include an alarm signal caused by a situation that was
brought under control prior to the calling out of responding police and/or fire
department personnel, that otherwise would have required a response.
(6) "Service fee" means a fee to be assessed after the third false
emergency alarm by an alarm user within a calendar year which will amount
to the actual cost of the response by Lawrenceburg personnel including the cost
of equipment, fuel, personnel, administration, on call fees, overtime and such
other costs and expenses as determined by the appropriate chief. The service
fee is not a penalty but rather a remedial fee. (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug.
2010)
20-203. False emergency alarms. (1) Whenever an alarm is activated
in the City of Lawrenceburg thereby requiring an emergency response to the
location of the alarm by the police and/or fire personnel, a police and/or fire
officer on the scene of the activated alarm shall make a determination whether
the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm system
or whether the alarm system malfunctioned in some way and thereby activated
a false emergency alarm. The determination is to be made by the police for
police related alarms and by fire department personnel for fire related alarms.
(2) If a determination is made by officials of the City of Lawrenceburg
that the activated alarm is determined to have been false and no emergency
existed at the time of the alarm, then the officer of the City of Lawrenceburg
shall submit a report of the false alarm to the respective chief of the police
department or fire department. A written notification of emergency response
and determination of the response shall be mailed and delivered to the alarm
user at the address or location where the alarm was activated.
(3) Responsibility for a false emergency alarm shall be borne by the
alarm user and/or the alarm user's employee, servant or agent occupying and/or
controlling the premises at the time of the occurrence of the false emergency
alarm. (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug. 2010)
20-204. Schedule of notice, warning, penalties and service costs.
(1) It is hereby found and determined by the board of mayor and
council that more than two (2) false alarms within a calendar year are excessive
and constitute a public nuisance. The activation of three (3) or more false
alarms within a twelve (12) month period of time will be handled in the
following manner:
First false emergency alarm - Notice letter informing the alarm user of the
provisions of this chapter.
Second false emergency alarm - Warning letter and notice to insure that
the alarm system is to be in proper working
order and that further false emergency alarms
20-6
will result in the imposition of a penalty and/or
costs of providing such service.
Third false emergency alarm - A fine of up to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall
be imposed.
Fourth false emergency alarm A fine of up to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
and more - each false emergency alarm and the actual cost
of such response by Lawrenceburg personnel
including the costs of equipment, fuel,
personnel, administration, on-call fees and such
other costs and expenses as determined by the
appropriate chief.
After the second false emergency alarms in a twelve (12) month period of
time, each alarm user may be cited to the Lawrenceburg City Court for any
response to a false alarm.
(2) No fine nor service fee may be assessed by the City of
Lawrenceburg if it is determined that the false emergency alarm was caused by
a violent act of nature in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 62-32-321. (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug. 2010)
20-205. Enforcement. Lawrenceburg police and fire department
officers are specifically authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
Lawrenceburg police or fire officer may lawfully issue a citation to appear in city
court to an alarm user whose alarm system has given a false alarm in excess of
two (2) false alarms in a twelve (12) month period of time under the provisions
of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug. 2010)
20-206. Penalty for offenses. Any person who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction in city court
shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In
addition to the fine, city court costs will be assessed and service fees will be
added pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for costs incurred associated the
false emergency alarms. (as added by Ord. #1059, Aug. 2010)
20-7
CHAPTER 3
LAWRENCEBURG MUNICIPAL AUDITORIUM
SECTION
20-301. Establishment of non-refundable reservation fee.
20-301. Establishment of non-refundable reservation fee. (1) The
Board of Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee hereby
establishes a thirty dollar ($30.00) per day non-refundable reservation fee for
the use of the City of Lawrenceburg Municipal Auditorium.
(2) The fee shall be due and payable on reservations beginning
January 1, 2015. Booking for the auditorium begins the first Monday in
November.
(3) Governmental entities, Tennessee Valley Jamboree and the
Lawrenceburg County Gospel Music Association are exempt from the said
reservation fees. (as added by Ord. #1143, Aug. 2014)
20-8
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
SECTION
20-401. Definitions.
20-402. Requesting access to public records.
20-403. Responding to public records requests.
20-404. Inspection of records.
20-405. Copies of records.
20-406. Fees and charges and procedures for billing and payment.
20-401. Definitions. (1) "Records custodian." The office, official or
employee lawfully responsible for the direct custody and care of a public record.
(See Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 10-7-503(a)(1)(C).) The records custodian is
not necessarily the original preparer or receiver of the record.
(2) "Public records." All documents, papers, letters, maps, books,
photographs, microfilms, electronic data processing files and output, films,
sound recordings, or other material, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection
with the transaction of official business by any governmental agency. (See
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 10-7-503(a)(1)(A).
(3) "Public records request coordinator." The individual, or individuals,
designated in § 20-403(1)(c) of this policy who has, or have, the responsibility to
ensure public record requests are routed to the appropriate records custodian
and are fulfilled in accordance with the TPRA. (See Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 10-7-503(a)(1)(B).) The public records request coordinator may also be a
records custodian.
(4) "Requestor." A person seeking access to a public record, whether
it is for inspection or duplication. (as added by Ord. #1199, March 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
20-402. Requesting access to public records. (1) Public record
requests shall be made to the Public Records Request Coordinator ("PRRC") or
his/her designee at jdicapo@lawrenceburgtn.gov in order to ensure public
record requests are routed to the appropriate records custodian and fulfilled in
a timely manner.
(2) Requests for inspection only cannot be required to be made in
writing. The PRRC will request a mailing, or email address from the requestor
for providing any written communication required under the TPRA.
20-9
(3) Requests for inspection may be made orally or in writing on Form
A1 at Lawrenceburg Municipal Complex, 25 Public Square, Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee 38464, by phone at 931-762-4459 or by email to
jdicapo@lawrenceburgtn.gov.
(4) Requests for copies, or requests for inspection and copies, shall be
made in writing on Form A in person or by mail at Lawrenceburg Municipal
Complex, 25 Public Square, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee 38464 or by email to
jdicapo@lawrenceburgtn.gov.
(5) Proof of Tennessee citizenship by presentation of a valid Tennessee
driver's license or alternative acceptable form of ID is required as a condition to
inspect or receive copies of public records. (as added by Ord. #1199, March 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
20-403. Responding to public records requests. (1) Public record
request coordinator. (a) The PRRC shall review public record requests
and make an initial determination of the following:
(i) If the requestor provided evidence of Tennessee
citizenship;
(ii) If the records requested are described with sufficient
specificity to identify them; and
(iii) If the City of Lawrenceburg is the custodian of the
records.
(b) The PRRC shall acknowledge receipt of the request and take
any of the following appropriate action(s):
(i) Advise the requestor of this policy and the elections
made regarding:
(A) Proof of Tennessee citizenship;
(B) Form(s) required for copies;
(C) Fees (and labor threshold and waivers, if
applicable); and
(D) Aggregation of multiple or frequent requests.
(ii) If appropriate, deny the request in writing, providing
the appropriate ground such as one of the following:
(A) The requestor is not, or has not presented
evidence of being, a Tennessee citizen;
(B) The request lacks specificity;
(C) An exemption makes the record not subject to
disclosure under the TPRA;
(D) The City of Lawrenceburg is not the custodian
of the requested records; or
1Request for Inspection (Form A), and any amendments thereto, may be
found in the recorder's office.
20-10
(E) The records do not exist.
(iii) If appropriate, contact the requestor to see if the
request can be narrowed.
(iv) Forward the records request to the appropriate
records custodian in the City of Lawrenceburg.
(c) The designated PRRC is: Joyce DiCapo
(i) Name or title: Executive assistant
(ii) Contact information: City of Lawrenceburg City Hall,
25 Public Square, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee 38464 or by phone at
931-762-4459, or by email to jdicapo@lawrenceburgtn.gov.
(2) Records custodian. (a) Upon receiving a public records request, a
records custodian shall promptly make requested public records available
in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 10-7-503. If the records
custodian is uncertain that an applicable exemption applies, the
custodian may consult with the PRRC, counsel, or the OORC.
(b) If not practicable to promptly provide requested records
because additional time is necessary to determine whether the requested
records exist; to search for, retrieve, or otherwise gain access to records;
to determine whether the records are open; to redact records; or for other
similar reasons, then a records custodian shall, within seven (7) business
days from the records custodian's receipt of the request, send the
requestor a completed public records request response form which is
attached as Form B,1 based on the form developed by the OORC.
(c) If a records custodian denies a public record request, he or
she shall deny the request in writing as provided in § 20-403(1)(b)(ii) and
may use the public records request response Form B.
(d) If a records custodian reasonably determines production of
records should be segmented because the records request is for a large
volume of records, or additional time is necessary to prepare the records
for access, the records custodian shall use the public records request
response Form B to notify the requestor that production of the records
will be in segments and that a records production schedule will be
provided as expeditiously as practicable. If appropriate, the records
custodian should contact the requestor to see if the request can be
narrowed.
(e) If a records custodian discovers records responsive to a
records request were omitted, the records custodian should contact the
requestor concerning the omission and produce the records as quickly as
practicable.
1Public records request response form (Form B), and any amendments
thereto, are available in the recorder's office.
20-11
(3) Redaction. (a) If a record contains confidential information or
information that is not open for public inspection, the records custodian
shall prepare a redacted copy prior to providing access. If questions arise
concerning redaction, the records custodian should coordinate with
counsel or other appropriate parties regarding review and redaction of
records. The records custodian and the PRRC may also consult with the
OORC.
(b) Whenever a redacted record is provided, a records custodian
should provide the requestor with the basis for redaction. The basis given
for redaction shall be general in nature and not disclose confidential
information. (as added by Ord. #1199, March 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
20-404. Inspection of records. (1) There shall be no charge for
inspection of public records.
(2) The location for inspection of records within the offices of the City
of Lawrenceburg shall be determined by either the PRRC or the records
custodian.
(3) When a reasonable basis exists, the PRRC or a records custodian
may require an appointment for inspection. (as added by Ord. #1199, March
2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
20-405. Copies of records. (1) A records custodian shall promptly
respond to a public record request for copies in the most economic and efficient
manner practicable.
(2) Copies will be available for pickup at Lawrenceburg City Hall.
(3) Upon payment for postage, copies will be delivered to the
requestor's home address by the United States Postal Service.
(4) A requestor will not be allowed to make copies of records with
personal equipment. Requestors may purchase storage devices from the City of
Lawrenceburg upon which the records will be downloaded. (as added by Ord.
#1199, March 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
20-406. Fees and charges and procedures for billing and payment.
Fees and charges for copies of public records should not be used to hinder access
to public records.
(1) Records custodians shall provide requestors with an itemized
estimate of the charges prior to producing copies of records and may require
pre-payment of such charges before producing requested records.
(2) When fees for copies and labor do not exceed ten dollars ($10.00)
the fees may be waived. (Requests for waivers for fees above ten dollars ($10.00)
must be presented to, the city administrator who is authorized to determine if
such waiver is in the best interest of City of Lawrenceburg and for the public
good.) Fees associated with aggregated records requests will not be waived.
(3) Fees and charges for copies are as follows:
20-12
(a) Fifteen cents ($0.15) per page for letter- and legal-size black
and white copies.
(b) Fifty cents ($0.50) per page for letter- and legal-size color
copies.
(c) The actual cost of any other medium upon which a
record/information is being produced.
(d) Labor when time exceeds one (1) hour.
(e) If an outside vendor is used, the actual costs assessed by the
vendor.
(4) Payment is to be made in cash or check payable to the City of
Lawrenceburg and presented to the city clerk.
(5) Payment in advance will be required when costs are estimated to
exceed twenty dollars ($20.00).
(6) Aggregation of frequent and multiple requests. (a) The City of
Lawrenceburg will aggregate record requests in accordance with the
frequent and multiple request policy promulgated by the OORC when
more than (4) requests are received within a calendar month (either from
a single individual or a group of individuals deemed working in concert).
(b) If more than four (4) requests are received within a calendar
month:
(i) Records requests will be aggregated at the
department level.
(ii) The PRRC is responsible for making the
determination that a group of individuals are working in concert.
The PRRC or the records custodian will inform the individuals that
they have been deemed to be working in concert and that they
have the right to appeal the decision to the OORC.
(iii) Requests for items that are routinely released and
readily accessible are exempt from this policy. These records
include, but are not limited to: agendas and approved minutes.
(as added by Ord. #1199, March 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
20-13
CHAPTER 5
BOBBY BREWER MEMORIAL PARK BALLFIELD
SECTION
20-501. Non-refundable reservation fee.
20-501. Non-refundable reservation fee. (1) The Board of Mayor and
Council of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee hereby establish a twenty-five
dollar ($25.00) per hour non-refundable reservation fee for the use of lighting at
City of Lawrenceburg Bobby Brewer Memorial Park Ballfield; with a minimum
of (2) hours per reservation, including all baseball, football, soccer and softball
fields.
(2) The fee shall be due and payable on reservations beginning May 12,
2017.
(3) Cancellation due to weather may be rescheduled to another date,
with no refund.
(4) The fee shall not apply to usage by Lawrenceburg League Teams,
but is intended for usage by any team or organization not associated with
Lawrenceburg League Teams. (as added by Ord. #1200, May 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
ZONING ORDINANCE
LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE
ORDINANCE NO. 789
ZONING ORDINANCE
LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE PLANNING COMMISSION
PLANNING COMMISSION MEMBERS
PREPARED BY
BOB HODGE, PRINCIPAL PLANNER
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
LOCAL PLANNING ASSISTANCE OFFICE
SUITE 128
446 METROPLEX DRIVE
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 37211-3139
TELEPHONE: (615) 741-1534
FAX NO.: (615) 532-1896
AMENDMENTS
DATE ORDINANCE NO. AMENDMENTS
Sept. 9, 1994 810 Replaced Article V, Section 5.092,
Section C. through c,1, a-f.
also, section C.2
April 11, 1996 841 Amended Article IV, Section 4.086, e.
(1), by deleting, maximum sign area
of one hundred (100) square feet,
from third sentence and replacing
with maximum sign area of one
hundred-fifty (150) square feet
April 11, 1996 842 Added Article III, Section 3.120, Zero
Lot Line Regulations, added. (3.120;
A, B, C, D, E.)
March 11, 1999 901 Amended Article IV, Section 4.086,
added new Subsection 3, Off-Premise
Commercial Sign Lot
October 21,
1999
911 Amended Article IV, Section 4.086,
deleted text from Subsection 1, c, (1),
and replaced with new text; deleted
text from Subsection 1, d, (1), and (4),
and replaced with new text; deleted
text from Subsection 2, a, (1), and (3),
and replaced with new text; and
Subsection 2, a, (1), and (3), added
new paragraph
May 4, 2000 926 Added Article V, Section 5.100--5.108,
relative to airport zoning provisions
March 15, 2001 936 Amended Article IV, Section 4.130,
Minimum Design Standards for
Transmission and Communication,
Towers and Stations
June 7, 2001 939 Replaced Article III, Section 3.120 in
its entirety
March 7, 2002 950 Amended Article VII, Section 7.030,
by adding a new Subsection 3
November 16,
2005
1014 Added Article IV, Section 4.140
July 24, 2008 1044 Amended Article VI, Section 6.021, C
August 12,
2010
1067 Amended Article V, Section 5.601, D
January 10,
2013
1103 Amended Article VII, Section 7.70, C
January 10,
2013
1108 Amended Article IV, Section 4.015, 2
December 12,
2013
1124 Amended Article II, Section 2.030, E,
18
January 26,
2017
1187 Amended Article V, § 5.071(F)(4)
January 26,
2017
1188 Amended Article V, § 5.072(F)(4)
January 26,
2017
1189 Amended Article V, § 5.061(F)(7)
January 26,
2017
1190 Amended Article V, § 5.062(G)
January 26,
2017
1191 Amended Article V, § 5.063(G)
January 26,
2017
1192 Amended Article V, § 5.064(G)
January 26,
2017
1193 Amended Article V, § 5.065(G)
January 26,
2017
1994 Amended Article III, § 3.100(E)
January 26,
2017
1995 Deleted Article IV, § 4.071(2)(g)
November 22,
2017
1217 Amended Article IV, § § 4.130(B), (C)
and (G)
January 26,
2017
1220 Amended Article V, § 5.092(C)(d)
APP 1-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I ENACTMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-5
SECTION
1.010 Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-5
1.020 Title . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-5
1.030 Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-5
1.040 Enactment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-6
1.050 Repeal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-6
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-8
SECTION
2.010 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-8
2.020 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-8
2.030 Use Classifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-20
ARTICLE III GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-40
SECTION
3.010 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-40
3.020 Only One (1) Principal Building on Any Lot App1-40
3.030 Lot Must Abut a Public Street . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-40
3.040 Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited . . . . . . . . . . App1-40
3.050 Rear Yard Abutting a Public Street . . . . . . . . App1-41
3.060 Corner Lots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-41
3.070 Future Street Lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-41
3.080 Obstruction to Vision at Street Intersection
Prohibited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-41
3.090 Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-42
3.100 Accessory Use Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-43
3.110 Buffer Strips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-43
3.120 Zero Lot Line Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-43
APP 1-2
Page
ARTICLE IV SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
APPLYING TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
App1-45
SECTION
4.010 Off-Street Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . App1-45
4.020 Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-56
4.030 Temporary Use Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-57
4.040 Customary Incidental Home Occupations . . . App1-60
4.050 Gasoline Service Station Restrictions . . . . . . App1-61
4.060 Swimming Pool Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-61
4.070 Development Standards for Multi-Family
Dwellings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-62
4.080 Standards for Signs, Billboards, Other
Advertising Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-66
4.090 Development Standards for Mobile Home
Parks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-91
4.100 Alternative Provisions for Lot Size and the
Location of Open Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-101
4.110 Development Standards for Automobile
Wrecking, Junk and Salvage Yards . . . . . . . . App1-107
4.120 Development Standards for Cemeteries . . . . App1-108
4.130 Minimum Design Standards for
Transmission and Communication Towers
and Stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-109
4.140 Seasonal Public Square Curb Market . . . . . . App1-111
ARTICLE V ZONING DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-112
SECTION
5.010 Classification of Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-112
5.020 Zoning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-113
5.030 Zoning District Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-113
5.040 Zoning of Annexed Territory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-113
APP 1-3
Page
5.050 Residential District Regulations . . . . . . . . . . App1-113
5.060 Commercial District Regulations . . . . . . . . . . App1-127
5.070 Industrial District Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . App1-145
5.080 Provisions Governing Floodway and Flood
Fringe Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-153
5.090 Special Overlay District Regulations . . . . . . . App1-180
5.100 Airport Zoning Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-200
ARTICLE VI EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS . . App1-210
SECTION
6.010 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-210
6.020 Nonconforming Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-210
6.030 Bulk and Lot Size Noncompliance . . . . . . . . . App1-215
6.040 Exceptions to Height Limitations . . . . . . . . . . App1-216
6.050 Lots of Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-216
6.060 Exceptions to Setback Requirements . . . . . . . App1-217
6.070 Absolute Minimum Lot Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-217
ARTICLE VII ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-218
SECTION
7.010 Administration of the Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . App1-218
7.020 The Enforcement Officer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-218
7.030 Building Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-219
7.040 Temporary Use Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-224
7.050 Certificate of Occupancy App1-225
7.060 Board of Zoning Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-225
7.070 Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-229
7.080 Procedure for Authorizing Special Exceptions App1-231
7.090 Amendments to the Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-248
7.100 Penalties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-250
APP 1-4
Page
7.110 Remedies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-250
7.120 Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-250
7.130 Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-251
7.140 Effective Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App1-251
APP 1-5
ARTICLE 1
ENACTMENT
SECTION
1.010 Authority
1.020 Title
1.030 Purpose
1.040 Enactment
1.050 Repeal
1.010 AUTHORITY
An ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by Section 13-7-201
through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code Annotated, to provide for the establishment
of districts within the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee: to regulate within such
districts, the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and
other structures, the percentage of lot occupancy, the size of open spaces, the
density of population, and the uses of land, buildings, and other structures for
trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities and similar purposes to
include special districts for areas subject to flooding and areas developed as a
planned development; to provide regulations governing nonconforming uses and
structures; to provide for a board of appeals and for its powers and duties; to
provide for permits; to establish and provide for the collection of fees; to provide
for the administration of this ordinance and for the official, whose duty it shall
be to enforce the provisions thereof; and to provide penalties for the violation of
this ordinance; and to provide for conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
1.020 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, dated, June 18, 1993. The zoning map shall be referred to as the
Official Zoning Map of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, and all explanatory matter
thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
1.030 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety, morals,
convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare by:
APP 1-6
A. Enhancing the character and stability of residential, business,
commercial, and industrial areas, and promoting the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas.
B. Preventing overcrowding of land.
C. Conserving the value of land and buildings.
D. Minimizing traffic hazards and congestions.
E. Preventing undue concentration of population.
F. Providing for adequate light, air, privacy, and sanitation.
G. Reducing hazards from fire, flood, and other dangers.
H. Assisting in the economic provision, utilization, and expansion of
all services provided by the public, including but not limited to
roads, water and sewer service, recreation, schools, and emergency
services.
I. Encouraging the most appropriate uses of land.
J. Enhancing the natural, man-made and historical amenities of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
1.040 ENACTMENT
Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall be erected or structurally
altered, nor shall any building or premises be utilized for any purpose, other
than those permitted in the zoning district in which the building or premises is
located. No land or lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or
open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed herein, nor shall the lot area per
family be reduced in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations
hereby established for the district in which such building is located. No yard or
other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with
these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for
any other building. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
1.050 REPEAL
The existing Zoning Ordinance of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, December 31, 1970,
as amended, is hereby repealed. The adoption of this ordinance, however, shall
not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution of an action to abate any
APP 1-7
existing violation of said regulations, as amended, if the violation is also a
violation of this ordinance. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-8
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
SECTION
2.010 Scope
2.020 Definitions
2.030 Use Classification System
2.010 SCOPE
For the purpose of this ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and
intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used
and interpreted as follows:
A. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an
individual.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended,"
"designed," or "arranged to be used" or "occupied."
F. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
2.020 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall
be interpreted as such throughout this Zoning Ordinance. Terms not herein
defined shall have their standard dictionary definition or such as the context
may imply.
ACCESS: The right to cross between public and private property, thereby
permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
APP 1-9
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A subordinate building, the use
of which is incidental to that of a principal building and located on the same lot
therewith.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and
subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same
lot therewith.
ADVERTISING: Includes any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem,
drawing, sign, or other device designs used or intended for advertising, whether
placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stumps, or other natural structures or
on buildings, structures, milestones, signboards, wallboard, roofboard, frames,
supports, fences or other man-made structure, and any such advertising is a
structure within the meaning of the word "structure" as utilized in this
ordinance.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: See SIGN.
AGRICULTURE USE: The use of a tract of land five (5) acres or more in size
including all forms of agriculture, growing of crops in the open, dairying,
grazing, the raising and maintaining of poultry and other livestock, horticulture,
viticulture, floriculture, forests, and wood, provided, however, all health codes
of Lawrence County are complied with.
The feeding or disposal of community or collected garbage to animals shall not
be deemed an agricultural use nor shall the commercial feed lots, the raising of
furbearing animals, fish or minnow hatcheries.
AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY USE. Those structures or equipment which
are normally required in the operation of agricultural uses.
ALLEY: A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a
secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility and public service
purposes.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending
a side or by increasing its height or structural changes, other than repairs, that
would affect safety. The term "alter" in its various modes and tenses and its
practical forms, refers to the making of an alteration.
APP 1-10
AREA, BUILDING: The total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of the principal building and all necessary buildings exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
ATTACHED: An enclosure having continuing walls, roof and floor.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling, storage, sale or dumping of
used motor vehicles, trailers, or parts thereof. Any lot or place of business which
is exposed to weather and upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any
kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically
feasible to make operative are placed, located, found.
AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION: The elevation of the mean finished grade
at the front of a structure.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half
(½) of its height is above the average ground elevation or when subdivided and
used for commercial activities.
BOARD: The Lawrenceburg, Tennessee Board of Zoning Appeals.
BUFFER STRIP: A greenbelt planted strip not less than ten (10) feet in width.
Such a greenbelt shall be composed of one (1) row of evergreen trees, spaced not
more than forty (40) feet apart and not less than two (2) rows of shrubs or
hedges, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart and which grow to a height of
five (5) feet or more after one (1) full growing season and which shrubs will
eventually grow to not less than ten (10) feet.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls,
including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, mobile homes or trailers, and similar
structures whether stationary or movable.
BUILDING AREA OF A LOT: That portion of a lot bounded by the required
year yard, side yards, and the building setback line.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The Zoning Codes Officer or his authorized
representative appointed by the Lawrenceburg City Commission.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
APP 1-11
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line delineating the minimum allowable
distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no
building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, FRONT: A line delineating the minimum
allowable distance between the street right-of-way, or if an official future street
right-of-way has been established, from that future street right-of-way line, and
the front of a building on a lot. The front building setback line extends the full
width of the lot and is parallel to the street right-of-way.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, REAR: A line delineating the minimum
allowable distance between the rear property line and a building on a lot (other
than for permitted accessory structures). The rear setback line extends the full
width of the lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE, SIDE: A line delineating the minimum distance
between the side property line and a building on a lot. The side setback line
extends from the front building setback line to the rear building setback line.
BULK: Describes the size of buildings or other structures and their relationship
to each other and to open areas and lot lines.
CAMPING GROUND: A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let, or
rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or
movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind.
CITY COMMISSION: The Lawrenceburg City Commission.
CLINIC: See MEDICAL FACILITY.
CONDITIONAL USE (SPECIAL EXCEPTION): A conditional use is a use
that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the
zoning districts but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation
to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals,
order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such
uses may be permitted in such zoning district as conditional uses, when specific
provisions for such use is made in this ordinance. For the purposes of
administration of this ordinance, conditional uses shall be construed as
synonymous with special exceptions, as controlled by Section 13-7-107,
Tennessee Code Annotated.
CONVENIENCE SALES: The retail sale of small convenience items such as
toiletries, tobacco, and magazines. The dispensing of petroleum products may
be included as accessory to convenience food products retailing.
APP 1-12
CONVENIENCE SERVICES: Services which are typically needed frequently
or recurrently, such as barber and beauty care; and includes the operation of
self-service laundromats but excludes other apparel, cleaning and repair
services.
COUNTRY CLUB: A chartered, nonprofit membership club, with facilities
catering primarily to its membership or social amenities: golf, riding, club
house, pool, dining facilities, lounge.
COVERAGE: The percentage of a lot which is covered by all buildings located
therein, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs.
DAY CARE HOME OR CENTER: Any place, home or institution, which
receives eight (8) or more unrelated young children for general care, exercise,
play or observation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations.
Agricultural activities such as plowing or cultivating and gardening activities
are not included in this definition of development.
DWELLING: A building or part thereof used as a habitation under one of the
following categories:
Single detached dwelling means a building and accessories thereto
principally used, designed, or adapted for use by a single household.
Duplex dwelling means a building and accessories thereto principally
used, designed, or adapted for use by two (2) households, the living
quarters of each of which are completely separate.
Triplex dwelling means a building and accessories thereto principally
used, designed, or adapted for use by three (3) households, the living
quarters of each of which are completely separate.
Multi-family apartment or dwelling means a building and accessories
thereto principally used, designed, or adapted for use as occupancy by
four (4) or more households each of which has separate living quarters.
Rooming house means a building and accessories thereto principally
used, designed, or adapted to provide living accommodations for not more
than six (6) occupants and without owner-provider cooking and dining
facilities.
APP 1-13
Boarding house means a building and accessories thereto principally
used, designed, or adapted to provide living accommodations for not more
than six (6) occupants and having common cooking and dining facilities.
Town house means a residential structure containing four (4) or more
nondetached dwelling units separated by a common vertical wall.
Condominium means an apartment building or townhouse containing
four (4) or more dwelling units separated by a common vertical wall.
Mobile home dwellings means a detached one-family dwelling with all
the following characteristics:
(1) Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen
facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for
attachment to outside systems.
(2) Constructed as a single self-contained unit and mounted on a
single or combined chassis transportable after fabrication on its
own wheels or detachable wheels.
(3) Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection
to utilities, and the like.
Prefabricated dwelling means a single detached dwelling constructed
primarily offsite, designed to be transported on a flatbed truck or trailer,
provided that it is installed on a permanently enclosed concrete or
masonry foundation, with sewer and water connections designed for
permanent connection to municipal or sanitary or onsite systems, and
permanently connected to such systems. Such structures are
distinguished from mobile homes as described elsewhere in this ordinance
when they have a minimum gross floor of six hundred (600) square feet
and have no horizontal exterior dimensions of less than fifteen (15) feet
not including porches or carports. When such a structure meets the
above stated requirements it shall qualify as a single detached dwelling.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that
unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family (excepting
as set forth below) shall contain over five (5) persons, but further provided that
domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises
APP 1-14
without being counted as a family or families, and that four (4) or less boarders,
including roomers, may be accommodated. The term "family" shall not be
construed to mean a fraternity, sorority, club, or institutional group. The term
family, as used in this ordinance, shall be construed to include groups of eight
(8) or fewer unrelated mentally retarded or physically handicapped persons and
with two (2) additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians who need
not be related to each other or to any of the mentally retarded or physically
handicapped persons residing in the house.1
FLOOR AREA: The total of the gross horizontal area of all floors, including
usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surface of the
main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the center lines of party walls
separating such buildings or portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to
and two (2) feet within the roof line of the building or portions thereof without
walls, but excluding in the case of nonresidential facilities; arcades, porticoes,
and similar open areas which are accessible to the general public, and which are
not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the
street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is utilized for the retail sale of gasoline, oil, or automobile
accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand car
washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including
painting or major repair.
GRADE, FINISHED: The completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Lawrenceburg County Department of Health
and Environment.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURES: The vertical distance from the
average ground elevation or finished grade at the building line, whichever is the
highest, to the highest point of the building structure.
HOME OCCUPATION: See Section 4.040.
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13, chapter 24.
APP 1-15
HOSPITAL: See MEDICAL FACILITIES.
JUNK YARD OR SALVAGE YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof,
used primarily for the collecting, storing, and selling of waste paper, rags, scrap
metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running conditions for the sale of parts
thereof.
LANDSCAPING: The planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, lawns, and
other ground cover, or materials.
LANDHOLDER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land
proposed to be included in a planned development. The holder of an option or
contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than fifty (50)
years in duration, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest
may be considered a "landholder" for the purpose of this ordinance.
LOADING SPACE: An area ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet with a fourteen (14)
foot height clearance providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of a truck
or other vehicle.
LOT: A piece, plot, or parcel of land in one ownership, which may include one
or more lots of records, occupied or to be occupied by one or more principal
building and accessory buildings, including the open spaces required under this
ordinance.
LOT, AREA: The total surface land area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut their full
lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two (2)
such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
LOT, DEPTH: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley or
adjacent lots.
APP 1-16
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the county register of deeds, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been recorded in the office of the county register of
deeds prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot at the building setback line measured at right
angles to its depth.
MARINA: A facility for the docking and servicing of boats.
MEDICAL FACILITIES:
Convalescent, Rest or Nursing Home: A health facility where persons are
housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for
compensation or fee.
Dental Clinic or Medical Clinic: A facility for the examination and
treatment of ill and afflicted human out-patients, provided, however, that
patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.
Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human
in-patient medical care for sick or injured and including related facilities
such as laboratories, out-patient facilities, emergency medical services,
and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility.
Public Health Center: A facility utilized by a health unit for the provision
of public health services.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, site or plot of land whereupon mobile
homes as herein defined are placed, located or maintained, and shall include all
accessory buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure, or use of land existing at the
time of enactment of this ordinance which does not conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material in gaseous, liquid or solid form which is
capable of causing injury to living organisms, chemical reactions, or detrimental
affects upon the social, economic or psychological well-being of individuals.
OPEN SPACE: An area on the same lot with a main building which is open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground to the sky except
as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
APP 1-17
OWNER: Includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devise,
fiduciary, and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in
question.
PARKING LOT: An off-street facility including parking spaces with adequate
provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and obtaining access, and for
entrance and exit.
PARKING SPACE: An off-street space available for parking one (1) motor
vehicle and having an area of not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square
feet exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto, and having
access to a street or alley.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A relatively large, interrelated commercial
development adhering to a master development plan and located on a single
tract of land, or on two (2) or more tracts of land which may be separated only
by a street or other right-of-way.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Lawrenceburg Regional Planning
Commission.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential or agricultural district,
any dwelling shall be deemed the principal structure on the lot on which the
same is situated. Carports and garages if permanently attached to the principal
structure shall be deemed a part of the principal structure. Awnings, porches,
patios, or similar attachments shall be deemed a part of the principal structure
with two meeting any yard requirement.
PRINCIPAL USE: The specific primary purpose for which land or a building
is used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of a physician, dentist, attorney,
architect, engineer, planner, accountant, or similar professions.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural, and service
buildings, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to storage and
maintenance of equipment and materials.
ROADWAY: The actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and
drainage facilities including ditches and curbs and gutters, which is used to
transport motor vehicles.
APP 1-18
SANITARY LANDFILL: An area of site utilized by a public or private entity
for disposal of solid waste or refuse in a manner which meets the regulations
imposed upon the operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill sites by the
State Department of Health and Environment.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of compatible commercial establishment,
planned, developed, and managed as a single unit, with an automobile storage
area provided on the property; the center must also be related in location, size,
and type of businesses to its' trade area.
SIGN, BILLBOARD, OR OTHER ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any structure
or part thereof or device attached thereto, or represented thereon, which shall
display or include any letter, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, or
any representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement,
direction or advertisement. The word "sign" includes the word "billboard" or any
other type of advertising device, but does not include the flag, pennant, or
insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit.
Business Sign: A sign which directs attention to the business or
profession conducted on the premises.
Billboards: A type of advertising sign having more than one hundred
(100) square feet of display surface which is either erected on the ground
or attached to or supported by a building or structure.
Flashing Sign: Any illuminated sign, whether stationary, revolving, or
rotating, which exhibits changing light or color effects, provided that
revolving or rotating signs which exhibit no changing light or color effects
other than those produced by revolution or rotation, shall be deemed
flashing signs only if they exhibit sudden or marked changes in such light
or color effects.
Ground Sign: A sign supported by a pole, uprights, or braces on the
ground.
Illuminated Sign: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light or
reflect such light from an artificial source.
Indirect Illumination Sign: Any illuminated nonflashing sign whose
illumination is derived entirely from an external artificial source and is
so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial
source into residence or streets.
APP 1-19
Marquee Sign: A projecting sign attached to or hung from a marquee
and said marquee shall be known to mean a canopy or covered structure
projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered
structure extends beyond the building, building line, or property line.
Off-Premises Sign: A sign relating to a product, service, or
establishment that is not on the premises on which the sign is located.
On-Premises Sign: A sign relating to a product, service, or
establishment that is on the premises on which the sign is located.
Pole Sign or Banjo Sign: A type of ground sign at least ten (10) feet
above the ground supported on a single post or pole most commonly
associated with gasoline service stations.
Roof Sign: A detached sign supported upon the roof or wall of a
building.
Temporary Sign: Temporary signs shall include any sign banner,
pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of wood, metal, cloth,
canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light material, with
or without frames, where either by reason of construction or purpose the
sign is intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
Wall or Flat Sign: Any sign erected parallel to the face or on the outside
wall of any building which projects out at any angle therefrom and
projects more than twelve (12) inches beyond the face of such wall.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A use which is specifically permitted if the owner can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that it will meet certain standards,
enumerated safeguards, or qualifying conditions.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; or any portion of a building
between the topmost floor and the roof which is used for human occupancy in
which the floor area with eight (8) feet or more of head clearance equals less
than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the story next below. Provided it is not
used as a dwelling unit, a top floor in which the floor area with eight (8) feet or
more of head clearance equals less than fifty (50) percent of floor area of the
story next below shall be a "half-story." A basement shall be considered as a
story if more than one-half (½) of its height is above the average ground level
from which the "height of a building" is measured or if it is used for commercial
purposes.
APP 1-20
STREET: A public road, highway, or thoroughfare which constitutes, or is
designed to constitute, the main access to more than one lot and which has been
legally dedicated and accepted for public use.
TOXIC MATERIALS: Materials (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate) which are
capable of causing injury to living organisms even when present in relatively
small amounts.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: A plot of land designed and equipped to
accommodate travel trailers for short periods of time.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance, provided that accessory buildings may be
located in a rear yard.
YARD FRONT: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between
the nearest part of the principal building, including porches, and the front lot
line.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the entire width of the lot between
the nearest part of the principal building, including porches, and the rear lot
line.
YARD, SIDE: The required space unoccupied except as herein provided,
measured between the side lot line and the nearest point of the principal
building and between the front yard and the rear yard. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
2.030 USE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The provisions of this section shall be known as the use classifications. The
purpose of these provisions is to classify land uses into a number of specifically
defined types on the basis of common functional characteristics and similar
compatibility with other uses, thereby with criteria which are directly relevant
to the public interest. These provisions shall apply throughout the zoning
regulations. Where there is a question concerning the appropriate activity
classification for any use not listed herein, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
make the determination based upon the characteristics of the unlisted use.
APP 1-21
A. Listing of Activity Classifications
All activities are hereby classified into the following activity types:
1. Residential Activities
a. Permanent
Dwelling, Single Detached
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Triplex
Dwelling, Mobile-Home
Dwelling, Multi-Family
Mobile Home Park
b. Semi-Permanent
Boarding House
Rooming House
2. Community Facility Activities
Administrative
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Essential Service
Extensive Impact
Health Care
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
3. Commercial Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Automotive Parking
Automotive Service and Repair
Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Commercial
Entertainment and Amusement Services
Financial, Consulting, and Administrative
APP 1-22
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service - Drive-In
General Business and Communication Services
General Personal Service
General Retail Trade
Group Assembly
Medical and Professional Services
Transient Habitation
Transport and Warehousing
Undertaking Services
Vehicular, Craft, and Related Equipment Sales,
Retail and Delivery
Wholesale Sales
4. Manufacturing Activities
Limited
Intermediate
Extensive
5. Agricultural, Resources Production, and Extractive Activities
Agricultural Services
Crop, Animal and Poultry Raising
Mining and Quarrying
Plant and Forest Nurseries
Commercial Feed Lots and Stockyards
B. Accessory Uses
In addition to the principal activities expressed above, each activity type
shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with, and
appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal activity. The
accessory uses permitted are presented with the regulation section of
each district as set forth in this zoning ordinance.
C. Residential Activities
1. Permanent Residential
The occupancy of living accommodations on a monthly or longer
basis with none of the living units under the same ownership or
management on the same zone lot being occupied on a less-thanmonthly
basis. This shall not include institutional living
APP 1-23
arrangements involving the provision of any kind of special care or
forced residence such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums,
half-way houses or prisons, except as provided by general law of
the state. The following dwelling types as defined by this
ordinance are permanent residential activities; however, only those
dwelling types as indicated by individual district regulations may
be permitted therein.
Dwelling, Single Detached
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Triplex
Dwelling, Mobile Home
Dwelling, Multi-Family (apartment, townhouse)
Mobile Home Park
2. Semi-Permanent Residential
The occupancy of living accommodations partly on a monthly or
longer basis and partly for a shorter time period, but with less
than thirty (30) percent of the living units under the same
ownership or management on the same zone lot being occupied on
a less-than-monthly basis. This shall not include institutional
living arrangements involving the provision of a special kind of
care or forced residence, such as nursing homes, orphanages,
asylums, half-way houses, and prisons, except as provided by
general law of the state. The following dwelling or rooming unit
types as defined by this ordinance are considered as semipermanent
residential activities; however, only those dwelling or
rooming unit types as indicated by individual district regulations
may be permitted therein.
Boarding House
Rooming House
D. Community Facility Activities
1. Administrative Services
The activities typically performed by public, utility, and nonprofit
private administrative offices. These activities would include:
City, County, State, and Federal Offices
Civil Defense Facilities
Court Buildings
APP 1-24
Fire Department Facilities
Police Department Facilities
Post Offices
2. Community Assembly
The activities typically performed by or at institutions and
installations for various social, athletic, and recreational purposes.
These activities do not include facilities primarily utilized for
profit. They would include:
Civic, Social, Fraternal, and Philanthropic Associations
Private (nonprofit) Clubs, Lodges, Meeting Halls, and
Recreation Centers
Temporary Nonprofit Festivals
3. Community Education
The activities typically performed by the following institutions:
Public and Private Nursery Schools
Kindergarten, Primary and Secondary Schools
4. Cultural and Recreational Services
The activities of a cultural or recreational nature which are either
owned by, or operated for the use and enjoyment of, the general
public. This does not embrace such facilities which are privately
owned and operated for profit.
These activities would include:
Art Galleries
Libraries
Museums
Parks, Playgrounds, and Playfields
Planetariums and Aquariums
Recreational Centers and Gymnasiums
Swimming Pools and Beaches
Zoological and Botanical Gardens
5. Essential Services
Includes the maintenance and operations of the following
installations:
APP 1-25
Electrical and Gas Substations
Electrical, Gas, Water, and Sewer Distribution and Collection Lines
Pumping Facilities for Water and Sewer Systems
Rights-of-Way for Transportation Modes
Telephone Switching Facilities
6. Extensive Impact Facilities
The activities that have a high degree of impact upon surrounding
land uses due to their hazards or nuisance characteristics, as well
as traffic generation, parking, and land requirements and typically
performed by, or the maintenance and operation of, the following
institutions and installations:
Airports, Air Cargo Terminals, Heliports, or Other
Aeronautical Devices
Correction and Detention Institutions
Electricity Generating Facilities and Transmission Lines
Garbage Incineration Plants, Including Cogeneration Facilities
And Sanitary Landfills
Major Fuel Transmission Lines and Facilities
Major Mail Processing Centers
Military Installations
Public and Private Utility Corporations and Truck Yards,
Including Storage Yards
Railroad Yards and Other Transportation Equipment Marshalling
And Storage Yards
7. Health Care Facilities
Includes the activities typically performed by the following
institutions but not including the offices, clinics, etc., of private
physicians or other health care professional:
Centers for Observation or Rehabilitation
Convalescent Homes
Hospitals
Medical Clinics
8. Intermediate Impact Facilities
The activities that have a significant effect upon surrounding land
uses due to their traffic generation characteristics, parking
requirements, land requirements, or potential nuisances and
APP 1-26
typically performed by, or the maintenance and operation of the
following institutions or installations.
Cemeteries, Columbariums, and Mausoleums
Colleges, Junior Colleges, and Universities, but Excluding
Profit-Making Business Schools
Commercial Boat Docks, Marinas, and Yacht Clubs
Golf Courses
Water Storage Facilities, Water and Sewage Treatment Plants
Radio and TV Transmission Facilities
Country Clubs
9. Personal and Group Care Facilities
The activities and facilities to provide for the care of preteenage
children, disabled and handicapped persons needing special care
or supervision, care for the elderly and other individuals requiring
supervised care, but excluding facilities for delinquent, criminally
dangerous, or psychotic people. These activities would include:
Associations for Physically or Mentally Handicapped Persons
Day Care Centers
Group Homes for Physically or Mentally Handicapped Persons
Nursing Homes
Retirement or Rest Homes
Orphanages
10. Religious Facilities
The activities or facilities utilized by various religious
organizations for worship or community service functions but
excluding any facility the primary functions of which is to produce
products or printed matter for sale or general distribution. The
activities include:
Chapels
Churches
Convents or Monasteries
Sanctuaries
Synagogues
Temples
APP 1-27
E. Commercial Activities
1. Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Include the provision of animal care, treatment, and boarding
services.
Veterinarian Clinics and Kennels
2. Automotive Parking
Includes the parking and/or storage of motor vehicles but excluding
junk or scrap vehicles.
Auto Parking Lots
Parking Garages
3. Automotive Services and Repair
Includes the sale, from the premises, of good and the provision of
services which are generally required in the operation and
maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist
needs, as well as clean-up, painting and repair of automotive
vehicles, including body work and installation of accessories.
Auto Cleaning and Repair Services
Auto Glass Repair and Replacement Shops
Auto Inspection and Diagnostic Services
Auto Paint Shops
Auto Towing Services
Car Washes
Gasoline, Fuel, and Oil Sales and Service
Radiator and Muffler Shops
Tire Retreading and Repair Shops
Wheel Alignment and Transmission Repair Shops
4. Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Includes the retail and wholesale sales and storage of materials
used in the construction of buildings and other structures as well
as the retail and wholesale sale and storage of implements,
equipment, feed and seed used in agricultural pursuits.
APP 1-28
Farm Equipment and Supplies
Feed Milling and Sales
Heating, Plumbing, and Electrical Supplies
Lumber and other Building Material Dealers
Retail Nurseries, Lawn and Garden Supply Stores
Seed Storage and Sales
5. Consumer Repair Services
Include the servicing and repair of appliance, furniture, and
equipment generally used or owned by individuals, not including
the repair of any type of automobile.
Blacksmith Shops
Electrical Repair Shops
Gunsmith Shops
Instrument Repair Shops
Locksmith Shops
Office Equipment Cleaning and Repair
Reupholstery and Furniture Repair
Saddlery Repair Shops
Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair
Lawn Mower Repair Shop
6. Construction Sales and Services
Includes the offices, buildings, and shops of various types of
contractors as well as incidental onsite construction and storage.
Builder's Hardware
Carpentering Contractors
Concrete Contractors
Excavation Contractors
General Building Contractors
Glazing Contractors
Highway and Street Construction Contractors
Masonry, Stonework, Tile Setting, and Plastering Contractors
Painting, Paper Hanging, and Decorating Services
Plumbing, Heating, and Electrical Contractors
Roofing and Sheet Metal Contractors
APP 1-29
7. Convenience Commercial
Includes the retail sale, from the premises, of groceries, drugs, and
other frequently needed personal convenience items, as well as the
provision of personal convenience services which are typically
needed frequently or recurrently, provided that no establishment
shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Barber Shops
Beauty Shops
Drug Stores
Fruit and Vegetable Markets
Grocery Stores
Hardware Store (no outside storage)
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Pick-up Stations
Liquor Stores
News Stands
Self-Service Gasoline Pumps
Tobacco Shops
8. Entertainment and Amusement Services
Include the provisions of cultural, entertainment, educational, and
athletic services, other than those classified as Community Facility
Activities, to assembled groups of spectators or participants.
Art Galleries (Commercial)
Batting and Golf Driving Ranges
Bowling Alleys and Billiard Parlors
Coin Operated Amusement Arcades
Dance Halls and Studios
Exhibition Halls and Auditoriums
Recording and TV Production Services
Skating Rinks
Theaters
Theatrical Producers, Bands, Orchestras, and Entertainers
9. Financial, Consulting, and Administrative Services
Include the provision of financial, insurance, and real estate
brokerage services, as well as advice, designs, information, or
consultations of a professional nature (other than those classified
as Community Facility Activities, Medical and Professional
Service, or Business and Communication Services). These also
APP 1-30
include the executive, management, or administrative activities of
private, profit oriented firms, but exclude the sale and/or storage
of goods or chattel unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance.
Agricultural Credit Institution
Banking and Bank-Related Functions
Credit Unions
Holding and Investment Organizations
Insurance Carriers, Agents, Brokers, and Service
Money Management and Investment Offices
Real Estate Brokers, Managers and Appraisers
Rediscount and Financing Institutions for Credit Agencies
Other Than Banks
Savings and Loan Associations
Securities Commodities, Brokers, Dealers, and Exchanges
Title Offices
10. Food and Beverage Service
Include the retail sale of prepared food or beverages for primarily
on-premises consumption within the principal structure on the
zone lot.
Restaurants
Taverns
11. Food Service Drive-In
Includes the retail sale of prepared food or beverages for either
home or on premises consumption either within the principal
structure or within a parked car on the same zone lot.
Drive-In Restaurants
Fast Food Restaurants with Drive-Thru Service
12. General Business and Communication Services
Include the provision of service of a clerical, goods brokerage, and
communications of a minor processing nature, copying and
blueprinting services, custom printing (except books) but include
the sale and/or storage of goods and chattel unless otherwise
permitted by this ordinance.
APP 1-31
Advertising Agencies and Services
Commercial Cleaning Services
Commercial Testing Laboratories
Communications Services
Radio and Television Broadcasting Studios
Telegraph Offices and Message Centers
Telephone Exchanges and Relay Towers
Television and Recording Production Studios
Computer and Data Processing Services
Credit Reporting, Adjustment, and Collection Agencies
Detective Agencies and Protective Services
Drafting Services
Employment, Personnel, and Temporary Help Services
Exterminating Services
Interior Decorator and Consulting Services
Mailing, Reproduction, and Commercial Art Services
Management, Consulting, and Public Relations Services
Membership Organizations
Automobile Clubs
Better Business Bureaus
Chamber of Commerce
Labor Unions
Political Organizations
Professional Associations
News Syndicates
Photofinishing Services
Research and Development Laboratories
Trading Stamp Services
Travel Agencies
Vehicular and Equipment Rental and Leasing Services
13. General Personal Service
Include the provision to individuals of informational and
instructional services as well as the provision of care and
maintenance for personal items. These activities do not include
the storage or sale of goods or chattel, unless otherwise permitted
herein.
Catering Services
Laundry, Cleaning, and Garment Services
Miscellaneous Personnel Services
Clothing Rental Agencies
Health Spas
APP 1-32
Photographic Studios
Shoe Repair and Hat Cleaning Shops
Special Training and Schooling Services
Art and Music Schools
Barber and Beauty Schools
Business Schools
Dancing Schools/Exercise Studios
Driving Schools
14. General Retail Trade
Includes the retail sales or rental from the premises, primarily for
personal or household use, of goods and/or services, but excluding
goods and services listed in the other classifications herein.
Antique and Second Hand Merchandise Stores
Automotive Parts (No exterior storage)
Book and Stationery Stores
Camera Stores
Candy, nut and Confectionary Stores
Children's and Infant's Stores
Dairy Products Stores
Department Stores
Drapery, Curtain, and upholstery Stores
Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores
Family Clothing Stores
Floor Covering Stores
Florists
Fruit Stores and Vegetable Markets
Furniture Stores
Furriers and Fur Shops
Gift Shops
Grocery Stores
Hardware Stores
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores
Household Appliance Stores
Jewelry Stores
Liquor Stores
Luggage Shops
Meat and Seafood Markets
Men's and Boy's Clothing and Furnishing Stores
APP 1-33
Miscellaneous Apparel and Accessory Stores
Bathing Suit Stores
Custom Tailors
Sports Apparel Stores
Uniform Stores
Miscellaneous General Merchandise Stores
Direct Selling Organizations
Mail Order Houses
Miscellaneous Home Furnishings Stores
Bedding and Linen Stores
Cookware Stores
Cutlery Stores
Glassware and China Shops
Lamp and Shade Shops
Paint and Wallpaper Stores
Music Stores
News Stands
Radio and Television Stores
Retail Bakeries
Sewing and Piece Goods Stores
Shoe Stores
Sporting Goods Stores
Tobacco Shops
Variety Stores
Women's Accessory and Specialty Stores
Women's Ready-to-Wear Store
15. Group Assembly
Includes the provision of cultural, entertainment, educational, and
athletic services, other than those classified as Community
Facilities, to large groups of assembled spectators and/or
participants (five hundred (500) or more) or that have a
substantial potential impact upon adjoining property.
Amusement Parks
Commercial Camp Grounds
Commercial Resorts
Commercial Sports Arenas and Playing Fields
Drag Strips
Race Tracts (Auto, Motorcycle, Dog, and Horse)
APP 1-34
16. Medical and Professional Services
Includes the provision of therapeutic, preventive, or corrective
personal treatment services by physicians, dentists, and other
practitioners, as well as testing and analysis and the offices of
various other professionals, the service of which is provided in an
office environment.
Accounting, Auditing, and Bookkeeping Services
Artist Studios (Excluding Commercial Artists)
Attorneys and Law Offices
Chiropractor Offices
Consulting Scientists
Dental Offices and Laboratories
Educational and Scientific Research Services
Engineering and Architectural Services
Optometrists
Physicians' Offices and Clinics (Out Patient Services)
Physiologists and Psychotherapists
Songwriters and Music Arrangers
Urban Planning Services
Writers and Lecturers
17. Transient Habitation
Includes the provision of lodging services to transient guests,
having at least seventy (70) percent of its accommodation available
on a less-than-weekly basis, other than those classified as
residential activities.
Hotels
Motels
Tourist Courts
18. Transport and Warehousing
Includes the provision of warehousing, storage, freight handling,
shipping, and trucking services.
Bus and Truck Maintenance and Repair
Food Lockers
APP 1-35
General Warehousing
Household Goods Storage
Mini-Warehouses
Packing and Creating Services
Railroad, Bus and Transient Terminals
Refrigerated Warehousing
Truck Terminals Freight Handling Services
19. Undertaking Services
Include the provision of undertaking and funeral services involving
the care and preparation of the human deceased prior to burial.
Funeral and Crematory Services
20. Vehicular, Craft, and Related Equipment
Includes the retail or wholesale sale or rental from the premises of
vehicular and related equipment with incidental maintenance.
Boat and Motor Dealers
Mobile Home Dealers
Motor Vehicle Dealers
Motorcycle Dealers
Recreational Vehicle and Utility Trailer Dealers
21. Wholesale Sales
Includes the storage and sale from the premises of goods to other
firms for resale, as well as the storage of goods and their transfer
to retail outlets; but exclude sale or storage of motor vehicles,
except for parts and accessories. These would include such uses
as:
Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions
Beer, Wine and Distilled Alcoholic Beverages
Chemicals and Allied Products
Drugs, Drug Proprietaries, and Sundries
Electrical Goods and Appliances
Farm Products Raw Materials
Farm Supplies
Furniture and Home Furnishings
Groceries and Related Products
Hardware, Plumbing, and Heating Equipment and Supplies
APP 1-36
Lumber and Other Construction Materials
Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies
Metals and Minerals
Motor Vehicles and Automotive Parts and Supplies
Paper and Paper Products
Petroleum and Petroleum Products
Sporting, Recreational, Photographic, and Hobby Goods
Tobacco and Tobacco Products
Toys and Supplies
F. Manufacturing Activities
Manufacturing activities include the onsite production of goods by
methods other than agricultural or extractive in nature.
1. Limited Manufacturing Activities
Include the following operations:
a. The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, treatment, or fabrication of the following
products:
Apparel and Accessories
Art Objects
Bakery Goods
Beverages (Nonalcoholic)
Dairy Products
Instruments for Scientific, Medical, Dental
Engineering, and Other Professional Purposes
Optical Instruments and Lens
Printed Matter
Signs
b. Activities and operations which include the following:
Book Binding
Data Processing Service
Photocopying
Photoengraving
Precision Machining of Dies, Jigs, and Fixtures
Printing
Publishing
Record Pressing
APP 1-37
Upholstering
Welding
2. Intermediate Manufacturing Activities
Include the following:
a. The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, treatment or fabrication of products, except for
the following:
Cotton Seed Oil
Explosives
Fireworks
Organic Fertilizers
b. Other activities and operations, except for the following:
Abrasive, Asbestos, and Nonmetallic Mineral Processing
Arsenals
Asphaltic Cement Plants
Atomic Reactors
Automobile Wrecking Yards, Scrap and Waste Materials
Cement and/or Concrete Plants
Chemical Manufacturing in Excess of One (1) Ton Per Day
Cotton Ginning
Fat Rendering
Foundries
Grain Milling
Junk Yards
Offal Processing
Ore Reduction
Paper Mills
Petroleum Refining
Pulp Manufacturing
Radioactive Materials Waste Handling
Rolling and Finishing of Ferrous Materials
Slaughtering of Animals
Smelting and Refining of Metals and Alloys
Steel Works (other than those listed)
Tanning
Waste Disposal by Compacting or Incineration,
as a Principal Use
APP 1-38
3. Extensive Manufacturing Activities
Include all intermediate manufacturing activities (described above)
and the exceptions listed above, except as follows:
Arsenals
Atomic Reactors
Explosives Manufacturing and Storage
Fireworks Manufacturing
Hazardous Wastes Storage and/or Transfer
Radioactive Waste Handling
Solid Waste Landfills
Solid Waste Processing and Recycling
Waste Incinerators, Including Hospital and Medical Waste
The above exceptions may be defined to be included within the
Extensive Manufacturing Classification only after proper review
by the Board of Appeals.
G. Agricultural, Resources Production, and Extractive Activities
1. Agricultural Services
Include Various activities designed to provide needed services for
agricultural uses and are appropriately located in close proximity
thereto:
Crop Drying, Storage, and Processing
Crop Planting, Cultivating, and Protection Services
Horticultural Services
Soil Preparation Services
Riding Stables
Livery Stables
2. Commercial Feed Lots and Stockyards
Include facilities and operations involved in the storage and
feeding (other than pasture grazing) of animals for resale or
slaughter.
3. Crop and Animal Raising
Includes the raising of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant
crops intended to provide food or fiber, as well as keeping, grazing,
APP 1-39
or feeding animals for animal products, animal increase, or value
increase, but specifically excluding commercial feed lots and
facilities for the processing, packaging, or treatment of agricultural
products.
Dairies
Farms
Raising of Plants, Animals, and Fish
Truck Gardens
4. Mining, Drilling and Quarrying
Includes drilling operations and facilities either utilized by, or in
support of the extraction of minerals, ores, petroleum, and natural
gas or in the quarrying and collection of stone, gravel, sand, clay,
and other nonmetallic minerals.
Chemical Fertilizer and Nonmetallic Mineral Mining
Clay, Ceramic, and Refactory Minerals
Coal Mining
Crude Petroleum and Natural Gas Production
Metal Ore and Mineral Mining
Sand and Gravel Quarrying
Stone Quarrying
5. Plant and Forest Nurseries
Includes the cultivation for sale of horticultural, specialties, such
as followers, shrubs, and trees, intended for ornamental,
landscaping, or tree planting purposes.
Forest Nursery
Plant Nursery
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #1124, Dec. 2013)
APP 1-40
ARTICLE III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION
3.010 Scope
3.020 Only One (1) Principal Structure on Any Residential Lot
3.030 Lot Must Abut a Public Street
3.040 Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited
3.050 Rear Yard Abutting a Public Street
3.060 Corner Lots
3.070 Future Street Line
3.080 Obstruction to Vision at Street Intersection Prohibited
3.090 Access Control
3.100 Accessory Use Regulations
3.110 Buffer Strips
3.120 Zero Lot Line Provisions
3.010 SCOPE
No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall
be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.020 ONLY ONE (1) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON ANY RESIDENTIAL
LOT
Only one (1) principal structure and its accessory structures may hereafter be
erected on any lot. This provision does not prohibit planned development
complexes as permitted under Subsection 5.091, of this ordinance, multi-family
dwellings or mobile home parks. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.030 LOT MUST ABUT A PUBLIC STREET
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one (1) publicly
maintained street for at least fifty (50) feet. This section shall not apply to
residential properties in a residential district abutting a cul-de-sac, which shall
abut a public street at least forty (40) feet. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.040 REDUCTION IN LOT AREA PROHIBITED
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall
be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or
APP 1-41
other requirements of the zoning ordinance are not maintained. This section
shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
No part of any yard or other open space or automobile storage area or loading
or unloading space provided about any building for the purpose of complying
with these regulations shall be considered as providing such space similarly
required for any other structure. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.050 REAR YARD ABUTTING A PUBLIC STREET
When the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, all structures built in that rear
yard shall observe the same setback as required for adjacent properties which
front on that street. In addition, any structure located within twenty-five (25)
feet of that setback line shall be no closer to any side property line than the
distance required for side yards on adjoining properties fronting on that street.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.060 CORNER LOTS
The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front
setback requirements for the next adjacent lot fronting on the street that the
side yard of the corner lot faces. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.070 FUTURE STREET LINE
For the purpose of providing adequate space for the future widening of streets,
required setbacks, or front yards, shall be determined by the right-of-way as
shown on the latest official Lawrenceburg Mayor Thoroughfare Plan. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
3.080. OBSTRUCTION TO VISION AT STREET INTERSECTION
PROHIBITED
In all districts on a corner lot within the area formed by the center lines of
intersecting street and a line joining points on such center lines at a distance of
ninety (90) feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision
between a height of three and one-half (3 ½) feet and a height of ten (10) feet
above the average grade of each street at the center line thereof. This section
shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining walls. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
APP 1-42
3.090 ACCESS CONTROL
In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize
traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the points of contact, the following
regulations shall apply:
A. A point of access for vehicles onto a street shall not exceed thirty
(30) feet in width. In nonresidential districts, vehicular service
uses may be permitted points of access exceeding thirty (30) feet,
but not exceeding forty (40) feet in width providing that they do
not exceed fifty (50) percent of their respective street frontage.
All points of access shall be so constructed as to provide for proper
drainage.
B. There shall be no more than two (2) points of access to any one
public street for each four hundred (400) feet of lot frontage, or
fraction thereof, provided, however, that lots less than one
hundred (100) feet in width shall have no more than one point of
access to any one public street.
C. No point of access shall be allowed within twenty (20) feet of the
curb line (or road line when there is no curb) of a public
intersection.
D. No curbs on city streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered
without approval of the Lawrenceburg City Street Superintendent,
or if a state highway, a permit must be obtained from the
Tennessee Department of Transportation.
E. Where two (2) driveways are provided for one (1) lot frontage, the
clear distance between the driveways shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
F. Cases requiring variances relative to the above provisions due to
topographic limitations shall be heard and acted upon by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, provided, further, that no curb cuts for
off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be permitted
where the arrangement would require that vehicles back directly
into a public street. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-43
3.100 ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
The use of land, buildings, and other structures permitted in each of the
districts established by this zoning ordinance are designed by listing the
principal uses. In addition to such principal uses, accessory uses which are
customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses are also permitted in each
district. Each accessory use shall:
A. Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the
same lot.
B. Be subordinate to and serve such principal use.
C. Be subordinate in area, intent, and purpose to such principal use.
D. Contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of users of
such principal use.
E. An accessory use or structure on any residential lot shall not
exceed sixty (60) percent of the total square footage of the principal
structure on such lot. If freestanding, it shall be located in the
rear yard in relation to the principal structure on any zone lot.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #1194, Jan. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
3.110 BUFFER STRIPS
Where a use is established in areas zoned commercial or industrial which abuts
at any point upon property zoned residential, the developer of said use shall
provide a landscaped buffer strip of no less than ten (10) feet in width at the
point of abatement. The buffer strip shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Furthermore, there shall be installed around the rear of all drive-in restaurants,
a four (4) foot fence designed to catch all litter or trash generated on the site,
unless specific conditions deem otherwise as determined in a hearing by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
3.120 ZERO LOT LINE PROVISIONS
On appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals zero side lot line setbacks will be
allowed a "Special Exception" subject to the following provisions:
A. All lots must have the minimum required lot width at the building
setback for the zoning district.
APP 1-44
B. Any lot proposed for zero lot line provisions must have a revised
plat approved that includes the revised setbacks and easements.
C. If proposed or existing buildings are to be connected by a common
wall, the building must meet all building and fire codes for the
type of structure.
D. In the event that the buildings are not connected, there must be a
minimum of five (5) feet between the buildings and both buildings
must meet building and fire codes for type of structure.
E. All lots being considered for zero lot line development are required
to have a five (5) foot construction and maintenance easement on
each side of the lot line.
F. The side yard setback shall be increased by fifty (50) percent for al
lots containing an open side yard.
G. All other provisions of the zoning ordinance must be met.
H. All commercial, industrial or multi-family use requesting this
"Special Exception" must have site plan in compliance with Section
7.030, approved by the Planning Commission prior to consideration
by the Board of Appeals.
I. No more than the ten (10) individual lots or structures shall be
connected on a single unbroken frontage. (Ord. #939, June 2001)
APP 1-45
ARTICLE IV
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
APPLYING TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
SECTION
4.010 Off-Street Parking Requirements
4.020 Off-Street Loading Requirements
4.030 Temporary Use Regulations
4.040 Customary Incidental Home Occupations
4.050 Gasoline Service Station Restrictions
4.060 Swimming Pool Restrictions
4.070 Development Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings
4.080 Standards for Signs, Billboards, and Other Advertising Structures
4.090 Development Standards for Mobile Home Parks
4.100 Alternative Provisions for Lot Size and the Location of Open Space
4.110 Development Standards for Automobile Wrecking, Junk and
Salvage Yards
4.120 Development Standards for Cemeteries
4.010 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
In all districts, accessory off-street parking shall be provided in conformity with
the requirements set forth in this section for all uses permitted by right or as a
conditional use.
A parking space is required for a portion of a unit of measure one-half (½) or
more of the amount set forth herein.
For an enlargement or modification resulting in a net increase in the floor area
or other applicable unit of measure specified herein, the same requirements
shall apply to such net increase in the floor area or other specified unit of
measurement.
In the case of uses where the Planning Commission is required to prescribe the
number of parking spaces, it shall base its determination on such factors as the
traffic generation of the facilities, the time operation of such facilities, their
location, and other such factors as affect the need for off-street parking as
required under the conditional use provisions.
Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on each lot
upon which any of the following uses are hereafter established. One (1) vehicle
space shall be one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet in size (nine feet by
eighteen feet (9' x 18')) and such space shall be provided on each lot upon which
APP 1-46
any of the following uses are hereafter established. One (1) vehicle space shall
be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. The required number of
parking spaces shall be provided on property owned by the relevant property
owner. Such spaces shall be located where they are within easy walking
distance and easily accessible to the services and use they service. Street or
highway right-of-way shall not be utilized to meet the minimum number of
required parking spaces. The number of parking spaces provided shall meet the
minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth below:
A. Residential Activities
1. Permanent
a. Single-Family Detached and Attached; Two-Family
Dwellings, Detached, Attached, Semi-Detached; Three-
Family Dwellings, Detached, Attached, and Semi-Detached
Two (2) per each dwelling unit.
b. Multi-Family Dwelling (3 or more); Townhouses;
Condominiums
c. Mobile Homes
Two (2) spaces per mobile home
d. Where Occupancy is to be Primarily Elderly Persons over
the Age of Sixty (60)
The number of developed spaces may be reduced to one and
one-half (1 ½) spaces per unit.
2. Semi-Permanent
a. Boarding or Rooming House
One and one-half (1 ½) spaces for each dwelling or
rooming unit.
APP 1-47
B. Community Facility Activities
1. Cultural and Recreational Services
Accessory off-street parking shall be provided for the
specific number of square feet of gross area or seating
capacity or other specified unit of measurement (or fraction
or one-half (½) or more thereof) for the type following
specified uses within the activity types indicated.
a. Art Galleries, Museums, Libraries
One (1) space for each eight hundred (800) square
feet of gross floor area.
b. Swimming Pools
Thirty (30) percent of capacity in persons.
c. Parks, Playgrounds and Athletic Fields
Ten (10) spaces for every acre of land devoted to field, plus
one (1) space for every four (4) spectator seats.
d. Recreation Centers and Gymnasiums
(Public/Nonprofit)
Fifty (50) percent of the capacity in persons.
2. Essential Public Transport, Communication, and Utility
Services
a. Electric and Gas Substations
Two (2) spaces.
3. Administrative Services; Government Office
One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of
gross floor area.
4. Community Assembly
Fifty (50) percent of the capacity in persons.
APP 1-48
5. Education Facilities; Public and Private Schools
a. Kindergarten and Nursery
One (1) space for each employee.
b. Elementary and Middle Schools, Grades 1-9
One (1) space per each employee or one (1) space per
each five (5) seats in the auditorium, whichever is
greater.
c. High School, Grades 7-12
One (1) space per each employee or one (1) space for
each four (4) students in grades 7 through 10. One
(1) space per each employee plus one (1) space per
each two (2) students in grades 11 and 12.
d. Vocational or Trade Schools
One (1) space for each student plus one (1) space for
each employee.
6. Extensive Impact Facilities
a. Airports, Heliports, or other Aeronautical Devices
One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) space
for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor
area.
b. Detention or Correctional Institutions
One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) space
for each patrol car on largest shift.
c. Electricity Generating Facilities, Radio, and
Television Towers, and Transmission Facilities
Minimum of two (2) spaces. The planning
Commission may require more.
APP 1-49
d. Railroad, Bus, and Transit Terminals for Passengers
One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet
of waiting room.
e. Railroad Yards and Other Transportation Equipment
Marshaling and Storage Yards
One (1) space for each employee.
f. Water and Sewage Treatment Plants
One (1) space for each employee.
7. Health Care Facilities
a. Hospitals
One and one-half (1 ½) spaces for each bed.
b. Medical or Dental Clinics
Three (3) spaces for each staff member or doctor or
dentist.
8. Intermediate Impact Facilities
The number of required parking spaces will be determined
by the Planning Commission, based on a site plan review.
9. Special Personal and Group Care Facilities
a. Day Care Centers and Family Day Care Homes
Two (2) spaces for each employee.
b. Family and Group Care Facilities
Two (2) spaces for every employee.
APP 1-50
c. Nursing Homes or Convalescent Homes
One (1) space for each staff or employee, plus (1)
space for each two (2) patients.
d. Retirement or Rest Homes
One (1) space for each staff member or employee plus,
one (1) space for each two (2) residents.
10. Religious Facilities.
All Uses: One (1) space for each three (3) seats.
C. Commercial Activities
USES LOCATED ON FREESTANDING SITES
One (1) parking space shall be required for each of the following
amounts of gross floor area. For example, where you see the
number 250 in the column labeled GROSS FLOOR AREA, this
means, one (1) parking space is required for every two hundredfifty
(250) square feet of gross floor area in the building, or rooms
to be used for each activity.
Activity-Type
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
1. Retail Trade-Apparel and Accessories 150
2. Retail Trade - Automotive, Marine
Craft and Aircraft Sales, Rental and
Delivery
Twenty-five (25) percent of
the gross lot area shall be
allocated to customer and
employee parking spaces.
3. Retail-Building Materials, Farm
Equipment and Hardware
1,000
Plus one (1) space for each
employee.
4. Retail Trade - Eating and Drinking
Establishments
100
5. Retail Trade - Food Stores
a. Limited line convenience. 150
APP 1-51
Activity-Type
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
b. All other uses 150
6. Retail Trade - General Merchandise
a. Department store 250
b. Variety store 250
c. Miscellaneous General
Merchandise Store
250
7. Retail Trade - Home Furniture,
Furnishings and Equipment
250
8. Convenience Sales 150
9. Wholesale Sales
(All uses)
1,000
10. Used Car Lots Twenty-five (25) percent of
the gross lot area shall be
devoted to customer parking
spaces, all of which shall be
off public right-of-ways.
Service Activities
1. Animal Care and Veterinarian
Services; Veterinary Hospital
300
2. Automobile Services and Repair One (1) space for each
employee, plus two (2) spaces
for each service bay.
3. Business Services
(All Uses)
400
Plus one (1) space for each
employee.
4. Communication Services 300
5. Contract Construction Services 300
6. Equipment Repair Services 300
7. Entertainment and Amusement
a. Art Galleries 800
APP 1-52
Activity-Type
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
b. Bowling Alleys Five (5) spaces for each alley.
c. Billiard Parlor 250
d. Coin Operated Arcades 250
e. Commercial Recreation
Dance Halls and Skating Rink 100
Golf Courses, Driving Range,
Putt-Putt Course
As determined by Planning
Commission
Exhibitions Halls, Auditoriums,
Amphitheaters
Forty (40) percent of capacity
in persons.
Riding Stables Minimum of five (5) spaces
plus one (1) for each
employee.
Boat Docks, Boat Rental,
Marinas Botanical or Zoological
Gardens
One (1) space for each
employee plus other spaces
as determined by Planning
Commission
f. Motion Picture Theater One (1) space for each three
(4) seats.
g. Motion Picture Theater- Drive-In Reservoir of ten (10) percent
above all spaces plus one (1)
space for each employee.
h. Acting and Legitimate Dance
Theater
One (1) space for each three
(3) seats.
i. Recording, Television, and Radio
Studios
Two (2) spaces for each
employee.
j. Resorts and Group Camps One (1) space for each
employee at peak season
plus other spaces as required
by Planning Commission.
k. Fairgrounds, Amusement Parks,
Carnivals, Circuses
Parking plan must be
presented to and approved
by the Planning Commission.
APP 1-53
Activity-Type
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
8. Finance, Insurance and Real Estate
Services
(All Uses) 200
Plus one (1) space per each
employee.
9. Gasoline Service Station 500
Plus two (2) spaces for each
service bay and one (1) for
each employee.
10. Personal Services
a. Funeral, Undertaking Services One (1) space for each one
hundred (100) square feet of
gross floor area or where a
chapel is provided, one (1)
space for each four (4)
perma-seats plus one (1) for
every twenty-five (25) square
feet of parlor area where
temporary seats are to be
used.
b. All Other Services 150
11. Professional Services
a. Medical Three (3) spaces per each
employee.
b. All Other 250
12. Transient Habitation
a. Hotel, Motels, Tourist Homes or
Courts
One (1) space for each room
to be rented, plus one (1)
space for each employee.
b. Sporting and Recreational
Vehicle Camps
One (1) space for each travel
vehicle or pad plus one (1)
space per each employee.
APP 1-54
Activity-Type
Gross Floor Area
(Square Feet)
13. Uses Within Commercial Complexes
Where three or more commercial operations (retail, wholesale, or
service activities) are grouped together such that they are a building
or a common site, the number of parking spaces shall be five and
one-half (5 ½) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
leasable area.
D. Industrial Activities
One (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor area, or one (1) space per each employee during a single or
two (2) successive shifts, whichever is greater. A minimum of five
(5) spaces shall be provided for any establishment.
1. Warehousing, Foods or Freight Transport, and Storage
One (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of
gross floor area plus one (1) space for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of open storage. A minimum of five (5)
spaces shall be provided by any establishment.
2. Manufacturing: Automobile Wrecking Yards, Scrap Metal
Processing, Junk Yards
One (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
E. Other
For buildings and land uses not referred to in the preceded activity
classifications and specifically listed in the corresponding use
classification listings cited within Section 2.030, the off-street
parking requirements shall be determined by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.011 Certification of Minimum Parking Requirements
Each application for a building permit shall include information as to the
location and dimensions of off-street parking spaces and the means of
ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient
APP 1-55
detail to enable the Building Inspector to determine whether or not the
requirements of this section are met. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.012 Combination of Required Parking Spaces
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be
combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not
be assigned to another use, except that the parking space required for
churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at
night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at
night or on Sundays. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.013 Remote Parking Spaces
If the off-street parking space required by this ordinance cannot be
reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located,
such space may be provided on any land within four hundred (400) feet
of the main entrance to such principal use, provided such land is in the
same ownership or lease as the principal use. Such land shall be used for
no other purpose so long as no other adequate provision of parking space,
meeting the requirements of this ordinance, has been made for the
principal use. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.014 Extension of Parking Area into a Residential District
Required parking space may be extended one hundred (100) feet into a
residential district, provided that:
1. The parking area adjoins a commercial or industrial district.
2. The parking space in this area have their only access to or front
upon the same street as the property in the commercial or
industrial districts for which it provides the required parking
spaces.
3. The parking area is separated from abutting properties in the
residential districts by a twenty-five (25) foot buffer strip.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.015 Requirements for Design of Parking Lots
1. Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family
residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so
APP 1-56
designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into
a public street to obtain egress.
2. Each parking space shall be no less than one hundred sixty-two
(162) square feet in area.
3. Entrances and exits for all off-street in such comply with the
requirements of Section 3.090, of this ordinance.
4. The parking lot shall be designed in such a manner as to provide
adequate drainage and to eliminate the possibility of stagnant
pools of water.
5. There shall be a parking aisle at least twenty-two (22) feet wide
serving all ninety (90) degree and sixty (60) degree angled parking
spaces. For all thirty (30) and forty-five (45) degree angled parking
spaces there shall be a minimum parking aisle of sixteen (16) feet
in width.
6. All off-street parking areas containing five (5) spaces or more shall
be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or other hard surfaced dustless
material and so constructed to provide for adequate drainage for
both on and off-site and to prevent the release of dust. All parking
spaces shall be clearly marked.
7. No parking space(s) serving any residential development shall be
located further than sixty (60) feet from the respective dwelling
unit such space(s) serve. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by
Ord. #1108, January 2013)
4.020 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
Every building or structure hereafter constructed and used for business or trade
involving the receiving or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise
shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or
public alley. Such space shall have access to a public or private alley, or if there
is no alley to a public street. The minimum required spaces for this provision
shall be based on the total usable floor area of each principal building according
to the following table:
Total Usable Floor Area
for Principal Building
Spaces Required (See Article II,
for Definition)
0 to 9,999 square feet One (1) space
APP 1-57
10,000 to 14,999 square feet Two (2) spaces
15,000 to 19,999 square feet Three (3) spaces
Over 20,000 square feet Four (4) spaces, plus one (1) space
for cash additional 20,000 square
feet
Off-street Loading and Unloading Requirements for Industrial Uses:
5,000 to 40,000 square feet One (1) space
Over 40,000 square feet to 100,000
square feet
Two (2) spaces
Each additional 100,000 square feet
or major fraction thereof
One (1) space
The Board of Zoning Appeals may reduce or increase this requirement in the
interest of safety where unusual or special conditions are due consideration.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.030 TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS
The following regulations are necessary to govern the operation of certain
necessary or seasonal uses nonpermanent in nature. Application for a
Temporary Use Permit shall be made to the Building Inspector. Said
application shall contain a graphic description of the property to be utilized and
a site plan, to determine yard requirements setbacks, sanitary facilities, and
parking space for the proposed temporary use. The following use are deemed
to be temporary uses and shall be subject to the specific regulations and time
limits which follow and to the regulations of any district in which such use is
located.
A. Carnival or Circus
May obtain a Temporary Use Permit in the C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, or F-1
Districts; however, such permit shall be issued for a period of not
longer than fifteen (15) days. Such use shall only be permitted on
lots where adequate off-street parking can be provided.
APP 1-58
B. Limited Duration Goods and Seasonal Merchandise
May obtain a thirty (30) day Temporary Use Permit for the display
and sale of limited duration goods and seasonal merchandise not
sold throughout the year on open lots in any district.
C. Temporary Buildings
In any district, a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for
contractor's temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to
construction project. Such permit shall not be valid for more than
one (1) year, but may be renewed for six (6) month extensions;
however, not more than three (3) extensions for a particular use
shall be granted. Such use shall be removed immediately upon
expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever occurs sooner.
D. Real Estate Sales Office
In any district, a Temporary Use Permit may be issued for a
temporary real estate sales in any new subdivision which has been
approved by the Planning Office Commission under the
Lawrenceburg Subdivision Regulations. Such office shall contain
no living accommodations. The permit will be valid for one (1)
year, but may be granted two (2) six (6) month extensions. Such
office shall be removed upon completion of sales of the lots therein,
or upon expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever occurs
sooner.
E. Religious Tent Meeting
In any district, except the IB, General Industrial District, a
Temporary Use Permit may be issued for a tent or other temporary
structures to house a religious meeting. Such permit shall be
issued for not more than a thirty (30) day period. Such activity
shall be permitted only on lots where adequate off-street parking
can be provided.
F. Temporary Dwelling Units in Case of Medical Hardships
In any district, a Temporary Use Permit may be issued to place a
mobile home on a lot which already contains a residential
structure, provided that the purpose of such temporary placement
shall be to make it possible for a resident of either structure to
provide assistance to a person who requires daily assistance due
APP 1-59
to physical or mental disability, and provided further that such a
temporary structure does not represent a hazard to the safety,
health, or welfare of the community.
An applicant for a Temporary Use Permit as provided under this
subsection must produce a written statement from a physician
certifying that the specific disability requires assistance from
someone in close proximity as evidence of such disability, and a
written statement from the Lawrence County Health Department
approving the sewage disposal system of the proposed temporary
structure.
Such permit may be initially issued for eighteen (18) months. A
permit may be renewed for six (6) months at a time, subject to
producing a new statement from a physician certifying that the
assistance is still required due to the disabling condition. The
temporary permit shall be revoked and the structure removed
immediately upon expiration of the permit or upon a change in the
conditions under which such permit was issued.
The person requiring assistance due to the disabling condition may
be a resident of either the temporary or permanent structure. The
temporary residence shall be treated as an accessory structure.
G. Temporary Dwelling Unit in Cases of Other Special Services
In any residential district, a Temporary Use Permit may be issued
to place a mobile home temporarily on a lot in which already
contains a residential structure where the Lawrenceburg Board of
Zoning Appeals finds that special circumstances or conditions fully
described in the findings of the Board, exist, such that the use of
a temporary residential structure is necessary in order to prevent
an exceptional hardship on the applicant, provided that such a
temporary structure does not represent a hazard to the safety,
health, or welfare of the community.
An applicant for a Temporary Use Permit as provided under this
subsection must produce a written statement from the Lawrence
County Health Department approving the sewage disposal system
of the temporary structure. Such a permit may be renewed for up
to six (6) months at a time, the total time for all permits not
exceeding a total time for all permits not exceeding a total of
eighteen (18) months. The temporary structure shall be treated as
an accessory building.
APP 1-60
I. Temporary Manufacture of Road Materials
In any district, except the residential districts, a Temporary Use
Permit may be issued upon approval by the Lawrenceburg Board
of Zoning Appeals to operate manufacturing plants which are
necessary in order to produce the materials required for the
construction of approved public roads where the Board finds that
such a use is not potentially noxious, dangerous, or offensive. In
the exercise of its approval, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
impose such conditions upon the proposed plants as it may deem
advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this
ordinance.
Such a permit may be initially issued for a nine (9) month period.
A permit may be renewed for up to six (6) months at a time, the
total time for all permits not exceeding a total of twenty-four (24)
months. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.040 CUSTOMARY INCIDENTAL HOME OCCUPATIONS
A home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted entirely
within the principal dwelling unit by members of the household residing on the
premises. Only one (1) person other than members of the household shall be
employed. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants,
with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
being used to conduct the home occupation. This section classifies all home
occupations as "Minor Home Occupations" or "Major Home Occupations," all
other uses that are not considered under one of these classifications are
prohibited under these regulations.
A. Minor Home Occupations
A minor home occupation is a limited activity conducted on
premises to differ from its residential character. Minor home
occupations shall include offices for accountants, architects,
artists, engineers and the like, and other uses that will not require
an increased amount of traffic to and from the residence. Uses
such as barber or beauty shops, auto repair or any similar use
shall not be considered as minor home occupations. Due to the
small scale of operation, minor home occupations are not required
to obtain special exception permits from the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
APP 1-61
B. Major Home Occupations
Uses classified as major home occupations are those conducted
within homes that may cause an increase in the amount of
neighborhood traffic. This increase in traffic may be in the form of
persons served by the home occupation or by deliveries or pick-ups
from the premises. An increased area for parking will be allowed
for uses that are classified as major home occupations. All major
home occupations are required to have their use approved by the
Board of Appeals prior to engaging in the activity. Major home
occupations shall include barber and beauty shops, teaching of
music and dance, small engine and appliance repair, upholstery
shops, dressmakers, real estate offices, and other similar uses that
in the opinion of the Board of Appeals would meet the criteria of a
major home occupation. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.050 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations:
A. There shall be a building setback from all street right-of-way lines
of a distance of not less than forty (40) feet, except for canopies
designed to cover the gasoline pump islands.
B. Gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to
any street right-of-way line.
C. Sign requirements as established in Article IV, Section 4.080, shall
be met. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.060 SWIMMING POOL RESTRICTIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all swimming pools:
A. No swimming pool or part thereof, including aprons, walks, shall
protrude into any required front yard in any residential districts.
B. The swimming pool area shall be walled or fenced so as to prevent
uncontrolled access by children and pets from the street or
adjacent properties. Said fence or wall shall not be less than four
(4) feet in height and maintained in good condition.
C. Private swimming pools are permitted in residential, and
commercial districts provided that the pool is intended, and is to
APP 1-62
be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants and their guests
of the property on which it is located. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.070 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
The provisions set forth herein are intended to provide design criteria for multifamily
dwellings located on a single zone lot or tract that abuts a public street.
Specifically, these provisions are intended to provide regulations controlling the
spacing, internal orientation, etc., of multiple buildings located on a single site.
It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to
provide for the implementation of these provisions by Planning Commission
review of the site plan required for all such developments by Section 7.030.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.071 Development Standards
1. General Standards
It is the intent that multi-family dwellings where they are
permitted:
a. May be appropriately intermingled with other types of
housing;
b. Shall not contain more than twelve (12) dwelling units per
floor on a single unbroken frontage; and
c. Shall constitute groupings making efficient economical,
comfortable, and convenient use of land and open space, and
serving the public purposes of zoning by means alternative
to conventional arrangements of yards and buildable areas.
2. Detailed Standards
a. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with reasonable visual
and acoustical privacy. Fences, walks, and landscaping
shall be provided for the protection and aesthetic
enhancement of the development and privacy of the
occupants, screening of objectionable views or uses and the
reduction of noise. A minimum of thirty (30) feet shall be
maintained between buildings.
APP 1-63
b. Street sidewalks and onsite walks shall be provided for
convenient and safe access to all living units from streets,
driveways, parking courts, or garages and for convenient
circulation and access to all facilities.
c. The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved
and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and
other site features; and additional new plant material shall
be added for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings, and
grounds and to screen out objectionable features. The
planting plan shall be submitted with the site development
plan.
d. Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens, and ground cover shall
be retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are
effective as a screen planting or are useful in protecting
slopes.
e. Adequate recreation facilities for the residents of the project
shall be provided in locations easily accessible to the living
units and where they do not impair the view and privacy of
living units.
f. Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be provided,
appropriate in size, type and number to the needs of the
residents.
g. All public and private streets located within any multifamily
development shall meet the construction
specifications set forth in the Lawrenceburg Subdivision
Regulations.
h. The Planning Commission shall act to insure that any
private drives, parking areas or other vehicular ways used
for common access for two (2) or more residents will be
suitably paved and maintained as a condition of approval of
the project.
i. Any central refuse disposal area shall be maintained in such
a manner as to meet local health requirements and shall be
screened from public view. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as
amended by Ord. #1195, Jan 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
APP 1-64
4.072 Access and Parking Requirements
1. Access
a. Each site developed for multi-family dwellings shall meet
the requirements for access set forth in Sections 3.030 and
3.090, of this ordinance.
b. Access and circulation shall adequately provide for fire
fighting, other emergency equipment, service deliveries,
furniture moving vans and refuse collection.
2. Parking
a. Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section
4.010, of this ordinance.
b. Off-street parking may be grouped in bays, either adjacent
to streets or in the interior of blocks. Such parking areas
shall generally be located in close proximity to the dwelling
units they are designed to serve. At least one (1) parking
space per dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a
maximum walking distance of two hundred (200) feet from
the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit the space is to
serve. Where appropriate, common driveways, parking
areas, walks and steps shall be maintained and lighted for
night use. Screening of parking and service areas shall be
encouraged through ample use of trees, shrubs, hedges and
screening walls. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.073 Open Space Requirements
Any common open space established within a multi-family dwelling
development shall be subject to the following:
1. Quality Use and Improvement of Common Open Space
a. Common open space must be for amenity or recreational
purposes. The uses authorized for common open space must
be appropriate to the scale and character of the development
considering its size, density, expected population,
topography and other factors.
APP 1-65
b. No common open space may be put to any use not specified
on the approved final development pain, unless such
amendment has been approved by the Planning
Commission. However, no change authorized may be
considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the
use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce
the covenants is expressly reserved.
c. Common open space may consist of either improved or
unimproved land. In this regard the approving agency may
determine that all or part of stream areas, bodies of water
and slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent may be included
in common open space. In making this determination, the
approving agency shall be guided by the extent of these
areas in relation to the development and the degree to
which these areas contribute to the quality, livability, and
amenity of the development.
2. Maintenance of Open Space
In an instance where common open space is to be deeded to a
maintenance organization, the developer shall file a declaration of
covenants and restrictions that will govern the association. This
document is to be submitted with the application for final approval of the
planned development plan. The provisions shall be included but not
limited to the following:
a. The maintenance organization must be established and
operational before any unit is sold.
b. Membership must be mandatory for each unit and must run
with the land so that any successive purchaser will
automatically become a member.
c. The restrictions covering the use, etc., of the open space
must be permanent; not just for a period of years.
d. The association(s) must be responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of all facilities
and lands deeded to it.
e. Home owners must pay their pro rata share of the cost
assessed by the maintenance association; said assessment
APP 1-66
by the association can become a lien on the homeowner's
property for failure to pay.
f. The association must be able to adjust the assessment of
fees to meet changing needs.
3. Conveyance of Common Open Space
All land shown on the final development plan as common open
space must be conveyed under one of the following options:
a. It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to
maintain the common open space and any buildings,
structures, or improvements which have been placed on it.
b. It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture
establishing an association, funded trust, or similar
organization.
The common open space must be conveyed to the trustees
subject to covenants to be approved by the Planning
Commission which restrict the common open space to the
uses specified on the final development plan, and which
provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a
manner which assures its continuing use for its intended
purposes. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.080 STANDARDS FOR SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, AND OTHER
ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
4.081 Intent and Objectives
1. Statement of Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the well-being of the
community by establishing standards that assure the provision of
signs adequate to meet essential communication needs while
safeguarding the rights of the people in the community to a safe,
healthful and attractive environment. Within this overall
framework, it is the intent of these regulations to:
a. protect the right to the use of signs for the identification of
activities and any related products, services and events and
for noncommercial messages;
APP 1-67
b. assure proper exposure of signs to their intended viewers;
c. protect the right of individuals to privacy and freedom from
nuisances;
d. protect the value of property and improvements thereon;
e. permit signs that are constructed and maintained in a safe
condition;
f. assure that signs are constructed and maintained in a safe
condition;
g. encourage design that enhances the readability and
effectiveness of signs;
h. prevent signs from interfering with traffic regulatory
devices or otherwise obstructing motorist or pedestrian
vision;
i. reduce traffic hazards;
j. eliminate obsolete signs;
k. provide an efficient and effective means of administration
and enforcement.
2. Scope
Except for signs that are prohibited in all districts in Subsection 4.084,
4, herein, these regulations shall apply to all signs and their
appurtenances that are visible from the outside of buildings, including
interior window signs and all exterior signs, except those located within
and visible only from within enclosed courtyards, malls, or similar
enclosures.
These regulations shall not in any manner attempt to censure the written
or depicted copy on any permitted sign. Any sign allowed under this
ordinance may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful
noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business
operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, and that
complies with size, location, height, lighting, and spacing requirements
of these regulations. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-68
4.082 Supplementary Definitions
The following definitions are to be used for interpreting the provisions of
this article only. Where words have not been defined, the standard
dictionary definition shall prevail, unless defined in Article III, of this
ordinance.
Awning: Any nonrigid material such as fabric or flexible plastic that is
supported by or stretched over a frame that is attached to an exterior
wall.
Awing Sign: A sign placed directly on the surface of an awning.
Banner: A sign that is mounted on or attached to a nonrigid surface
such as cloth, fabric, or paper.
Billboard: See off-premises sign.
Bulletin Board Sign: A particular type of changeable copy sign that
displays copy in a casement made of glass or plexiglass.
Canopy: An extension of the roof of a building or a freestanding
structure that has a roof with support, but no walls.
Canopy Sign: A sign attached to a canopy.
Copy: The characters, letters, or illustrations displayed on a sign face.
Frontage, Building: The length of a building that faces a street,
parking area, or private drive.
Illegal Sign: A sign that was constructed in violation of regulations that
existed at the time it was built.
Marquee: A permanent structure other than a roof attached to,
supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection
from natural elements.
Marquee Sign: A sign attached to and made part of a marquee or any
other similar projection from a building.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that met all legal requirements when
constructed, but that is not in compliance with these regulations. An
illegal sign is not a nonconforming sign.
APP 1-69
Off-Premises Sign: Any sign which is not located on the premises that
it identifies or advertises.
Sign: Any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial
representation (including illustration or decoration); emblem (including
device, symbol, or trademark); flag (including banner, streamer, or
pennant); inflatable devices; or any other figure of similar character,
which:
(a) is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted
on, or in any other manner represented on a building or
other structure;
(b) is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and
(c) is visible from outside a building.
Sign, Abandoned: Any sign in which the functions of direction and/or
identification of a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity
conducted or product available are obsolete.
Sign, Accessory: Any sign that directs attention to a person, activity,
or commodity on the same zone lot.
Sign, Advertising: A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the same zone lot, including any expressive
sign larger than fifteen (15) square feet; or directs attention to any brand
name or trade name product that may be incidentally available on the
same zone lot as the sign provided the establishment offering the product
is not associated with the brand or trade name of the product being
advertised.
Sign, Animated: A sign that is animated, moving, rotating or appears
to be animated, moving or rotating.
Sign, Banner: A sign having the copy applied to cloth, paper, or fabric
of any kind with only such material for a backing. "Banner" shall include
animated and/or fluttering devices designed to attract attention.
Sign, Building Mounted: Any sign attached to or supported by any
building or other structure that has a purpose other than solely to
support a sign, except a sign attached to any upright pole or support
APP 1-70
when the sign is wider than said pole or support, which shall be
considered a freestanding sign.
Sign, Business: A type of accessory sign that identifies or provides
related information about commercial and manufacturing activity types.
Sign, Changeable Copy: A sign designed so the copy can be changed
while the display surface remains unchanged; includes such signs as
manually or electronically changed readerboards and fuel price displays.
Sign, Civic: A type of accessory sign that identifies or provides related
information about community facility activity types.
Sign, Development: A type of incidental sign that denotes the future
facility, the architect, the engineer, the contractor, the lending agency
and/or the developer on a construction site.
Sign, Direct Illumination: All illuminated signs not included in the
definition of "Sign," "Luminous Background" or "Sign," "Indirect
Illumination."
Sign, Directional: Any sign which provides information relative to
safely identifying vehicular entrances and exits to parking lots or traffic
circulation areas for activities. Directional signs may include logo,
symbols or a business name and shall not exceed three (3) square feet in
size nor thirty (30) inches in height. Such signs shall be located on the
private premises and only one shall be installed per driveway.
Sign, Directory: A sign which lists the names of individuals,
businesses, or products available at a single site.
Sign, Expressive: Any sign that expresses an opinion, feeling or point
of view, such as political, ideological, religious, campaign, and good will
signs. Depending on its size, and expressive sign may be an incidental,
temporary, or permanent advertising sign.
Sign, Flashing: Shall be construed to be any sign that flashes or blinks
or appears to flash or blink.
Sign, Freestanding: Any sign that is not attached to or supported by
any building or other structure that has a purpose other than solely to
support the sign and any sign attached to any upright pole or supports
when such sign is wider than said pole or support.
APP 1-71
Sign, Ground: A sign permanently affixed to the ground by a foundation
pedestal or other structure, such foundation, pedestal, or other structure
being greater than three (3) feet in width or twelve (12) inches in
diameter and not attached to any building.
Sign, Handtacked: A temporary advertising sign commonly attached,
tacked, hung, or suspended from any available structure, usually
intended to announce an upcoming event such as a music performance,
garage sale, or church bazaar.
Sign, Illuminated: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light or
reflect such light from an artificial source.
Sign, Incidental: An accessory sign intended primarily for the
convenience or direction of the public including: accessory residential
signs smaller than three (3) square feet that indicate name, address or
home occupation; signs that indicate the types of credit available at a
business; realty signs; signs with information that is warning in nature,
such as "danger," "no trespassing" or "beware of dog"; signs indicating
temporary events such as a garage sale or open house; political yard
signs; and expressive signs smaller than three (3) square feet.
Sign, Indirect Illumination: Is any illuminated sign which is either a
sign illuminated entirely from an external artificial source or an
illuminated sign which all attached or internal artificial sources of
illumination are not directly visible or are shielded by an opaque
material.
Sign, Large Residential: A type of accessory sign larger than three (3)
square feet that indicates the name and/or address of a residential
activity type that contains four (4) or more dwelling or rooming units; and
shall include a sign at the principal entrance to any subdivision or
residential planned development that contains more than twelve (12)
dwelling units.
Sign, Luminous Background: A sign created by transilluminating or
backlighting of a translucent plastic or glass panel, or panels of similar
material, which may be integrally pigmented, painted, or opaqued.
Sign, Monument: A freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground
which measures at least two-thirds (2/3) the horizontal length of the sign.
Sign, Permanent: Any permitted sign which is not restricted as to the
duration of time it can be displayed.
APP 1-72
Sign, Pole: A sign permanently affixed to the ground by means of one
(1) or more poles, columns, uprights, or braces and not attached to a
building.
Sign, Portable: Any sign which is movable, portable, or designed to be
portable which is in the shape of an "A" frame, panel, or mounted on
wheels or legs of any kind, whether or not permanently affixed to the
ground or buildings.
Sign, Projecting: Any sign that (a) is attached to a wall and projects
outward from the wall more than twelve (12) inches or (b) is suspended
from any structure that constitutes a covering or shelter such as a
canopy, portico, or marquee. Usually, though not always, the face of a
projecting sign will be perpendicular to or from a wide angle with the
surface to which it is attached.
Sign, Realty: A type of incidental sign that temporarily provides
information regarding the sale, lease or rent of the premises or any
improvements thereon which is no larger than nine (9) square feet.
Sign, Roof: Any sign attached to or mounted on any surface defined as
a roof.
Sign, Structure: A structure, including uprights, supports, frames,
display surfaces, and other appurtenances, intended to support and
display one or more signs.
Sign, Temporary: Any sign that has a specific limitation in the amount
of time that it can be displayed. Expressive signs with between three (3)
and fifteen (15) square feet of display surface area shall be treated as
temporary signs.
Sign, Wall: A type of building mounted sign (a) that is attached to a wall
(including parapet wall) or other structure that supports a roof, including
any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy or awning and any sign
attached to any side face of a marquee, (b) that does not project outward
more than twelve (12) inches from the surface to which it is attached, and
(c) in which the sign face is parallel to the plane of the surface to which
it is attached. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-73
4.083 Exempt Signs and Temporary Signs
1. Exempt Signs
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article or from
the requirement to obtain a sign permit.
a. Address and Name of Resident: Signs indicating address
and/or name of residential occupants of the premises, not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area, and not including any
commercial advertising or identification.
b. Artwork: Works of art that do not include any commercial
messages or references.
c. Construction Signs: Temporary signs warning of
construction, excavation, or similar hazards so long as the
hazard may exist.
d. Decals: Decals affixed to windows or door glass panes, such
as indicating membership in a business group or credit
cards accepted at the establishments.
e. Directional Signs: Signs giving on-site directional
assistance for the convenience of the public, not exceeding
two (2) square feet in area or located closer than five (5) feet
to any property line. Directional signs may be internally lit
or illuminated by white light only.
f. Flags, Emblems, Insignia, and Banners: Of any
governmental agency or religious, charitable, public or
nonprofit organization, subject to the following: No single
flag that is flown shall exceed forty (40) square feet in area
and no single zoning lot shall fly more than three (3) such
flags. If the total area of such flags exceeds seventy-two (72)
square feet, the excess area shall be included in the sign
area calculations for the zoning lot. Flagpoles shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. Wall-mounted flags,
emblems, insignia, and barriers shall be limited to one (1)
per zoning lot and shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in
area.
APP 1-74
g. Handicapped Parking Space Sign: Signs not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area reserving parking spaces for
handicapped motorists.
h. Home Occupations Signs: On-premise identification signs
for home occupations shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area and shall contain only the name of the business and/or
business owner. Such signs shall be located on an exterior
wall, window, or door of the premises.
i. Public Signs: Signs erected by government agencies or
utilities including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing,
and identification signs for public facilities, and any signs
erected by the City Commission or under the direction of the
Commission.
k. Seasonal Signs: Signs in the nature of decorations which
are seasonal, clearly incidental and customarily associated
with any national, local, or religious holiday.
l. Security and Warning Signs: On-premise signs regulating
the use of the premises, such as "no trespassing," "no
hunting" and "no soliciting" sings, that do not exceed two (2)
square feet in area in residential areas and five (5) square
feet in commercial and industrial areas.
m. Temporary Political Signs: On premises temporary political
signs may be located in any residential, commercial, or
industrial district. These signs shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet and are permitted in addition to any other signs
permitted by this ordinance. These signs shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the election or political event.
n. Temporary Real Estate Signs: Temporary signs indicating
the availability of real property for lease or sale, located on
the premises being leased or sold. Display of such signs
shall be limited to one (1) per property not exceeding six (6)
feet in height and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in
area in residential zones and eight (8) square feet in area in
all other zones. Such signs shall be removed within seven
(7) days of the settlement or lease of the property.
o. Auction Signs: Signs announcing and directing the public
to the auction site shall be limited to a maximum of five (5)
APP 1-75
signs per event and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet. No sign shall be placed in such a manner that would
obstruct vision of motorist or be a detriment to the functions
of business. All signs shall be removed within one (1)
business day following the event. Any sign not complying
with this ordinance shall be removed at the owner's expense
and be subject to penalty.
2. Temporary Signs Requiring a Sign Permit
The following signs may be erected only after obtaining a
temporary sign permit from the enforcing officer. The permit shall
cite the length of time the sign may be displayed. If any temporary
sign is not removed by the expiration of the appropriate time limit
noted in this section, the Administrator may remove it and charge
the costs of removal to the individual or enterprise responsible.
a. Special Event Signs: Signs announcing special events
including, but not limited to grand openings, new
management, going out of business, and events sponsored
by religious, charitable, or public service groups. Any
business, individual, or organization may display two (2)
temporary signs including portable signs, twice during the
calendar year for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
Such signs shall not be located in any public right-of-way or
in any location that would impair visibility of the motoring
public, and shall be removed immediately following the
event.
b. Temporary Farm Product Signs: Temporary on-premise
signs announcing the availability of seasonal farm products.
The number of signs shall not exceed two (2) and the total
area of all such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet, nor shall any sign exceed six (6) feet in height.
c. Construction Signs: Temporary signs announcing new
buildings, or projects, erected after the commencement of
building construction or site development. Each
construction site shall be limited to one (1) construction sign
not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight
(8) feet on height, which shall be removed by the time a
permanent sign is erected or a certificate of occupancy for
APP 1-76
the building is issued, whichever occurs first. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
4.084 General Provisions
1. General Standards
a. No sign except for those specified in Subsection 4.083, 1,
shall be erected until a permit has been obtained in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
b. No sign shall resemble or approximate the size, shape, form,
or color of any official traffic control sign, signal, or device.
c. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with
the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic control sign, or
with driver vision at any access points.
d. On any corner lot no sign shall be erected or placed in a
manner to impede or obstruct vision between a height of two
and one half (2 ½) and ten (10) feet above the center line
grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points
along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the
intersection.
e. No sign other than duly authorized governmental signs
shall be erected or maintained within any public street
right-of-way.
f. No sign shall be painted on or attached to any trees, rocks,
fence posts, utility poles, or similar structures or objects.
g. No sign shall obstruct any doorway, window, or fire escape.
h. The light from any illuminated sign shall be so directed,
shaded, or shielded that the light intensity or brightness
shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises
nor affect in any way the safe vision of operators of moving
vehicles. Light shall not be permitted to shine or reflect on
or into any residential structure.
i. All pole and monument signs shall be limited to no more
than eight (8) items of information.
APP 1-77
2. Surface Area Display Standards
a. The supports or uprights and any covering thereon on which
one or more signs is mounted shall not be included in the
display surface area.
b. On signs in which the copy together with the background
are designed as an integrated unit separate from the
structure on which the sign is mounted, the display surface
area shall be the total area within a perimeter that encloses
the entire sign copy of background.
c. On signs that do not have a distinct background separate
from the structure on which the sign is mounted, the display
surface area shall be the area within a continuous single
perimeter composed of one or more rectangles, circles,
and/or triangles that enclose the extreme limits of the copy
considered to be the sign.
d. When two (2) sign faces of the same shape and dimensions
are mounted back to back on the same sign structure and
are either parallel or from an angle not exceeding thirty (30)
degrees, only one of the sign faces shall be used to compute
the display surface area. If the angle of the sign faces
exceeds thirty (30) degrees, then both faces shall be used to
compute the display surface area.
e. In any district which permits advertising signs the
computation of display surface area shall include both
advertising and accessory signs.
f. On a corner lot, a permitted sign may be located along each
street frontage.
3. Height of Signs
The following general rules shall apply in the determination of the height
of signs.
a. The height of any sign shall be measured to the topmost
point of the sign or sign structure from the average grade
level at the base of the supports of the base of any sign
directly attached to the ground.
APP 1-78
b. The height of signs placed on berms, mounds, or similar
landscape features or on hills or mounds left after a lot is
graded shall be measured from the finished or established
grade around such features.
4. Signs Prohibited in All Districts
The following signs or types of signs are prohibited in all districts
and are hereby declared to be illegal.
a. Any sign that is abandoned, deteriorated, unsafe, or not
otherwise identified as defined in this ordinance;
b. Any sign which is painted on or attached to a vehicle or a
vehicular trailer unless such vehicle is in operable condition,
carrying all current and valid licenses, and used primarily
for the transportation of goods and/or persons in the
everyday and ordinary course of business of the owner
thereof;
c. Signs which are made structurally sound by guy wires or
unsightly bracing;
d. Signs which contain any kind of strobe or pulsating lights;
e. Banner signs that over hang any public right-of-way;
f. Any sign with direct illumination provided by exposed bulbs
or lamps;
g. Off-premise signs, except as permitted in Subsection 4.086,
2, a;
h. Flashing signs;
i. Handtacked signs, on utility poles, fence posts and trees;
j. Portable signs, except as permitted in Subsection 4.083, 2,
a;
k. Roof signs. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-79
4.085 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts
Withing the residential districts, the following signs are permitted subject
to the provisions as set forth herein.
1. Community Facility Activities
a. A community facility activity may have one (1) civic sign
constructed as a monument sign or a wall sign.
b. A monument sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height and
twenty-five (25) square feet in size. Ground signs which are
integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood
architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be
permanently landscaped, may exceed four (4) feet in height
to a maximum of six (6) feet.
c. A wall sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in size.
d. Civic signs may be illuminated by indirect means or with
luminous background, provided that the light source does
not illuminate surrounding properties.
e. Civic signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way
and property lines, a minimum of eight (8) feet.
2. Development Signs
a. A development sign may be located at the major entrance to
a new development. Said sign shall be removed within one
(1) year of the approval of the development by the planning
commission, provided that in the case of a multi-year
development the time for removal may be extended by the
enforcing officer one (1) additional year for each year the
development is under continuous construction. Such signs
may be either a pole or ground sign.
b. A development sign shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet in size nor fifteen (15) feet in height.
c. A development sign shall not be lighted.
d. Any development sign shall be set back from the street
right-of-way a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
APP 1-80
3. Large Residential Signs
a. Subdivision identification signs may be permitted at the
main entrances to a subdivision.
b. Each subdivision is allowed a maximum of two (2)
identification signs located at main entrances. These signs
are to be located on private property or in a median if one is
present.
c. All subdivision identification signs shall be integrally
designed as a part of a permanently constructed and
maintained wall, fence, or similar feature or shall be a
ground sign. All such areas shall be attractively
landscaped.
d. A subdivision identification sign shall not exceed twentyfive
(25) square feet in size.
e. The maximum height of such signs shall be four (4) feet
when constructed as a ground sign. Ground signs which are
integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood
agricultural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be
permanently landscaped, may exceed four (4) feet in height
to a maximum of six (6) feet.
f. All subdivision identification signs and the attendant
landscaped area shall be owned and maintained either by
the owner/developer or by a legally established homeowners
association.
g. Any lighting on such signs shall be integrated into the
entrance feature and shall be subdued and shall light only
such sign. No light shall shine or reflect on or into any
residential structure. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-81
4.086 Permitted Signs in Commercial and Industrial Districts1
Within the commercial and industrial districts, the following signs are
permitted subject to the provisions as set forth herein.
1. Commercial District Signs
Within the C-1, C-3, C-4, and C-5 Districts, the following standards
for signs shall apply:
a. Accessory business and civic signs are permitted and shall
be either wall or projecting signs, except as set forth in
Subsections d, e, and f, below. All other sign types are
prohibited.
b. A use may be permitted to have one (1) projecting sign
attached to the front of the building subject to the following
standards:
(1) Such sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in
display surface area.
(2) Such sign shall not project into the public right-ofway
more than six (6) feet provided that in no case
shall such sign be closer than two (2) feet from the
curb or edge of pavement of the travelway, (C-1
Districts only).
(3) Such sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height
measured from the bottom of the sign provided that
1Ord. #911 which provided amendments to this section also provides:
Additional signage may be permitted on the building(s) within the
complex and shall be wallsigns, projecting signs, or signage painted on
glass windows or a combination thereof. Such signage shall be in scale
with the wall of the building upon which it is located and be
architecturally compatible. The display area of such signage shall not
exceed fifteen (15) percent of the square footage of such wall and may be
apportioned for multiple occupants with each occupant entitled to an
equal share of the display surface area.
The ordinance did not specify the placement of these provisions in the
section.
APP 1-82
in no case shall such sign extend above the roof line
of the building to which it is attached.
(4) Such sign shall clear the established grade by a
minimum of ten (10) feet.
(5) Such sign shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet to
any other projecting sign.
(6) The copy information shall be limited to the
identification of the owner, address, name and/or
principal activity conducted on the premises.
c. Wall signs are permitted subject to the following standards:
(1) All signs are limited to fifteen (15) percent of the wall
surface area below the roof line of the building.
(2) Such sign shall be located on the front wall of the
building which is oriented to the street from which
access is derived. For uses with two street frontages,
wall signs may be located on a wall for each frontage.
For uses not oriented to a public street, the wall
considered to be the front of the use shall be used for
location of such signage.
(3) Such sign shall not extend above the roof line of the
building to which it is attached nor shall such sign
project outward from the building more than twelve
(12) inches.
(4) Such sign placed in the horizontal space between
windows of a two (2) story building shall not exceed
in height more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance
between the top of the window below and the sill of
the window above.
(5) Such sign shall not cover or interrupt major
architectural features of the building.
(6) If a use utilizes both wall and projecting signs, the
total display surface area shall not exceed eighty (80)
square feet.
APP 1-83
(7) The copy information shall be limited to the
identification of the owner, address, name and/or
principal activity conducted on the premises.
d. If a use on a lot is set back from the public right-of-way a
minimum of thirty (30) feet and has off-street parking, then
such use may utilize one (1) ground or pole sign subject to
the following standards. All other signs on the same lot
shall be wall signs.
(1) Such sign shall not exceed a maximum of one
hundred (100) feet on any single sign or two hundred
(200) feet for lots with more than one street frontage.
(2) The maximum height of a pole sign shall be thirty
(30) feet and of a ground sign four (4) feet. Ground
signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, or
stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm,
all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may
exceed four (4) feet in height to a maximum of six (6)
feet.
(3) The number of signs permitted on a sign structure
shall be limited to one (1) sign, except that an
additional sign which is a changeable copy sign may
be permitted with a maximum display surface area of
twenty (20) square feet.
(4) Signs shall be setback from the public right-of-way to
meet the following standards:
a. Signs with 100 square feet or less 8 feet
b. Signs exceeding 100 square feet 16 feet
e. A commercial complex of two (2) or more acres, which is set
back from the right-of-way a minimum of thirty (30) feet
and has off-street parking may utilize the following
provisions:
(1) A commercial complex may be permitted one (1) pole
or ground sign for each street frontage identifying the
name of the complex or business. In the event a
street frontage is in excess of two hundred fifty (250)
feet in length, one (1) additional such sign shall be
APP 1-84
permitted. The maximum size of each such sign shall
be a ratio of ½ to 1 of square footage of sign area to
the length of the street frontage or the front facade of
the building, whichever is greater, with a maximum
sign area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Such
sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height or the
height of the building, whichever is less, if a pole
sign; or four (4) feet in height if a ground sign.
Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive
brick, stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth
berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped,
may exceed four (4) feet in height to a maximum of
six (6) six feet. In the event the above ratio results in
a sign less than fifty (50) square feet in size, then a
minimum size sign of fifty (50) square feet shall be
permitted.
(2) Additional signage may be permitted on the
building(s) within the complex and shall be either
wall signs, projecting signs, or signage painted on
glass windows or a combination thereof. Such
signage shall be in scale with the size of the wall of
the building upon which it is located and be
architecturally compatible. The display surface area
of such signage shall not exceed five (5) percent of the
square footage of such wall and may be apportioned
for multiple occupants with each occupant being
entitled to an equal share of the display surface area.
(3) In lieu of a pole or ground sign identifying the name
of the complex, such commercial complex may utilize
a directory sign identifying individual occupancies
subject to the same size requirements as in
paragraph (1), above.
(4) A directory sign listing the names of individual
businesses or occupancies may be permitted at the
entrance to the parking lot or at the entrance of each
building. The maximum display surface area shall
not exceed ten (10) square feet and the maximum
height shall be six (6) feet.
f. Signs may be illuminated subject to the following standards:
APP 1-85
(1) Exposed bulbs or luminous tubes are prohibited.
(2) No sign shall change color or intensity.
(3) In no event shall the light from any illuminated sign
exceed one (1) foot candle at the property line of any
lot that is zoned residential or agricultural.
(4) The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded,
shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or
brightness shall not adversely affect the surrounding
or facing premises nor adversely affect safe vision of
operators of vehicles moving on public or private
streets or parking areas. Light shall not shine or
reflect on or into any residential structure.
2. Highway Commercial and Industrial District Signs
Within the C-2, 1-1 and 1-2, Districts, the following standards for
signs shall apply:
a. Accessory business and civic signs are permitted as follows:
(1) Each land use is permitted to have one (1) ground or
pole sign for each street frontage. The maximum
display area for each sign is limited to two hundred
(200) square feet per sign. The maximum display
area for all signs on the same lot is limited to three
hundred (300) square feet.
(2) The maximum height shall be thirty (30) feet for a
pole sign and four (4) feet for a ground sign. Ground
signs which are integrated into an attractive brick,
stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm,
all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may
exceed four (4) feet in height to a maximum of six (6)
feet.
(3) Signs shall be setback from the public right-of-way to
meet the following standards:
a. Signs with 100 square feet or less 8 feet
b. Signs exceeding 100 square feet 16 feet
APP 1-86
(4) The number of signs permitted on a sign structure
shall be limited to one (1) sign except that an
additional sign which is a changeable copy sign may
be permitted with a maximum display surface area of
twenty (20) square feet.
(5) In addition to the signage permitted above, a use on
a lot shall be allowed to have wall signs or signage
painted on glass at the entrance to the building. Wall
signs shall be subject to the standards contained
above in Subsection 4.086, 1, c.
(6) A commercial complex shall be subject to the
provisions contained above in Subsection 4.086, 1, e.
b. This section shall apply one to those uses engaged in the
retail petroleum and petroleum products business. The
following additional provisions shall apply:
Each such use shall be permitted:
(1) One (1) permanent price sign per street frontage.
Such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
size and shall not identify more than three (3)
products. Such sign shall be setback from the rightof-
way a minimum of ten (10) feet and shall be no
closer than thirty (30) feet from any street
intersection.
(2) Two (2) nonilluminated self-service or full-service
signs per pump island. Such signs shall not exceed
one hundred sixty (160) square inches per sign and
shall be located at the ends of the pump island
perpendicular to the street.
(3) Federal and State stamps, octane, ratings, pump use
directions, prices, and no smoking signs as required
by Federal, State, and local authorities. Such signs
shall be located on the body of the pump.
c. This section shall be applicable only to movie houses or
theaters. The following additional provisions shall apply:
APP 1-87
(1) In lieu of a wall sign or in combination therewith, a
marquee structure may be permitted which may have
signage thereon. Such marquee may project over a
private sidewalk or driveway but not over a public
right-of-way. Such marquee structure shall be
permanently attached to the principal building.
(2) Where the building contains more than one (1)
theater, additional display surface area may be
permitted up to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet
of sign area for each theater. This sign area shall be
in addition to an identification sign for the theater(s).
d. Signs may be illuminated subject to the standards as
specified above in Subsection 4.086.1, f.
3. Off-Premise Commercial Sign Lot
Within the C-1, C-2 and C-3 Districts the following standards shall
apply to off-premise commercial signs:
a. Free standing commercial signs are permitted as principal
use on lots where no other principal use is established,
providing the applicant meet the following standards. In
the event the owner proposes to locate any other use of the
lot, it will be required to remove the sign.
b. All lots considered for use under this section shall meet the
minimum size of the district it is to be located in, or is to be
approved as an existing nonconforming lot by the Board of
Appeals.
c. All off-premise signs shall meet the following standards:
(1) No sign shall exceed 240 square feet in display area.
(2) No part of any sign shall be closer than forty (40) feet
to any public right-of-way.
(3) Such signs shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in
height above the finished grade.
(4) Such signs shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet
from any adjacent property line. In the event that a
APP 1-88
sign lot is adjacent to a residential district the
established setback for the district shall apply. All
buffers required by the ordinance shall apply.
(5) With the exception of the area where the sign is
located, the lots shall remain or be covered in grass,
groundcover or landscaping.
d. Lighting of these signs shall be internal or in a manner that
shields the light source from sight. All other site lighting is
prohibited.
e. All signs that move or are animated shall be designed in
compliance with all established Traffic Safety standards and
in compliance with all State and Federal laws.
f. Before a permit is granted for any off-premise sign a site
plan in compliance with section 7.030 B, 2 shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #841, April
1996, Ord. #901, March 1999, and Ord. #911, Oct. 1999)
4.087 Temporary Sign Provisions
Temporary signs shall be permitted for any lawful activity on a lot or
parcel subject to the provisions set forth herein.
1. General Requirements
a. All temporary signs are required to obtain a yearly permit
to place one (1) temporary sign on a parcel or lot. Each
permit shall be issued for a twelve (12) month period to be
renewed each year. These permits will be twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) to assist in the cost of administration of
these regulations.
b. Concerns which are actively engaged in the sign rental
business and hold a current business license with the City
of Lawrenceburg for this type business, will be eligible to
purchase an annual permit for one hundred dollars
($100.00). This annual permit will cover up to twenty (20)
temporary signs. If additional permits are required by the
concern, they will be issued at the price of five dollars
($5.00) each.
APP 1-89
c. Banners may be used as temporary signs, if they do not
overhang any public right-of-way.
d. All such signs shall be securely anchored or fastened and
positioned in place so as not to constitute a hazard of any
kind.
e. No temporary sign shall be displayed on a roof.
f. No temporary sign shall be permitted to project into or over
any public street right-of-way.
g. Temporary signs are permitted at construction sites for the
purpose of identifying names of contractors, consultants,
etc.
2. Display Surface Area, Height, and Illumination
a. Maximum display surface area shall be thirty-five (35)
square feet.
b. Maximum height shall be ten (10) feet.
c. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated except in
commercial or industrial districts.
d. Any sign that is lighted shall be done in compliance with the
National Electrical Code.
3. Location of Temporary Signs
a. All temporary signs shall setback a minimum of eight (8)
feet, from any street right-of-way, unless an alternate
location is approved by the building inspector in special
cases. No temporary graphic shall overhang or encroach on
any street right-of-way at any time.
b. The minimum distance between any two (2) such signs on
the same lot shall be seventy-five (75) feet. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
APP 1-90
4.088 Nonconforming and Noncomplying Sign Provisions
Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance
but which is not permitted either by type of sign, location, or district or
which fails to meet the standards on regulations shall be classified as
either nonconforming or noncomplying as per definitions.
1. Removal of Temporary Nonconforming Signs
Nonconforming portable and handtacked signs and signs in a
public right-of-way shall be removed within forty-five (45) days.
Nonconforming, flashing or animated signs shall be caused to stop
flashing or animation within forty-five (45) days.
2. Alterations to Nonconforming and Noncomplying Signs
A nonconforming or noncomplying sign may be altered subject to
the following conditions.
a. The proposed alteration is not greater than fifty (50) percent
of the total sign structure or alteration costs are not greater
than fifty (50) percent of its depreciated value.
b. The total copy of an advertising sign may be changed in
accordance with normal business practices.
c. The proposed alteration conforms to the provisions of this
ordinance.
d. No new nonconformance or noncompliance is created.
3. Damage or Destruction of Nonconforming and Noncomplying Signs
When any such sign is damaged or destroyed from any cause to the
extent of fifty (50) percent of the sign structure or to the extent of
fifty (50) percent of its depreciated value at the time of its damage
or destruction, the sign shall be removed or otherwise made to
conform or comply with all appropriate provisions of this
ordinance.
Except that any advertising sign located within six hundred-sixty
(660) feet, of a Federal highway, as defined by the Federal
Highway Beautification Act and oriented to that highway shall not
APP 1-91
be removed until compensation can be made to the extent required
by law. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.090 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS
The following regulations are intended to supplement the state health
regulations established by the Tennessee Trailer Court Act of 1957, Section
68-24-101 through 68-24-120, Tennessee Code Annotated, by ensuring a
minimum standard of site development for mobile home parks where permitted
as a special exception in a zoning district.
A. Mobile Home Park Building Permit
1. The application for a "mobile home park permit" shall be filed with
the Building Inspector, after the applicant has obtained all permits
for water and sewer service. However, construction or extension
of a mobile home park may not commence within the area of
jurisdiction of this ordinance until a mobile home park building
permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. The mobile
home park building permit may be issued only upon approval of
the special exception by the Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning
Appeals. The Board shall act upon an application for a permit
after receipt of a report from the Lawrenceburg Regional Planning
Commission. The Board may attach whatever conditions it sees fit
to the permit in order to protect the neighborhood or adjoining
properties.
2. Site Plan Required
A mobile home park building permit may only be issued for
construction or extension of a mobile home park upon submission
and approval by both the Planning Commission and the Board of
Appeals of a site development plan containing the following
information.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The location, area, and dimensions of the proposed mobile
home park site as well as a legal description.
c. The location, size, and number of all mobile home spaces.
d. The location and size of all buildings, improvements, and
facilities (including roads, water, sewer, refuse disposal).
APP 1-92
e. The proposed use of buildings shown on the site plan.
f. The location and size of all points of entry and exit for motor
vehicles and the internal circulation plan (roadways and
pedestrian walkways).
g. The location and number of all off-street parking facilities.
h. The location of park and recreation areas.
i. A complete drainage plan with contour lines at five (5) foot
intervals.
j. A location map showing the park site in relation to the
existing public street pattern and indication of uses of
property adjacent to the site and the location of all buildings
within two hundred (200) feet of the site.
k. A time schedule for development shall be prepared which
shall demonstrate the applicant's readiness and ability to
provide the proposed services. Said time shall be for a
period of not more than one (1) year.
l. Such other architectural, engineering, and topographical
data as may be required to permit the county health
department, the Building Inspector, the Planning
Commission, and the Board of Zoning Appeals to determine
if the provision of these regulations are being complied with
shall be submitted with the site plan.
3. Inspection Fee
An inspection fee shall be required for approval of a mobile home
park which shall be made upon submission of a plan for approval.
After completion of construction, a final inspection shall be made
at no additional charge.
a. The inspection fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year plus
two dollars ($2.00) per space. The fee is nonrefundable.
b. The inspection fee shall be paid annually upon inspection of
the mobile home park by the Building Inspector.
APP 1-93
B. Development Standards
1. General
a. A mobile home park shall be located only as a special
exception within those districts where permitted.
b. No part of the park shall be used for nonresidential
purposes, except such uses as are required for the direct
servicing and well being of park residents and for the
management and maintenance of the park. Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the
sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and
connected to the pertinent utilities.
c. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and
topography shall not create hazards to the property or the
health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be
exposed to objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors or other
adverse influences, and no portion subject to flooding or
erosion and shall be used for any purpose which would
expose persons of property to hazards.
2. Minimum Development Size
No mobile home park shall be approved which contains less than
five (5) acres in area or has less than fifteen (15) mobile home
spaces.
3. Dimensional Requirements for Parks
a. Along the entire periphery of the mobile home park, yards
and setbacks meeting the district regulations shall be
provided.
b. Within the interior portions of the mobile home park, no
yards except as required to meet other provisions set forth
in this section are required.
c. No building structure erected or stationed in a mobile home
park shall have a height greater than two (2) stories or
thirty (30) feet.
APP 1-94
d. Each mobile home park shall be permitted to display, on
each street frontage, one (1) identifying sign of a maximum
size of twenty (20) square feet. Said sign(s) shall contain
thereon only the name and address of the park and may be
lighted by indirect lighting only.
4. Spacing of Mobile Homes and Site Coverage
a. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there
shall be at least a twenty-five (25) foot clearance between
mobile homes; for mobile homes parked end-to-end, the endto-
end clearance may be less than twenty-five (25) feet, but
not less than fifteen (15) feet. No mobile home shall be
located closer than twenty (20) feet from any building
within the park.
b. There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between
the nearest edge of any mobile home and an abutting access
streets.
c. Each mobile home stand shall not occupy an area in excess
of twenty-five (25) percent of the respective lot area. The
total area occupied by the mobile home and its accessory
structures shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the
respective lot area.
5. The Mobile Home Lot
a. General
The limits of each mobile home lot shall be marked on the
ground by suitable means. Location of lot limits on the
ground shall be the same as shown on accepted plans. No
lot shall be smaller than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. Mobile Home Stands
The mobile home stands shall be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the
mobile home. The stand shall not heave, shift or settle
unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to frost
action, inadequate drainage, vibration, wind or other forces
acting on the structure. In addition, such stand shall
APP 1-95
comply with the publication of FHA "Minimum Property
Standards for Mobile Home Parks," May, 1977.
c. Outdoor Living Area
Each mobile home lot should be provided with an outdoor
living and service area. Such area should be improved as
necessary to assure reasonable privacy and comfort. The
minimum area should be not less than two hundred (200)
square feet and shall be paved.
d. Tenant storage shall be provided for each mobile home at
the rear of the mobile home space.
6. Utilities and Other Services
a. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water
shall be provided in each mobile home development on
trunk lines not less than six (6) inches. Where a public
supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality, and
pressure is available at the site or at the boundary of the
site, connection shall be made thereto and its supply use
exclusively.
b. Each mobile home site shall be provided with the connection
to the sanitary sewer line or to a sewer system approved by
the Lawrence County Health Department and the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
c. Solid waste collection stands shall be provided for waste
containers for each mobile home. Any central waste
container shall be screened from view with access
appropriately provided.
d. Service buildings, housing sanitation and laundry facilities,
shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable
ordinances and statutes, regulations, buildings, electrical
installations, and plumbing and sanitation systems.
e. Each mobile home park shall be equipped with fire hydrants
spaced no more than five hundred (500) feet apart. The
water system shall be capable of providing a required fire
flow of five hundred (500) gallons per minute for a one (1)
hour duration.
APP 1-96
f. Each mobile home park shall be maintained free of litter
and accumulation of any kind of debris which may provide
rodent harborage or breeding places for files, mosquitos, or
other pests.
7. Streets
Entrances to mobile home parks shall have direct connections to
a public street and shall be designed to allow free movement of
traffic on the adjacent public street. Safe and convenient vehicular
access shall be provided from abutting public streets to each
mobile home lot. Such access shall be provided by streets or
driveways. All internal streets shall be private.
a. Circulation
The internal street systems should provide convenient
circulation by means of minor streets and properly located
collector streets. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length
to five hundred (500) feet and their closed end shall be
provided with an adequate turn-around with a minimum
diameter of eighty (80) feet.
b. Pavement Widths
Pavement widths shall be as follows:
Collector Street with no Parking
with On-Street Parking
20 feet
36 feet
Minor Street with no Parking
with On-Street Parking
18 feet
34 feet
One-Way Minor Street
with no Parking
with On-Street Parking
12 feet
28 feet
c. Construction
The internal streets and drives shall be paved in accordance
with city road standards.
APP 1-97
8. Walks
All mobile home developments shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for
intended use, durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between
locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common
walks shall have a minimum width of three and one-half (3 ½) feet.
All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks,
streets, driveways and parking spaces by individual walks. Such
individual walks shall have a minimum width of two (2) feet.
9. Recreation Area
Adequate recreation facilities for the residents of the project shall
be provided in locations easily accessible to the living units and
where they do not impair the view and privacy of living units.
Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be provided, appropriate in
size, type and number to the needs of the residents.
Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size and number shall be
provided where it is anticipated that children will occupy the
premises.
10. Buffer and Screening
A landscape buffer shall be provided along the perimeter of the site
boundaries not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, except that a
minimum buffer area from any public street shall be no less than
twenty (20) feet.
Within the landscaped buffer, a continuous fence six (6) to eight (8)
feet high or landscaped screen shall be provided. Such fence shall
be opaque and such screening shall be a year-round evergreen four
(4) feet wide and at least four (4) feet high at the time of planting
and expected to achieve a height of six (6) feet within three (3)
years. No landscaped screen or fence shall be provided within
fifteen (15) feet of any vehicular entrance and/or exit to the park.
APP 1-98
11. Site Design
The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site
features; and additional new plant material shall be added for
privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out
objectionable features. The planting plan shall be submitted with
the site development plan.
Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be
retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective
as a screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes.
12. Parking
Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.010.
a. Off-Street Parking
Paved off-street parking may be grouped in bays either
adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks or on the
mobile home lot. Such parking areas shall generally be
located in close proximity to the dwelling units they are
designed to serve. At least one (1) parking space per
dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a maximum
walking distance of fifty (50) feet from the nearest entrance
of the dwelling unit the space is to serve.
C. Responsibility of Park Management
1. The permittee shall operate the mobile home park in compliance
with this ordinance and shall provide adequate supervision to
maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and
in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The permittee shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this ordinance and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this ordinance.
3. The permittee shall supervise the placement of each mobile home
on its mobile home stand to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector which includes securing its stability to anchor pins and
installing all utility connections.
APP 1-99
4. The permittee shall maintain a register containing the following
information:
a. The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
b. The name and address of the owner of each mobile home
and motor vehicle by which it was towed.
c. The make, model, year, and license number of each mobile
home and motor vehicle.
d. The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home.
5. The mobile home park shall keep the register record available for
inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health
officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of
the information contained in the register.
6. The register record shall not be destroyed for a period of three (3)
years following the date of departure of the registrant from the
park.
7. The permittee shall notify the health authority immediately of any
suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park.
8. The permit to operate shall be conspicuously posted in the mobile
home park office at all times.
9. The permittee shall be answerable for the violation of any
provision of this section.
D. Responsibilities of Park Occupants
1. The park occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements
of this ordinance and shall maintain his/her mobile home lot, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
2. The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the
mobile home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of
all utility connections and anchoring in accordance with the
instruction of the park management.
APP 1-100
3. Skirtings, awnings, and other additions shall be installed only if
permitted and approved by the park management. When
installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space
immediately underneath each mobile home shall be used for
storage only if permitted by the park management. If permitted,
the following conditions shall be satisfied:
< The storage area shall be provided with a base of
impervious material.
< Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere
with the underneath inspection of the mobile home.
< The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
4. The park occupant shall store and dispose of all rubbish and
garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage
container shall be rodent proof, insect proof, and watertight.
5. Fire extinguishers for Class B and C fires shall be kept at the
premises and maintained in working condition.
6. All park occupants shall be required to register their pets (dogs
and cats) with the park management.
7. All park occupants shall be required to have their pets (dogs and
cats) on a leash and shall not be allowed to roam free and
unleashed.
8. Park occupants shall not be allowed to construct or place pens for
animals on the park premises.
9. No inoperative automobiles, junk, or noncontained trash shall be
allowed within the park.
E. Inspections
1. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
annual inspections to determine the conditions of mobile home
parks, in order to insure the health and safety of occupants of
mobile home parks and of the general public.
2. The Building Inspector shall have the power to enter upon any
private and public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the annual inspection as it is
related to the enforcement of this section.
APP 1-101
3. Penalties
a. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined
not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense.
b. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
c. Any extension of an existing mobile home park is considered
a noncomplying use and is hereby prohibited unless said
park is brought up to the standards herein stated.
F. Revocation of Permit
The Board may revoke any permit to maintain and operate a park
when the permittee has been found guilty by a court of competent
jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this section. After such
conviction, the permit may be reissued if the circumstances leading
to conviction have been remedied and the park is being operated
and maintained in full compliance with this section.
G. Prohibited Structures
1. Cabanas, travel trailers, and other similarly enclosed structures
are prohibited.
2. Trailers with or without toilet facilities that cannot be connected
to approved sewer systems shall not be permitted in a mobile home
park.
3. Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential uses within a mobile home park, except that one (1)
mobile home in the park may be used to house a rental office.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.100 ALTERNATIVE PROVISIONS FOR LOT SIZE AND THE
LOCATION OF OPEN SPACE
The purpose of this section is to provide a permissive voluntary alternative
procedure to be utilized in the placement of buildings and in the location of open
spaces associated therewith. These provisions are intended to provide
variations in lot size and open space requirements within the residential
APP 1-102
districts. The density standards established for individual districts are to be
maintained on an overall basis and thereby provide desirable and proper open
air space, tree cover, recreation areas or scenic vistas; all with the intent of
preserving the natural beauty of the area, while at the same time maintaining
the necessary maximum population density limitations of the district in which
this procedure may be permitted.
A. General Provisions
The provisions contained within this section are intended to provide a
flexible procedure for locating dwellings upon sites. As such, the
provisions do not constitute a use, but an alternative procedure for the
spacing of buildings and the use of open areas surrounding those
buildings. It is necessary, however, that the purposes and intent of this
ordinance be assured and that proper light, air, and privacy be made
available for each dwelling unit.
A site development plan as provided for in this section is required not
only as an accurate statement of the development, but as an enforceable
legal instrument whereby the Planning Commission may be assured that
the general purposes, standards, etc., contained in this section are being
met.
B. Site development Plan Required
1. Contents
A site development plan containing the information required by
Section 7.030, shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning
Commission for its review and approval along with a sketch plat
as required by the Subdivision Regulations.
2. Coordinated Review
Upon receipt of a site development plan and sketch plat containing
information as required above, the Planning Commission may:
a. Concurrently review the site development plan and sketch
plat
b. Jointly approve, approve with modification, or disapprove
these documents; and
APP 1-103
c. In the instance of approval, or approval with modification,
transfer the site development plan to the Building inspector
for enforcement.
3. Enforcement
Upon approval of a site development plan, the Building Inspector
shall become responsible for enforcement of the plan. Only
minimal adjustments involving the placement of any structure will
be permitted once a site development plan has been approved. Any
other change shall require submission of a proposed amendment
to the approved. plan.
C. Development Standards
The following standards and requirements shall apply to all alternative
density developments.
1. General Standards for Development
In the interest of promoting the most appropriate economical use
of the land while assuring that the character of the residential
district is maintained, the Planning Commission in its review of a
proposed development shall consider the following:
a. The protection of the characters, property values, privacy
and other characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood;
b. The provision for surface drainage control, sewage disposal,
and water supply, recreation and traffic control; and
c. The preservation and protection of existing trees, ground
cover, top soil, streams, rock outcroppings and scenic or
historic sites from dangers and damage caused by excessive
and poorly planned grading for streets and building sites.
2. Availability of Public Utilities
Generally all public utilities, specifically including water and a
central sewage collection and treatment system, as defined by this
ordinance, shall be available. Where public sewer is not available,
no lot or housing site may be created which is less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area and all septic fields for each
APP 1-104
dwelling unit shall be located within the area of fee simple
ownership of said dwelling unit.
3. Permitted Density
The density permitted is intended to be within the range of that
permitted within more typical developments offering no common
open space. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
shall be computed as follows:
a. From the gross acreage available within the development
shall be subtracted: (1) Any portion of the site which is
within the right-of-way and/or easement for major utilities
such as gas or electric transmission lines where the full use
of the land is not available to the landowner, because of
restrictions thereon; (2) Any portion of the site which lies
within a floodway district.
b. The area remaining after the above adjustments shall be
divided by the minimum development area per dwelling
unit for the district in which the dwelling unit is located.
For developments located in more than one zoning district,
the density shall be computed separately for that portion of
the development lying within each district. No
developmental density may be transferred across zoning
district boundaries.
4. Minimum Lot Area and Lot Width
No lot of record may be created within the district indicated which
has less area than required for the type dwelling indicated.
The following dimensional requirements shall be maintained in all
alternative density developers:
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
Minimum Lot Size 15,000 10,000 7,000 5,000
Lot Width at Building Line 100 75 75 60
Front Yard Setback 40 40 30 30
Rear Yard Setback 15 15 10 10
Side Yard Setback 10 10 5 5
APP 1-105
5. Yard Requirements
Within any development approved under the provisions of this
section, the following yard requirements shall apply:
a. For units located entirely within the interior of a site no
yards as such are required. However, each dwelling unit
shall on its own lot have one yard containing not less than
fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet. This yard shall be
reasonably secluded from view from streets and from
neighboring property and shall not be used for off-street
parking or for any accessory building.
b. In addition to the provisions of Subsection a., above, for
units located along the periphery of the site, the basic yard
provisions established for the district within which the
development is located shall apply along all portions of such
lots as may abut the periphery, excepting any portion of
such lots as may involve the use of party walls.
6. Lot Coverage
Individual dwellings may exceed the maximum lot coverage
provisions established for the district in which such site is located.
However, in no instance shall the aggregated site coverage of all
dwellings exceed the coverage provisions established for the
district in which such site is located. In the event a project lies
within two or more zoning districts, the coverage ratio applicable
to each zone district shall apply to these dwellings located within
it. No transfer of bulk is permitted among zoning districts.
7. Access to Dwellings
Access to each lot shall be in compliance with Section 3.030, of this
ordinance.
8. Pedestrian Circulation
The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall
be insulated as completely as possible from the street system in
order to provide separation of pedestrian underpasses or
overpasses in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping
areas, and other neighborhood uses which generate a considerable
amount of pedestrian traffic.
APP 1-106
D. Open Space Requirements
Any common open space provided within a development this type shall:
1. Quality Use and Improvement of Common Open Space
a. Common open space must be for amenity or recreational
purposes. The uses authorized for common open space must
be appropriate to the scale and character of the development
considering its size, density, expected population,
topography and other factors.
b. No common open space may be put to any use not specified
in the approved final development plan, unless such plan
has been amended and approved by the Planning
Commission. However, no change authorized may be
considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the
use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce
these covenants against any use permitted are expressly
reserved.
c. Common open space may, subject to approval by the
Planning Commission, shall consist of either improved or
unimproved land. In this regard, the approving agency may
determine that all or part of stream areas, bodies of water
and slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent may be included
in common open space. In making this determination, the
approving agency shall be guided by the extent of these
areas in relation to the development and the degree to
which these areas contribute to the quality, livability, and
amenity of the development.
2. Mandatory Provisions Governing Organization and Operation of
Maintenance Association
In an instance where common open space is to be deeded to a
maintenance organization, the developer shall file a declaration of
covenants and restrictions that will govern the association. This
document is to be submitted with the application for final approval
of the development plan. The provisions shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
a. The maintenance organization must be established and
operational before any homes are sold.
APP 1-107
b. Membership must be mandatory for each home buyer and
must run with the land so that any successive purchaser
will automatically become a member.
c. The restrictions covering the use, etc., of the open space
must be permanent, not just for a period of years.
d. The association(s) must be responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of all facilities
and lands deeded to it.
e. Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost
assessed by the maintenance association; said assessment
by the association can become a lien on the homeowner's
property for failure to pay.
f. The association must be able to adjust the assessment of
fees to meet changing needs. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.110 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR AUTOMOBILE WRECKING,
JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS
A site development plan specified in Section 7.030, shall be submitted for review
on all proposals subject to this provision. The approval of said plan along with
any accompanying conditions associated with a particular development is
precedent to any approval under this section. The Planning Commission is the
agency responsible for this review.
Because of the nature and character of their operations, automobile wrecking
and salvage yards, junk yards, and similar uses of land can have a decidedly
detrimental effect upon surrounding properties. Salvage and wrecking yards
tend to create problems of noise, dust, traffic and health hazards, and may
adversely affect property value by their general appearance. The following
standards shall be used as a guide in evaluating whether proposed land uses,
such as those outlined above, will have properly minimized their objectionable
characteristics.
A. All motor vehicles stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept
that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may
breed and so that they will not constitute a place or places in which
rats, mice, or other vermin may be harbored, reared, or
propagated.
APP 1-108
B. Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the breeding
of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than one
thousand (1,000) feet from any established residential zone.
C. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence, screen, or
wall, excepting driveway areas, between eight (8) and twelve (12)
feet in height. Storage between the road and street and such
fence, screen, or wall for concealment shall be maintained in good
condition.
D. All such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary
condition and so as not to be a menace to public health or safety.
E. Off-Street Parking
As regulated in Article IV, Section 4.010.
F. Ingress and Egress
The number of vehicular access drive ways permitted on any single
street frontage shall be limited to:
1. One (1) driveway where the parcel to be used has a
maximum road or street frontage of one hundred (100) feet
or less.
2. Two (2) driveways where the road or street frontage exceeds
one hundred (100) feet. Driveways used for ingress and
egress shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet in width
maximum, exclusive of curb returns.
G. No automobile wrecking, junk, or salvage yard shall be permitted
within three hundred (300) feet of any public road in
Lawrenceburg, except a more stringent State or Federal law
applies. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
4.120 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR CEMETERIES
A. The following standards shall be imposed upon the development and
construction of cemeteries in Lawrence County:
1. The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the
development of a system of collector and larger streets in the
APP 1-109
vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access
to a thoroughfare.
2. Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less
than twenty (20) acres.
3. All structures, including but not limited to mausoleums,
permanent monuments, or maintenance buildings shall be setback
not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or street
right-of-way.
4. All graves or burial lots shall be setback not less than twenty-five
(25) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line.
5. All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained in good
order in accordance with state and local regulations. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
4.130 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR TRANSMISSION AND
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND STATIONS
All transmission and communication towers and operating equipment
shall adhere to the following standards:
A. All towers constructed shall be the principal use on the property
that they are located on. No parcel shall be used for the purpose
of constructing a tower that does not meet minimum lot size
requirements for a zoning district.
B. Any equipment added to an existing tower must be approved by
the Planning Commission.
C. All towers with a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet (from base
to top) or more shall be constructed in accordance with Electronic
Industries Association ("EIA") standard 222 utilizing a wind rating
of eighty (80) miles per hour plus ice loading for Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee. Each application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer licensed
in the State of Tennessee and competent in such design.
D. Each application for a new tower shall include written technical
information that the tower will not interfere with public, safety
communications or disrupt the transmission or reception of radio,
APP 1-110
television or other communications of adjacent residential and
non-residential uses.
E. A site plan in compliance with section 7.030 shall be approved by
the Planning Commission prior to submission to the Board of
Zoning Appeals for approval of the use.
F. All applications for new towers are required to have approval as a
"Special Exception" by the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to any
permit being issued for construction.
G. All towers shall be set back from all property lines by a distance
that is equal to:
1. for a guyed tower fifty (50) percent of the height, and
2. for a self-supporting tower, equal to the height of the tower
unless the applicant provides a letter from the tower
engineer that the tower is designed to fall entirely within
the tower property.
H. All applications for permits to build towers in Lawrenceburg must
be accompanied with a "Determination of No Hazard" from the
Federal Aviation Administration, as well as all required Federal
Communications Commission permit information.
I. The entire area containing the tower, equipment and any guyed
supports shall be enclosed with a fence no shorter than eight (8)
feet in height with out riggers. Access gates to the site will be
locked at all times when the site is not occupied.
J. Where the tower site abuts or is contiguous to any Residential
Zoned District, there shall be provided a continuous, solid
screening around the fenced area of the site and it shall be of such
plant material as will provide a year-round evergreen screening.
Screening, as required herein, shall not be less than four (4) feet
in height at the time of planting, and shall be permanently
maintained.
K. All towers that require marking or lighting shall be done in
compliance with Federal Aviation Administration regulations, but
no tower shall be lighted from dusk to dawn by any form of white
flashing light unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Towers not requiring marking or lighting shall
have an exterior finish, which enhances compatibility with
adjacent land use as approved by the Board of Appeals.
APP 1-111
L. The tower owner is responsible for maintaining the grounds,
landscaping and all structures on the tower site in a manner
acceptable to the city.
M. In the event that the tower owner decides to discontinue operation
of the tower, the owner shall notify the City in writing of when the
use shall be discontinued. Unless the owner will maintain the
discontinued tower site the tower and all accessory structures are
to be removed within six (6) months. (Ord. #936, March 2001, as
amended by Ord. #1217, Nov. 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
4.140 SEASONAL PUBLIC SQUARE CURB MARKET
All Seasonal Public Square Curb Market venders shall adhere to the
following:
A. All Seasonal Public Square Curb Market venders must be located
on the Lawrenceburg Public Square to participate in the market.
B. The use of the Seasonal Public Square Curb Market is restricted
to bona fide Lawrence County farmers and growers.
C. The hours during which the market may be used and occupied are
between the hours of seven A.M. and four P.M. or can be
established by governing body in control of scheduling events.
D. It is unlawful for any person or vehicle to obstruct the public way
on the Public Square in any way.
E Anyone wanting to sell on the square must obtain a permit
through existing governing body in control of scheduling events on
the square.
F. All Sellers must maintain strict cleanliness practices in the
handling of produce. Hands and surfaces which come in contact
with produce must be kept clean with handy wipes or any
adequate cleaning substance. All sellers will be subject to
inspection and any non-compliance with this section can be
grounds for permit revocation.
G. All selling premises must be left clean with any and all trash
picked up. (as added by Ord. #1014, Nov. 2005)
APP 1-112
ARTICLE V
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION
5.010 Classification of Districts
5.020 Zoning Map
5.030 Zoning District Boundaries
5.040 Zoning Annexed Territory
5.050 Residential District Regulations
5.060 Commercial District Regulations
5.070 Industrial District Regulations
5.080 Provisions Governing Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts
5.090 Special Overlay District Regulations
5.010 CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following zoning districts are hereby
established in the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
Zoning District
District
Abbreviation
A. Residential Districts
Large Lot Residential District R-1
Low-Density Residential District R-2
Medium-Density Residential District R-3
High-Density Residential District R-4
B. Commercial Districts
Central Business District C-1
Highway Service District C-2
General Commercial District C-3
Neighborhood Service Business District C-4
Office/Professional Service District C-5
C. Industrial Districts
Industrial District I-1
D. Floodway Districts F-1
E. Special Overlay District Regulations
Planned Commercial District
Historic Zoning Overlay District
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-113
5.020 ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this ordinance
are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled Zoning Atlas of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. The zoning map and any amendment thereto shall
be dated with the effective date of the ordinance that adopts same. Certified
prints of the adopted map and zoning map amendments shall be maintained in
the office of the Mayor and Building Inspector and shall be available for
inspection by the public at all reasonable times, as long as this ordinance
remains in effect. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.030 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Unless, otherwise, indicated on the zoning map amendment, the district
boundaries are lot lines, center lines of streets or alleys, as they exist at the time
of the enactment of the zoning. Questions concerning the exact locations of
district boundaries shall be determined by the Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning
Appeals.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time this ordinance
takes effect, and the major portion of said lot is in the less restricted district, the
regulations relative to that district may extend as well to such portion of said
lot as is not more than one hundred (100) feet, within the more restricted
district. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.040 ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
Prior to the annexation of property, the Planning Commission shall recommend
zoning districts to the Lawrenceburg City Commission, which shall assign the
zoning districts by ordinance within one hundred-twenty (120) days, after
annexation. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.050 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The residential districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote
and protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and other
aspects of the general welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes:
1. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential
development to meet the housing needs of the city's present and expected
future population, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites
and building types;
APP 1-114
2. To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic and
against through traffic of all kinds;
3. To protect residential areas against congestion, by regulating the density
of population and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around
them and to one another, and by providing for off-street parking spaces.
4. To require the provision of open space and a maximum conservation of
natural sites in residential areas, and to encourage the provision of
additional open space by permitting planned development of moderately
higher density and intensity coverage with concomitantly higher
standards of open space, in order to provide large open areas with greater
utility for rest and recreation; and to encourage the development of more
attractive and economic and less monotonous building forms, by providing
freedom of architectural and site design;
5. To provide for access of light and air to windows and for privacy by
controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures;
6. To provide appropriate space for those public and private educational,
recreational, health, and similar facilities which serve the needs of
nearby residents, which generally perform their own activities more
effectively in a residential environment, and which do not create
objectionable influences;
7. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stability
of residential development, to protect the character of the district and its
peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and
buildings, and to protect the city's tax revenue. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.051 R-1, Large Lot Residential District
A. Purpose and Intent of District
These districts are designed to provide suitable areas for low
density residential development characterized by an open
appearance. Generally, the residential development will consist of
single family detached dwellings and accessory structures. These
districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and
open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts,
or which are benefitted by an open residential environment
without creating objectionable or undesirable influence upon
residential developments. Further, it is the intent of this
APP 1-115
ordinance that these districts be located so that the provision of
appropriate urban services will be physically and economically
facilitated and so that provision is made for the orderly expansion
and maintenance of urban residential development within the
urban area. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude
from these districts all buildings and other structures and uses
having commercial characteristics whether operated for profit or
otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations for these districts
shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they
otherwise conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Uses Permitted
In the R-1, Large Lot Residential District, the following uses are
permitted.
Agricultural Activities
Crops and Animal Raising
Residential Activities
Single Detached Dwelling
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Private garages and sheds.
2. Outdoor recreational facilities exclusively for the use of the
residents.
3. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
4. Home occupations as defined by and subject to the
provisions of Section 4.040.
5. Other accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the permitted uses.
APP 1-116
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the R-1, Large Lot Residential District, the following uses may
be permitted as special exceptions after review and approval by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 7-080.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
E. Uses Prohibited
In the R-1, Large Lot Residential District, any use not permitted
by right, by accessory use, or as a special exception as defined
above is strictly prohibited.
F. Dimensional Requirements
All uses permitted in the R-1, Large Lot Residential District, shall
comply with the following requirements.
1. Minimum lot size:
Minimum Area
with sewer 20,000 square feet
without sewer 30,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback
with sewer 100 feet
without sewer 125 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 60 feet
Side 20 feet
Rear 25 feet
APP 1-117
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any lot, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory
structures, shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total area.
4. Height Requirements
No principal building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirtyfive
(35) feet in height, and no accessory structure shall
exceed two (2) stories in height, except as provided in
Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirements
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Landscaping
The front yard, excluding necessary driveways, shall be
landscaped and not used for automobile storage.
7. Accessory Structures
a. With the exception of signs and fences, accessory
structures shall not be erected in any required front
yard.
b. Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5)
feet from any side lot line, from the rear lot line, and
from any building on the same lot. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
5.052 R-2, Low-Density Residential District
A. Purpose and Intent of District
These districts are designed to provide suitable areas for low to
medium density residential development where appropriate urban
services and facilities are provided or where the extension of such
services and facilities will be physically and economically
facilitated. Most generally, these districts will be characterized by
single-family detached structures and such other structures as are
accessory thereto. These districts also include community
facilities, public utilities and open uses which serve specifically the
APP 1-118
residents of those districts or which are benefitted by and
compatible with a residential environment. It is the express
purpose of this zoning ordinance to exclude from these districts all
buildings or other structures and uses having commercial
characteristics whether operated for profit or otherwise, except
that special exceptions and home occupations specifically provided
for in these regulations for these districts shall be considered as
not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the
provisions of this ordinance.
B. Uses Permitted
In the R-2, Low-Density Residential District, the following uses are
permitted.
Residential Activities
Single Detached Family
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Triplex
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Private garages and sheds.
2. Outdoor recreational facilities exclusively for the use of the
residents.
3. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
4. Home occupations as defined by and subject to the
provisions of Section 4.040.
5. Other accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the permitted uses.
APP 1-119
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the R-2, Low-Density Residential District, the following uses
may be permitted as special exceptions after review and approval
by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 7.080.
Community Facility Activities
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
E. Uses Prohibited
In the R-2, Low-Density Residential District, any use not
permitted by right, by accessory use, or as a special exception as
defined above is strictly prohibited.
F. Dimensional Requirements
All uses permitted in the R-2, Low-Density Residential District,
shall comply with the following requirements.
1. Medium Lot Size
Minimum Area 15,000 square feet
Area Per Family 5,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Side 15 feet
Rear 25 feet
APP 1-120
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any lot, the area occupied by all structures, including
accessory structures, shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
percent of the total area.
4. Height Requirements
No principal building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirtyfive
(35) feet in height, and no accessory structure shall
exceed two (2) stories in height, except as provided in
Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirements
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Landscaping
The front yard, excluding necessary driveways, shall be
landscaped.
7. Accessory Structures
a. With the exception of signs and fences, accessory
structures shall not be erected in any required front
yard.
b. Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5)
feet from any side lot line, from the rear lot line, and
from any building on the same lot. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
5.053 R-3, Medium-Density Residential District
A. Purpose and Intent of District
This class of district is designed to provide suitable areas for
medium density residential development where sufficient urban
services and facilities are provided or where the extension of such
services can be physically and economically facilitated prior to
development. All types of residential activities are permitted. It
is the intent of this district to not restrict in number the dwelling
units contained in a building provided there is sufficient area of
APP 1-121
zone lot and open space on such lot relative to the number of
dwelling units thereon. This class of district is intended also to
permit community facility and public utility installations which
are necessary to serve and do serve specifically the residents of
these districts, or which installations are benefitted by and
compatible with a residential environment. It is the express
purpose of this ordinance to exclude from this class district all
buildings and other structures and uses having commercial
characteristics and not planned as an integral part of a total
residential development, whether operated for profit or otherwise,
except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically
provided for in these regulations for this class of district shall be
considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise
conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Uses Permitted
In the R-3, Medium-Density Residential District, the following
uses are permitted.
Residential Activities
Single Detached Dwelling
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Triplex
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Private garages and sheds.
2. Outdoor recreational facilities exclusively for the use of the
residents.
3. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
4. Home occupations as defined by and subject to the
provisions of Section 4.040.
APP 1-122
5. Other accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the permitted uses.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the R-3, Medium-Density Residential District, the following
uses may be permitted as special exceptions after review and
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Section 7.080.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
Residential Activities
Dwelling, Multi-Family (Apartment, Townhouse)
E. Uses Prohibited
In the R-3, Medium-Density Residential District, any use not
permitted by right, by accessory use, or as a special exception as
defined above is strictly prohibited.
F. Dimensional Requirements
All uses permitted in the R-3, Medium-Density Residential
District, shall comply with the following requirements.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Area 10,000 square feet
Area Per Family 3,500 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 75 feet
APP 1-123
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 40 feet
Side 10 feet
Rear 20 feet
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any lot, the area occupied by all structures, including
accessory structures, shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
percent of the total area.
4. Height Requirements
No principal building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirtyfive
(35) feet in height, and no accessory structure shall
exceed two (2) stories in height, except as provided in
Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirements
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Landscaping
The front yard, excluding necessary driveways, shall be
landscaped.
7. Accessory Structures
a. With the exception of signs and fences, accessory
structures shall not be erected in any required front
yard.
b. Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5)
feet from any side lot line, from the rear lot line, and
from any building on the same lot. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
APP 1-124
5.054 R-4, High Density Residential District
A. Purpose and Intent of District
This class of district is designed to provide suitable areas for highdensity
residential development where sufficient urban services
and facilities are available or where such facilities will be available
prior to development. All types of residential activities are
permitted, if they are in a planned unit development. It is the
intent of this district to not restrict in number the dwelling units
contained in a building provided there is sufficient area of zone lot
and open space on such lot relative to the number of dwelling units
thereon. This class of district is intended also to permit
community facility and public utility installations which are
necessary to serve and do serve specifically the residents of these
districts, or which installations are benefitted by and compatible
with a residential environment. Commercial activities may be
permitted where included as a part of a planned development.
B. Uses Permitted
In the R-4, High-Density Residential District, the following uses
are permitted.
Residential Activities
1. Permanent Activities
Dwelling, Single Detached
Dwelling, Duplex
Dwelling, Triplex
Dwelling, Mobile Home
Dwelling, Multi-Family (Apartment, Townhouse)
2. Semi-Permanent Residential
Boarding House
Rooming House
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Private garages and sheds.
APP 1-125
2. Outdoor recreational facilities exclusively for the use of the
residents.
3. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
4. Home occupations as defined by and subject to the
provisions of Section 4.040.
5. Other accessory structures and uses customarily incidental
to the permitted uses.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the R-4, High-Density Residential District, the following uses may be
permitted as special exceptions after review and approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 7.080.
Residential
Mobile Home Park (Subject to the Provisions of Section 4.090)
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
E. Uses Prohibited
In the R-4, High-Density Residential District, any use not
permitted by right, by accessory use, or as a special exception as
defined above is strictly prohibited.
F. Dimensional Requirements
All uses permitted in the R-4, Medium-Density Residential
District, shall comply with the following requirements.
APP 1-126
1. Minimum Lot Size:
Single-Family, Duplex, and
Mobile Homes 7,500 square feet
Multi-Family Dwelling and
Triplex 11,000 square feet
Area Per Family
Single-Family and Mobile Homes 7,500 square feet
Multi-Family and all other
Residential Uses 2,750 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback
Single-Family and Duplex 75 feet
Multi-Family Dwelling 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 35 feet
Side 8 feet
Rear 15 feet
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any lot, the area occupied by all structures, including
accessory structures, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of
the total area.
4. Height Requirements
No principal building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirtyfive
(35) feet in height, and no accessory structure shall
exceed two (2) stories in height, except as provided in
Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirements
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Landscaping: The front yard, excluding necessary
driveways, shall be landscaped.
APP 1-127
7. Accessory Structures
a. With the exception of signs and fences, accessory
structures shall not be erected in any required front
yard.
b. Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5)
feet from any side lot line, from the rear lot line, and
from any building on the same lot. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
5.060 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The commercial districts, established by this ordinance are designed to promote
and protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and other
aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following
specific purposes:
1. To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations in proximity
to established residential areas, for local retail and service trades
catering specifically to the recurring shopping needs of the
occupants of nearby residences.
2. To protect both retail and service developments and nearby
residences against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter,
radiation, and other hazards, and against offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous
matter, heat, humidity, glare, and their objectionable influences.
3. To protect both retail and service developments and nearby
residences against congestion, by regulating the intensity of retail
and service developments consistent with their marketing
functions, by restricting those types of establishments which
generate heavy traffic, and providing for off-street parking and
loading facilities.
4. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for commercial
districts to satisfy functional needs of Lawrenceburg, and in
particular the need for medical services, and the needs of the
general public traveling along major highways.
5. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the mixture
of compatible high density residential and restricted commercial
APP 1-128
developments where standards for development will provide
protection for the environmental essentials of either.
6. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for all types of
commercial and miscellaneous service activities.
7. To enhance the central business district and to promote and
protect its service attributes, to lessen congestion in the district, to
provide for high intensity of land use consistent with land
valuation, and to protect its intended functional aspects against
encroachment by detrimental influences.
8. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote
stability of commercial development, to protect the strengthen the
economic base of Lawrenceburg to protect the character of the
district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve
the value of land and buildings. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.061 C-1, Central Business District
A. District Description
This district is designed to provide for a wide range of retail, office,
amusement, and service uses, and light industrial processes
involving high performance standards. In addition, this district
provides for governmental uses, and community facilities and
utility necessary to serve the district or which are required for the
general community welfare. The regulations are structured to
permit maximum freedom of pedestrian movement. Relatively
high density and intensity of use is permitted in this district.
B. Uses Permitted
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Cultural and Recreational Services
Essential Services
Health Care Facilities
APP 1-129
Commercial Activities
Automotive Parking
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Commercial
Entertainment and Amusement Services
Financial, Consulting and Administrative Services
Food and Beverage Services
General Business and Communication Services
General Personal Services
General Retail Trade
Medical and Professional Services
Transient Habitation
Undertaking Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-1, Central
Business District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the C-1, Central Business District, the following uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions after review
and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
Residential Activities
Permanent Residential
Semi-Permanent Residential
APP 1-130
Community Facility Activities
Community Education
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
E. Uses Prohibited
Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
C-1, Central Business District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the C-1, Central Business District shall
comply with the following requirements, except as provided in
Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area None
Lot Width at Building Setback None
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback Twenty-five (25) feet,
except where a
b u i l d i n g o r
buildings on an
adjacent lot or lots
provide front yards
less than twenty
(20) feet in depth, a
front yard equal to
the average of
adjacent front yards
shall be provided
Side Yard Setback None except that when an
open area is
provided, it shall be
at least ten (10) feet
wide, and shall be
unobstructed
APP 1-131
Rear Yard Setback Twenty (20) feet
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
There are no restrictions on the area occupied by all buildings
including accessory buildings on a lot or parcel located in the C-1
District.
4. Height Requirement
The maximum height of all buildings located in the C-1
District shall be established as follows, except as provided
in Section 6.040.
a. The maximum building height at the street line shall
be four (4) stories or fifty (50) feet.
b. For each foot the building is setback from the street
line, the height of the building may be increased by
one and one-half (1 ½) feet to a maximum height of
sixty-five (65) feet.
5. Parking Space Requirements
As regulated in Article IV, Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
7. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10)
percent of the lot area landscaped to enhance site
appearance. Included in the ten (10) percent coverage,
there shall be maintained a landscaped strip at least ten
(10) feet wide along all street right-of-way lines, exclusive of
business driveways and walkways. If an existing parcel is a
legal non-conforming lot with respect to the minimum size
requirements, the ten (10) foot landscape strip may be
reduced by half. The provisions of this section may be
waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals in cases where the
lack of setbacks would make strict application of the
APP 1-132
provision impossible. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by
Ord. #1067, Aug. 2010, and Ord. #1189, Jan. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
5.062 C-2, Highway Service District
A. District Description
This district is designed to provide adequate space in appropriate
locations for uses which serve the needs of the motoring public.
Automobile and other vehicular service establishments, transient
sleeping accommodations, and eating and drinking establishments
primarily characterize this district. In addition, commercial trade
and service uses are permitted if necessary to serve the recurring
needs of persons frequenting these districts. Community facilities
and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the
general community welfare are also permitted. Bulk limitations
required of uses in these districts, in part, are designed to
maximize compatibility with lesser intense use of land or building
in proximate residential districts. Appropriate locations for this
district are along major traffic arteries. Such districts should be
situated near major transportation interchanges in clustered
development patterns, and not patterns of striped commercial
development extending in a continuous manner along such major
traffic arteries.
B. Uses Permitted
In the C-2, Highway Service District, the following uses and their
accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Essential Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
APP 1-133
Commercial Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Automotive Parking
Automotive Service and Repair
Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Commercial
Entertainment and Amusement Services
Financial, Consulting, and Administrative
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service - Drive-In
General Business and Communication Services
General Personal Service
General Retail Trade
Medical and Professional Services
Transient Habitation
Transport and Warehousing
Undertaking Services
Vehicular, Craft and Related Equipment
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-2, Highway
Service District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the C-2, Highway Service District, the following uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions, after review
and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
APP 1-134
Commercial Activities
Wholesale
Manufacturing Activities
Limited Manufacturing Activities
Agricultural, Resources Production, and Extractive Activities
Plant and Forest Nurseries
E. Uses Prohibited
Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
C-2, Highway Service District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the C-2, Highway Service District, shall
comply with the following requirements in Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 55 feet
Side Yard Setback 15 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
APP 1-135
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
seventy (70) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, except as
provided in Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Article IV, Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street rightsof-
way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways. If an
existing parcel is a legal non-conforming lot with respect to the
minimum size requirements, then ten (10) foot landscape strip
may be reduced by half.
H. Planned Commercial Development Provisions
All developments within the C-2, Highway Service District,
involving two (2) or more buildings on a single tract, site, or lot or
any development site involving three (3) or more acres must be
submitted as a planned commercial development as provided in
Subsection 5.091. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord.
#1190, Jan 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
APP 1-136
5.063 C-3, General Commercial District
A. District Description
These districts are designed to provide for a wide range of
commercial uses concerned with retail trade and consumer
services; amusement and entertainment establishments;
automotive and vehicular service establishments; transient
sleeping accommodations; drive-in stores; eating and drinking
places, financial institutions; and offices. The uses in this district
service a wide market area and, therefore, ease of automotive
access is a requirement. However, it is not intended that this
district permit uses which generate large volumes of truck traffic.
Appropriate open space between commercial and residential areas
is required.
B. Uses Permitted
In the C-3, General Commercial District, the following uses and
their accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Essential Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
Commercial Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Automotive Parking
Automotive Service and Repair
Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Commercial
Entertainment and Amusement Services
Financial, Consulting, and Administrative
APP 1-137
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service - Drive-In
General Business and Communication Services
General Personal Service
General Retail Trade
Group Assembly
Medical and Professional Services
Transient Habitation
Transport and Warehousing
Undertaking Services
Vehicular, Craft and Related Equipment
Wholesale Sales
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessories are permitted in the C-3, General
Commercial District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory structures and uses, provided that such accessory
structures and uses are carried out on the same lot and are
not otherwise prohibited.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the C-3, General Commercial District, the following uses and
their accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions after
review and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
Manufacturing Activities
Limited Manufacturing Activities
Agricultural, Resources Production and Extractive Activities
Plant and Forest Nurseries
APP 1-138
E. Uses Prohibited
Any use or structure not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
C-3, General Commercial District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the C-3, General Commercial District, shall
comply with the following requirements, except as provided in
Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 40 feet
Side Yard Setback 20 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all buildings
including accessory buildings, shall not exceed sixty (60) percent
of the total area of such lot or parcel.
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, except as
provided in Section 6.040.
APP 1-139
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Article IV, Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street
rights-of-way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
If an existing parcel is a legal non-conforming lot with respect to
the minimum size requirements, the ten (10) foot landscape strip
may be reduced by half.
H. Planned Commercial Development Provisions
All developments within the C-3, General Commercial District,
involving two (2) or more buildings on a single tract, site, or lot or
any development site involving three (3) or more acres must be
submitted as a planned commercial development as provided in
Subsection 5.091. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord.
#1191, Jan 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
5.064 C-4, Neighborhood Convenience Service Districts
A. District Description
This district is designed to provide for uses to serve the recurring
household needs and personal service requirements of the
occupants of nearby residential areas. The permitted
establishments are those which provide for regular local shopping
and which, therefore, are visited frequently by customers. This
district may occur along or away from arterial streets,
characteristically are small, and are distributed widely for
convenient accessibility by residential area occupants. The bulk
regulations are established to commercial activity in the district
and adjacent residential activity, and to lessen the concentration
APP 1-140
of vehicular traffic as compared to other commercial districts
providing goods and services for a more extensive marketing area.
B. Uses Permitted
In the C-4, Neighborhood Convenience Service District, the
following uses and their accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Essential Services
Health Care Facilities
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
Commercial Activities
Convenience Commercial
General Personal Service
General Retail Trade
Medical and Professional Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessories are permitted in the C-4, Neighborhood
Convenience Service District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
APP 1-141
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
No uses are permitted as special exceptions in the C-4, Neighborhood
Convenience Service District.
E. Uses Prohibited
Any use or structure not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
C-4, Neighborhood Convenience Service District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the C-4, Neighborhood Convenience Service
District, shall comply with the following requirements, except as
provided in Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Side Yard Setback 20 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
sixty (60) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
APP 1-142
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, except as
provided in Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Article IV, Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped-strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street
rights-of-way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
If an existing parcel is a legal non-conforming lot with respect to
the minimum size requirements, the ten (10) foot landscape strip
may be reduced by half.
H. Planned Commercial Development Provisions
All developments within the C-4, Neighborhood Convenience
Service District, involving two (2) or more buildings on a single
tract, site, or lot or any development site involving three (3) or
more acres must be submitted as a planned commercial
development as provided in Subsection 5.091. (Ord. #789, June
1993, as amended by Ord. #1192, Jan. 2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
5.065 C-5, Office/Professional Service District
A. This district is designed to provide for the provision of professional
office services, medical and personal services, as well as financial,
insurance, real estate and consulting services. In addition to the
office activities, limited commercial trade and certain community
facilities are permitted to serve to the needs of persons frequenting
this district.
APP 1-143
B. Uses Permitted
In the C-5, Office/Professional Service District, the following uses
and their accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreational Services
Essential Services
Health Care Facilities
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
Commercial Activities
Automotive Parking
Financial, Consulting, and Administrative Services
General Business and Communication Services
General Personal Service
Medical and Professional Services
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessories are permitted in the C-5,
Office/Professional Service District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
APP 1-144
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the C-5, Office/Professional Service District, the following uses
and their accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions
after review and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
Commercial Activities
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service Drive-In
E. Uses Prohibited
Any use or structure not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
C-5, Office/Professional Service District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the C-5, Office/Professional Service District,
shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided
in Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 40 feet
Side Yard Setback 15 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
APP 1-145
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
sixty (60) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height, except as
provided in Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street
rights-of-way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
If an existing parcel is a legal non-conforming lot with respect to
the minimum size requirements, the ten (10) foot landscape strip
may be reduced by half.
H. Planned Commercial Development Provisions
All developments within the C-5, Office/Professional Service
District, involving two (2) or more buildings on a single tract, site,
or lot or any development site involving three (3) or more acres
must be submitted as a planned commercial development as
provided in Subsection 5.091. (as amended by Ord. #1193, Jan.
2017 Ch4_03-28-19)
5.070 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The industrial districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote
and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and other
APP 1-146
aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following
specific purposes:
1. To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of
the area of Lawrenceburg's expected economic expansion for all types of
distributive, industrial and related activities, with due allowance for the
need for choice of suitable sites.
2. To protect distributive, industrial and related activities, as well as
residential and related activities by providing for the separation of these
uses, and, as far as possible, provide that appropriate space needs for
distributive and industrial activities are available by prohibiting the use
of such space for residential purposes.
3. To encourage industrial development which is free from danger of fire,
explosions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, and other hazards, and from offensive noise,
vibration, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable
influences, by permitting such development areas where this ordinance
restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial
products and processes involved.
4. To protect adjacent residential and commercial areas, and to protect the
labor force in other establishments engaged in less offensive types of
industrial and related activities, by restricting those industrial activities
which involve danger of fire, explosions, toxic or noxious matter,
radiation, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, and other hazards, or
create offensive noise, vibration, heat, humidity, glare, and other
objectionable influences, by permitting such development in area where
this ordinance restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard
to the industrial products or processes involved.
5. To protect industrial activities and related developments against
congestion, as far as is possible and appropriate in each area, by limiting
the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one
another, and by requiring space off public ways for parking and loading
facilities associated with such activities.
6. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development, to promote stability of industrial and related development,
to strengthen the economic base of the Lawrenceburg area, to protect the
character of these districts and their peculiar suitability for particular
uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect
Lawrenceburg's tax revenues. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-147
5.071 I-1, Light Industrial District
A. District Description
These districts are intended to provide space for a wide range of
industrial and related uses which conform to a relatively low level
of objectionable influences. It is required that all operations of
industrial establishments be carried on within completely enclosed
buildings thus providing a standard of development which removes
most adverse characteristics that affect neighboring properties.
These districts may provide a buffer between other districts and
other industrial activities which have more objectionable
influences. New residential activities are excluded, but community
facilities and commercial establishments which provide needed
services for industry and are complementary thereto are
permitted.
B. Uses Permitted
In the I-1, Light Industrial District, the following uses and
accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
Extensive Impact Facilities
Commercial Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Construction Sales and Services
Transport and Warehousing
Wholesale Sales
Manufacturing Activities
Limited Manufacturing
Intermediate Manufacturing
Agricultural, Resources Production, and Extraction Activities
Crop and Animal Raising
Plant and Forest Nurseries
APP 1-148
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessory uses are permitted in the I-1, Light
Industrial District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory Structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the I-1, Light Industrial District, the following uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions after review
and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
Community Facility Activities
Administrative Services
Intermediate Impact Facilities
Commercial Activities
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Entertainment and Amusement Services
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service Drive-In
Group Assembly
E. Uses Prohibited
Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
I-1, Light Industrial District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
APP 1-149
All uses permitted in the I-1, Light Industrial District shall comply
with the following requirements except as provided in Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 100 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 35 feet
Side Yard Setback 20 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be forty (40) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be fifty (50) feet.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
sixty (60) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed seventy-two (72) feet in height,
except as provided in Section 6.040.
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
APP 1-150
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street rightsof-
way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #1187, Jan. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
5.072 I-2, General Industrial District
A. District Description
These districts are intended to provide space for the types of
industrial activities which by reason of volume of raw materials or
freight, scale of operation, type of structures required, or other
similar characteristics, require location relatively well segregated
from nonindustrial uses. New residential activities are excluded,
but community facilities and commercial establishments which
provide needed services for industry and are complementary
thereto are permitted.
B. Uses Permitted
In the I-2, General Industrial District, the following uses and
accessory uses are permitted.
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
Commercial Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Building Materials and Farm Equipment
Construction Sales and Services
Food and Beverage Service
Food Service Drive-In
Transport and Warehousing
Wholesale Sales
APP 1-151
Manufacturing Activities
Limited Manufacturing
Intermediate Manufacturing
C. Accessory Uses and Structures
The following accessory uses are permitted in the I-2, General
Industrial District.
1. Signs in compliance with the regulations set forth in Section
4.080.
2. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as
required in Section 4.010.
3. Accessory Structures and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and
uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise
prohibited.
D. Uses Permitted as Special Exceptions
In the I-2, General Industrial District, the following uses and their
accessory uses may be permitted as special exceptions after review
and approval in accordance with Section 7.080.
Community Facility Activities
Extensive Impact Facilities
Commercial Activities
Group Assembly
Manufacturing Activities
Extensive Manufacturing Activities
Agricultural, Resources Production, and Extractive Activities
Mining, Drilling and Quarrying
APP 1-152
E. Uses Prohibited
Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional
uses, temporary uses, or accessory uses are prohibited within the
I-2, General Industrial District.
F. Dimensional Regulations
All uses permitted in the I-2, General Industrial District shall
comply with the following requirements except as provided in
Article VI.
1. Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Lot Area 40,000 square feet
Lot Width at Building Setback 150 feet
2. Minimum Yard Requirements
Front Yard Setback 100 feet
Side Yard Setback 40 feet
except where the side yard
abuts or is adjacent to a
residential district, in which
case the minimum setback for
that yard shall be eighty (80) feet.
Rear Yard Setback 50 feet
except where the rear yard
abuts or is adjacent to a residential
district, in which case the minimum
setback for that yard shall be one hundred (100) feet.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage
On any area or parcel of land, the area occupied by all
buildings including accessory buildings, shall not exceed
fifty (50) percent of the total area of such lot or parcel.
4. Height Requirements
No building shall exceed seventy-two (72) feet in height,
except as provided in Section 6.040.
APP 1-153
5. Parking Space Requirement
As regulated in Section 4.010.
6. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures shall be located at least five (5) feet
from any lot line, and any building on the same lot.
G. Landscaping Provisions
Each site shall be developed with a minimum of ten (10) percent of
the lot area landscaped to enhance site appearance. Included in
the ten (10) percent coverage, there shall be maintained a
landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide along all street rightsof-
way lines exclusive of business driveways and walkways.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #1188, Jan. 2017
Ch4_03-28-19)
5.080 PROVISIONS GOVERNING FLOODWAY AND FLOOD FRINGE
DISTRICTS
5.081 Intent and Objectives
A. Finding of Facts
1. The flood hazard areas of Lawrenceburg are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
2. The flood losses are caused by the cumulative affect of
obstructions in flood heights and velocities, the occupancy
of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages.
APP 1-154
B. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public loses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at
the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved
in the accommodation of flood waters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage, and;
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.
C. Objectives
The Objectives of this ordinance are:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of
the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in floodplains;
APP 1-155
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and;
7. To insure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a flood area. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.082 Supplementary Definitions
The following definitions are to be used for interpreting the provisions of
this article only. The definitions are not intended to permit uses of land
that may otherwise be prohibited by the base zoning district. Where
words have not been defined, the standard dictionary definition shall
prevail, unless defined in Article III, of this ordinance.
1. "Accessory Structure" shall represent a subordinate structure to
the principal structure and, for the purpose of this section, shall
conform to the following:
a. Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation.
b. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
c. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the
flow of floodwaters.
d. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
e. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed.
2. "Act" means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance
Program that are incorporated in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
3. "Addition (to an existing building" means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common load bearing wall other than a fire wall.
Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall
or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new
construction.
APP 1-156
4. "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Building Inspector's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
5. "Area of Shallow Flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone, on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one (1)
percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth
of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
6. "Area of Special Flood-Related Erosion Hazard" is the land within
a community which is most likely to be subject to severe floodrelated
erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E, on
the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After the detailed
evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E, may be further
refined.
7. "Area of Special Flood Hazard" is the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to one (1) percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A,
on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A, usually is refined
into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, or A99.
8. "Base Flood" means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
9. "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
10. "Breakaway Wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces,
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
11. "Building" for purposes of this section, means any structure built
for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
(See "structure.")
APP 1-157
12. "Development" means any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
13. "Elevated Building" means a non-basement building: (i) built to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (posts and piers), (ii) and adequately anchored so as not
to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30,
AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building," also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.
14. "Emergency Flood Insurance Program" or "Emergency Program"
means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in
accordance with Section 1336, of the Act.. It is intended as a
program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all
insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
15. "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses. This peril is not per se covered under the Program.
16. "Exception" means a waiver from the provisions of Subsection
5.086, of this subarticle, directed to a community which relieves it
from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other
determination made or issued pursuant to the Act.
17. "Existing Construction" any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of this
ordinance.
18. "Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of this ordinance.
19. "Existing Structures," see "Existing Construction."
APP 1-158
20. "Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or
Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
21. "Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. the overflow of inland or tidal waters;
2. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
22. "Flood Elevation Determination" means a determination by the
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood that
is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of
occurrence in any given year.
23. "Flood Elevation Study" means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
erosion hazards.
24. "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of
a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, where the boundaries of the flood related erosion areas
having special hazards have been designated as Zone A, M,
and/or E.
25. "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
26. "Flood Insurance Study" is the official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains
flood profiles as well as the Flood Boundary Map and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
APP 1-159
27. "Floodplain" or "Flood Prone Area" means any land area
susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of "flooding").
28. "Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness
plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
29. "Floodplain Protection System" means those physical structural
works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify
flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a
community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
30. "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
31. "Flood-Related Erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of lake or other body of water as a result of
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
32. "Flood-Related Erosion Area" or "Flood-Related Erosion Prone
Area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other
body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or
bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to
suffer flood-related erosion damage.
33. "Flood-Related Erosion Area Management" means the operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited
APP 1-160
to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control
works and flood plain management regulations.
34. "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.
35. "Floor" means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building
(including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction
or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does
not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
36. "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
"Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors
that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
37. "Functionally Dependent Use" means a use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does
not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
38. "Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of
the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
39. "Historic Structure" means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior)
or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
APP 1-161
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either:
i. By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior, or
ii. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.
40. "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water
so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
41. "Levee System" means a flood protection system which consists of
a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and
drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in
accordance with sound engineering practices.
42. "Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of Section 5.050.
43. "Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not
include a "recreational vehicle."
44. "Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
APP 1-162
45. "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the
Agency.
46. "Mean-Sea-Level" means the average height of the sea for all
stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance,
the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
47. "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929,
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
48. "New Construction" any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this
ordinance. The term also includes any subsequent improvements
to such structure.
49. "New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this ordinance.
50. "100-Year Flood," see "Base Flood."
51. "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including
State and local governments and agencies.
52. "Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
APP 1-163
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
53. "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
54. "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
55. "Special Hazard Area" means an area having special flood,
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and
shown on an FHBM or FIRM, as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or
AH.
56. "Start of Construction" includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred-eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
57. "State Coordinating Agency" (Tennessee Department of Economic
and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office)
means the agency of the state government, or other office
designated by the Governor of the State or by state statute at the
APP 1-164
request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the
National Flood Insurance Program in that state.
58. "Structure," for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed
building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home,
a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or
infrastructures.
59. "Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
60. "Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
or; (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a "historic structure."
61. "Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or
Subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds
fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads
before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
62. "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship.
63. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of
compliance required in Section 5.050, (b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
APP 1-165
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5), is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided
64. "Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other
datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.083 General Provisions
A. Application
This article shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special food hazard identified on the Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, Community - Panel Numbers 47099C 0090B
and 47099C 0150B. Effective Date: December 16, 1988, and any
subsequent amendments or revisions, are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance. These areas shall be
incorporated into the Lawrenceburg, Tennessee Zoning Map.
C. Requirement for Development Permit
A development permit shall be required in conformity with this
article prior to the commencement of any development activity.
D. Compliance
No structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted
or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easement, covenant, or deed restriction. However, where
this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
APP 1-166
F. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all
provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally
construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit
nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that
land outside the flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
H. Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or
special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as
other misdemeanors as provided by law. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, from
taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
5.084 Administration
A. Designation of (Building Inspector)
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Permit Procedures
Application for a development permit shall be made to the
Building Inspector on forms furnished by him prior to any
APP 1-167
development activity. The development permit may include, but
is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale,
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill,
storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities. Specifically,
the following information is required:
1. Application Stage
a. Elevation in relation to mean-sea-level of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all
buildings*
b. Elevation in relation to mean-sea-level to which any
nonresidential building will be floodproofed, where
base flood elevation data is available.*
c. Certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
building will meet the floodproofing criteria in
Subsection 5.084, B, 2, where base flood elevation
data is available.*
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
2. Construction Stage
Within unnumbered A Zones, where flood elevation data are
not available, the Building Inspector shall record the
elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit.
The elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the
measurement of the lowest floor of the building and the
highest adjacent grade. USGS Quadrangle maps may be
utilized when no more detailed reference exists to establish
reference elevations.
Within all flood zones where base flood elevation data are
utilized, the Building Inspector shall require that upon
placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever
*(See 2, below.)
APP 1-168
construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Building
Inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor,
or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built,
in relation to mean-sea-level. Said certification shall be
prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a registered
land surveyor, professional engineer, or architect and
certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a
particular building, said certification shall be prepared by,
or under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer or
architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior
to submission of the certification shall be at the permit
holder's risk. The Building Inspector shall review the floor
elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by
such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Building Inspector
Duties of the Building Inspector shall include, but not be limited
to:
1. Review of all development permits to assure that the requirements
of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
2. Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are
known, require that copies of such permits be provided and
maintained on file with the development permit. This shall
include Section 404, of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
3. Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee
Department of Economic and Community Development, Local
Planning Assistance Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse, and submission of evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
4. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean-sea-level or
highest adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) of the lowest floor
APP 1-169
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved
buildings, in accordance with Subsection 5.084, B, 2.
5. Record the actual elevation (in relation to mean-sea-level or
highest adjacent grade, whichever is applicable) to which the new
or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in
accordance with Subsection 5.084, B, 2.
6. When floodproofing is utilized, the Building Inspector shall obtain
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect,
in accordance with Subsection 5.084, B, 2.
7. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the Building Inspector shall make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Subsection 5.086.
8. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency then the
Building Inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State, or other source, including data developed as a result of these
regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A, on the
Community FHBM or FIRM, meet the requirements of this article.
Within unnumbered A Zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
Building Inspector shall require the lowest floor of a building to be
elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least two (2) feet above the
highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade
being defined in Subsection 5.082, of this ordinance). All
applicable data including the highest adjacent grade elevation and
the elevations of the lowest floor of floodproofing shall be recorded
as set forth in Subsection 5.084, B.
9. All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be
maintained in the office of the Building Inspector and shall be open
for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for
expedited retrieval within combined files.
APP 1-170
10. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated portion of any water course is maintained. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
5.085 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
A. General Standards
In all flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
1. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure;
2. Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of overthe-
top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall
be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;
3. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage;
4. New construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimizes flood
damage;
5. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
6. New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system;
7. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters;
APP 1-171
8. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding;
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building which is in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new
construction" as contained in this article; and,
10. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building which is not in compliance with the provision of
this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new
construction" as contained in this article and provided said
nonconformity is not extended.
B. Specific Standards
These provisions shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard as
provided herein:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
have been provided, including A Zones, A1-30 Zones, AE Zones, AO
Zones, AH Zones, and A99 Zones, and has provided a regulatory
floodway, as set forth in Subsection 5.083, B, the following
provisions are required.
1. Residential Construction
New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement elevated no lower than one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure,
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of Subsection 5.085, B, 3.
2. Nonresidential Construction
New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower
than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation.
Buildings located in all A-Zones may be floodproofed in lieu
APP 1-172
of being elevated provided that all areas of the building
below the required elevation are watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are
built with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection
are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
Building Inspector as set forth in Subsection 5.084, B, 2.
3. Elevated Building
New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation, shall be designed to preclude finished living space
and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.
a. Designs for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or
architect or meet the following minimum criteria.
i. Provide a minimum of two openings having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one (1) foot above grade; and
iii. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.
b. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage
door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment
used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator); and
APP 1-173
c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a
way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and
all such petitions shall comply with the provisions of
Subsection 5.085, B, of this article.
4. Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational
Vehicles
a. All manufactured homes placed, or substantially
improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions
of existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions,
or in substantially improved manufactured home
parks or subdivisions, must meet all the
requirements of new construction, including
elevations and anchoring.
b. All manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision must be elevated so that:
i. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the
level of the base flood elevation on a
permanent foundation;
ii. The manufactured home must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement; and,
iii. In or outside of an existing or new
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in
an expansion of an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as the result of a flood, any
manufactured home placed or substantially
improved must meet the standards of
Subsection 5.085, B, 4, b, i, and ii, above.
c. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
APP 1-174
i. Be on the site for fewer than one hundredeighty
(180) consecutive days;
iii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
iii. The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including
anchoring and elevation requirements of
Subsection 5.085, B, 4, a, or b, i, and ii, above.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached structures.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided, the provisions of 5.084, C, 8, shall be
utilized for all requirements relative to the base flood
elevation or floodways.
C. Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard Zones A1-30 and AE
with Established Base Flood Elevation, but Without Floodways
Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Subsection 5.083, B, where streams exist with base flood data
provided but where no floodways have been provided, (Zones A1-30
and AE) the following provisions apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill material, new structures
or substantial improvements shall be located within areas
of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one (1) foot, at any point within
the community. The engineering certification should be
supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principals.
APP 1-175
2. New construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in
accordance with Subsection 5.085, B.
D. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO and AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Subsection 5.083, B, are areas designated as shallow flooding
areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base
flood depths of one to three feet (1' - 3') where a clearly defined
channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest
adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two (2)
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential buildings shall:
a. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade.
If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor,
including basement shall be elevated at least two (2)
feet above the highest adjacent grade; or,
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
be completely floodproofed to or above that level so
that any space below that level is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
APP 1-176
E. Standards for Areas Protected by Flood Protection System (A-99
Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Subsection 5.083, B, are areas of the 100-year flood protected by a
flood protection system which is under construction but where base
flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been
determined. With these areas (A-99 Zones), the following
provisions apply:
1. All provisions of Subsections 5.084, and 5.085, A, and H,
shall apply:
F. Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard with Established
Base Flood Elevation and with Floodways Designated
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
Subsection 5.083, B, where streams exist with base flood data and
floodways provided, the following provisions apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill material, new construction,
substantial improvements or other developments shall be
located within designated floodways, unless certification by
a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
encroachments or new development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge at any point
within the community. The engineering certification should
be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principals.
2. If Subsection 5.085, F, 1, above is satisfied, new
construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall
be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in
accordance with Subsection 5.085, B.
G. Standards for Unmapped Streams
Located within Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, are unmapped streams
where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor base
flood data or floodways have been provided. Adjacent to such
streams the following provisions shall apply:
APP 1-177
1. In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no
encroachments including fill material or structures shall be
located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of
the stream along each side of the stream, unless
certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1)
foot at any point within the locality.
2. When flood elevation data is available, new construction or
substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or
floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with
Subsection 5.084, B, 2.
H. Standards for Subdivision Proposals
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be
reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably
safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development is in a flood prone area, any such proposals shall be
reviewed to ensure that:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is
greater than fifty (50) lots and/or five (5) acres. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
APP 1-178
5.086 Variance Procedures
The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special
flood hazard.
A. Board of Zoning Appeals
1. The Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures (see definition) upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
3. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this
ordinance, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other
property to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage;
d. The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location,
in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
APP 1-179
h. The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
i. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood waters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site, and;
j. The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
4. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the
purpose of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
ordinance.
5. Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
B. Conditions for Variances
1. Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the
flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a
determination that the variance is the minimum relief
necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and
design of the building.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good
and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship;
and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
3. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a
APP 1-180
structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance, and that such
construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property.
4. The Building Inspector shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
5.090 SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
The following regulations shall apply in the special overlay zoning districts
established in Section 5.010, of this ordinance.
5.091 Planned Commercial Development
A. Intent of Section
This section is intended to provide a maximum flexibility in design
and to insure a minimum standard of site development for
commercial activities involving the location of two (2) or more
buildings on a single lot or tact of land, or any development site
involving five (5) or more acres not subdivided. Proposed uses for
a planned commercial development project shall conform to the
intent and permitted uses for the commercial zone within which it
is to be located.
B. Procedure for Approval
A building permit for a planned commercial development project
shall be issued by the Building Inspector only as authorized by the
Lawrenceburg Planning Commission. The commission shall so
authorize said permit only after application and review in
accordance with the requirements of this section, and after the
Planning Commission determines that the proposed project meets
the intent of this article and that the development standards set
forth by this article will be followed.
1. Information Required
The following information is required:
APP 1-181
a. Site plan drawn to a scale no smaller than 1"=100;
showing:
(1) Small scale location map of the proposed site.
(2) Acreage and zoning classification of the area
involved.
(3) Topographic contours at five (5) foot intervals.
(4) The location and dimension of internal streets
(including traffic circulation patterns),
sidewalks, points of access to public streets,
and off-street parking spaces and loading
areas.
(5) The location and dimensions of structures
including height; bulk, and the utilization of
structures including activities and number of
living units (if any).
(6) Reservations for yards and other open space
areas, and landscaping/screening features.
(7) The location and size of existing and proposed
water and sewer lines, storm drainage, and
any easements.
(8) A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to
various uses and activities and overall
densities.
(9) Provisions or agreements for maintenance of
common open space area.
(10) A stage development schedule, generally
setting forth when the land owner intends to
commence construction and completion period.
APP 1-182
2. Review Procedure
a. Preapplication Conference
Prior to the filing of the application, the applicant
shall confer with the Planning Commission to clarify
procedures and issues.
b. Preliminary Review
Twelve (12) copies of the proposal containing the
information required above shall be submitted to the
Lawrenceburg Planning Commission at least ten (10)
days in advance of the meeting at which it is to be
considered for preliminary review. Commission
findings, including necessary revisions or additions
prior to final site plan submission, shall be outlined
to the applicant.
c. Final Review
Twelve (12) copies of the proposal shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission, at least ten (10) days in
advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered
for final review. Upon final approval, the Planning
Commission shall authorize issuance of a permit for
the planned development project by the Building
Inspector.
3. Expiration of Building Permit
In the event that actual construction has not begun within
three (3) years from the date of approval of the planned
development project, the building permit for said project
shall expire. Reinstatement of a project after expiration
shall require submission of the proposal for Planning
Commission approval.
4. Amendments
Any amendments or changes to a planned development
project after receiving final approval by the Planning
Commission must be resubmitted for commission
consideration and approval.
APP 1-183
C. Purpose and Intent of Planned Commercial Development
The purpose and intent of planned commercial development are:
1. To encourage the grouping of commercial activities within
areas specifically designed to accommodate the activities
and to discourage the proliferation of commercial uses along
major thoroughfares and residential areas.
2. To encourage the orderly development of commercial areas
through establishment of sound design and development
standards providing for suitable location of commercial
activities, parking and traffic circulation, ingress and
egress, loading, landscaping and open space, and utilities
and other service facilities.
D. Types of Planned Commercial Development
The two (2) types of planned commercial development include:
1. Planned Commercial Development--General
Planned commercial development--general provides for a
range of retail trade and service activities including
neighborhood commercial special purpose shopping facilities
and community shopping centers.
2. Planned Commercial Development--Office Park
Planned commercial development--office park provides for
adequate regulation of activities and traffic around office
parks.
E. Permitted Activities in Planned Commercial Development
Activities or uses in planned commercial development shall
conform to the intent and permitted uses of the particular
commercial zone within which it is located. Any planned
commercial development located in the Highway Service, General
Commercial and Neighborhood Convenience zones will come under
"Planned Commercial Development--General" provisions.
APP 1-184
F. Development Standards
1. Location and Site Requirements
In all planned commercial developments
a. The site shall comprise a single lot or tract of land.
b. The site shall abut a public street a minimum of fifty
(50) feet.
c. Minimum lot area NONE.
2. Building Area
In all planned commercial developments maximum building
area shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
Parking, areas, open courts, and other open space uses shall
not be computed in building area.
3. Maximum Permitted Height of Structures
a. Planned commercial development--general:
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
b. Planned commercial development--office park:
No building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
4. Minimum Yards
Setback from
Public Street
Right-of-Way
Rear
Yard
Side
Yard
Planned Commercial
Development--General
35 feet 20 feet 15 feet
Planned Commercial
Development--Office
Park
40 feet 20 feet 15 feet
APP 1-185
In any planned commercial development abutting a residential
district, the minimum distance between any building and a
residential district boundary in all cases shall be sixty (60) feet.
Not less than forty (40) feet, of such required space shall be
devoted to grass, trees, shrubs, and other landscaping; the
remainder of such space may be used for off-street parking.
5. Building Location Requirements
a. In all planned commercial developments, the
minimum distance between any building and any
internal street shall be fifteen (15) feet.
b. The minimum distance between buildings shall be:
(1) Planned Commercial
Development--General 25 feet
(2) Planned Commercial
Development--Office Park 25 feet
6. Maximum Lot Coverage
In any planned commercial development no more than
eighty (80) percent of the total surface land area shall be
improved with buildings, structures, parking and loading
areas, streets, driveways, or roadways.
7. Minimum Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
a. An off-street parking space shall contain a minimum
of two hundred (200) square feet, exclusive of access
and maneuvering space.
b. The off-street parking requirements shall be as
provided in Article IV, Section 4.010.
c. There shall be ten (10) square feet of landscaped area
per parking space, such landscaped areas to be
evenly distributed throughout the parking area.
d. Each off-street parking space shall have a curb or
parking bumper to aid in preventing vehicle
encroachment upon adjacent spaces.
APP 1-186
e. Curbs, planting strips, or similar aids to
channelization of traffic shall be provided at the ends
of parking tiers in order to clearly delineate and
separate parking aisles.
8. Off-Street Loading Space
a. Size
An off-street loading space, open or enclosed, shall
have three (3) minimum dimensions:
(1) Length 55 feet
(2) Width 12 feet
(3) Vertical Clearance 12 feet
These dimensions shall not include driveways
or entrances to, or exits from, such off-street
spaces.
b. Location
No off-street loading space and no entrance or exit
thereto shall be located less than fifty (50) feet from
the intersection of two (2) street lines. A location
closer to such intersection may be permitted if such
location is not hazardous to traffic safety and will not
create traffic congestion.
c. In any planned commercial development there shall
be one (1) off-street loading space for a floor area of
from seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet to ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in a single occupancy;
one (1) additional space for each additional fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet of such floor area or
major fraction thereof; provided, that under no
circumstances shall more than five (5) off-street
loading spaces be required for any single occupancy.
APP 1-187
9. Internal Street Design and Construction Standards
In any planned commercial development, the following shall
apply:
a. The maximum grade on any street shall be six (6)
percent.
b. All street intersections shall be at right angles.
c. All internal streets, drives, roadways, and parking
and loading areas shall be privately constructed and
maintained.
d. All internal streets, drives, roadways, and parking
and loading areas shall meet the construction
standards for streets as set forth in Article 4, of the
Subdivision Regulations of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
e. The minimum pavement width of any internal street,
road, or drive shall be twenty (20) feet.
10. Access Requirements
In any planned commercial development, the following
provisions shall apply:
a. Access to public streets shall be controlled in the
interest of public safety. Each building or group of
buildings and accompanying parking or service area
shall be physically separated from public streets by
a curb, planting strip, or other suitable barrier that
prevents unchanneled motor vehicle ingress and
egress and clearly delineates authorized points of
access.
b. A point of access, i.e., a drive, curb-cut, or other
opening for vehicles onto a street shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet in width.
c. There shall be no more than two (2) points of access
to any one (1) public street on a lot of less than four
hundred (400) feet, but more than one hundred (100)
feet of public street frontage. Lots with less than one
APP 1-188
hundred (100) feet frontage on a public street shall
have no more than one (1) point of access to any one
(1) public street. On lots of more than four hundred
(400) feet frontage on a public street, the minimum
distance between access points in addition to those
indicated above shall be one thousand (1,000) feet.
d. No points of access shall be permitted within fifty
(50) feet of the curb line (or street line where there is
no curb) of any public street intersection.
e. No access point to a public street shall be made
without written approval of the Building Inspector.
11. Utility Provisions
a. All planned commercial developments shall be
serviced with public sanitary sewerage and water
lines of not less than eight (8) inches and six (6)
inches, respectively. Septic sewage disposal may be
permitted with the approval of the Planning
Commission and the Lawrence County Department
of Public Health.
b. All electric, telephone, and similar service lines and
wiring shall be installed underground, and there
shall be no utility poles or overhead wiring in any
planned commercial development.
12. Storage of Solid Waste Material
In all planned commercial developments, solid waste
storage areas shall be screened from public view and shall
be maintained in such a manner as to meet County Public
Health Department requirements.
13. Street Graphics
Street graphic provisions as provided in Section 4.080, are
effective in planned commercial developments. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
APP 1-189
5.092 Historic Zoning Overlay District
A. Intent of the Historic District
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the identification,
designation and regulation, for purposes of protection, preservation
and continued use and enhancement, of those sites, structures
with their appurtenances and environmental settings, and districts
of historical, archaeological, architectural or cultural value to the
City of Lawrenceburg. These requirements are adopted pursuant
to the authority granted in Section 13-7-401, of the Tennessee
Code Annotated. The general intent of this provision includes,
among others, the following specific purposes:
1. To preserve and protect the historic and/or architectural
value of buildings or other structures;
2. To regulate exterior design, arrangement, texture and
materials proposed to be used within the historic district to
ensure compatibility;
3. To create an aesthetic appearance which complements the
historic buildings or other structures;
4. To stabilize and improve property values;
5. To foster civic beauty;
6. To strengthen the local economy; and
7. To promote the use of historical districts for the education,
pleasure and welfare of the present and future citizens of
the City of Lawrenceburg.
B. Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section.
1. Alteration
Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure, including, but not
APP 1-190
limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or
removal of any structure.
2. Construction
The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or
property.
3. Demolition
Any act that destroys the external walls in whole or in part
of a structure.
4. Demolition by Neglect
The failure to provide ordinary and necessary maintenance
and repair to a historic site or a historic resource within a
historic district, whether by negligence or willful neglect,
purpose or design, by the owner or any partly in possession
of such site.
5. Design Guidelines
Standards adopted by the Lawrenceburg Historic Zoning
Commission which preserve the historic, cultural, and
architectural character of an area or of a structure.
6. An Economic Hardship
An economic burden imposed upon the owner which is
unduly excessive and prevents a realization of a reasonable
rate of return upon the value of his property.
7. Historic District
A group of historic resources which are significant as a
cohesive unit and contribute to the historical, architectural,
archaeological or cultural values within the City of
Lawrenceburg and which has been so designated by the
Historic Zoning Commission.
APP 1-191
8. Historic Landmark
Any individual historic resource that is significant and
contributes to the historical, architectural, archaeological or
cultural values within the City of Lawrenceburg and which
has been so designated by the Historic Zoning Commission.
9. Ordinary Repair and Maintenance
Any work, the purpose of which is to correct any
deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure or any
part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as may be
practicable, to its condition prior to such deterioration,
decay or damage, using the same materials or those
materials available which are as close as possible to the
original.
10. Relocation
Any change of the location of a structure in its present
setting or another setting.
11. Structure
A nonmoveable work made up interdependent and
interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization.
C. Creation of the Historical Zoning Commission
In order to execute the purposes of this act there is hereby
established a commission to be known as the Historic Zoning
Commission. The commission shall consist of five (5) members.
All members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor,
and subject to confirmation by the Board of Commissioners.
Additionally, one (1) city commissioner shall serve as an advisory,
non voting, member of said Historical Zoning Commission.
1. Membership of Historical Zoning Commission shall be
composed of the following members:
a. One (1) member of the Lawrenceburg Regional
Planning Commission.
APP 1-192
b. One (1) member representing the Lawrence County
Historical Society,
c. One (1) architect who is a member, or meets
membership requirements, of the American Institute
of Architects, if available.
d. Three (3) members from the community in general.
e. One (1) merchant or property owner.
f. One (1) member of the Lawrenceburg Board of
Commissioners, elected by the members of said
board. Said City Commission member shall be in an
advisory capacity only, and shall not have voting
rights.
2. Terms of Office
The members of the Historic Zoning Commission shall serve
for a five (5) year term, except for the members first
appointed, who shall serve respectively as follows: One (1)
for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for three (3)
years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5) years.
All members shall serve without compensation and may be
removed from membership by vote of the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Lawrenceburg.
Vacancies on the Historic Zoning Commission shall be filled
for the unexpired term of those members whose position has
become vacant in the manner herein provided for the
appointment of such members; vacancies shall be filled
within sixty (60) days.
3. Organization
The Historic Zoning Commission shall elect from its
members its own chairman and other officers deemed
appropriate to carry out its purpose. The commission shall
adopt rules of order and establish regular meeting dates. At
least four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of its business. The concurring
vote of members of the commission shall constitute final
action of the commission on any matter before it.
APP 1-193
4. Conflict of Interest
Any member of the Historic Zoning Commission who shall
have a direct or indirect interest in any property which is
the subject matter of or is affected by a decision of said
commission shall be disqualified from participating in the
discussion, decision, or proceedings of the Historic Zoning
Commission in connection therewith.
D. Boundaries of Historical Districts and Landmarks
Upon adoption of this ordinance, the Historic Zoning Commission
shall delineate the boundaries of the historical district or
landmark and have it approved by the Lawrenceburg City
Commission. After the boundary receives approval by the Board,
it shall be shown on the zoning map or as special overlays to the
zoning map. Changes in the boundaries of the historical district
or landmarks may occur after a recommendation by the Historical
Zoning Commission and approved by the City Commission.
1. Historic District Defined
A historic district shall be defined as a geographically
definable area which possesses a significant concentration,
linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects
which are united by past events or aesthetically by plan or
physical development, and which meets one (1) or more of
the following criteria.
a. That it is associated with an event which has made a
significant contribution to local, state, or national
historic; or
b. That it includes structures associated with the lives
of persons significant in local, state, or national
history; or
c. That it contains structures or groups of structures
which embody the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, or method of construction, or that
represent the work of a master, or that possess high
artistic values, or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction; or
APP 1-194
d. That it has yielded or may be likely to yield
archaeological information important in history or
prehistory; or
2. Landmark Defined
A historic landmark shall be defined as a building,
structure, site or object, its appurtenance and the property
it is located on, of high historical, cultural, architectural or
archeological importance and whose demolition or
destruction would constitute an irreplaceable loss to the
quality and character of Lawrenceburg and which meets one
(1) or more of the following criteria:
a. That is associated with an event which has made a
significant contribution to local, state, or national
history;
b. That is associated with the lives of persons
significant in local, state, or national history;
c. That embodies the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, or method of construction or that
represents the work of a master, or that possesses
high artistic value;
d. That has yielded or may be likely to yield
archaeological information important in history or
prehistory; or
e. That is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places.
E. Powers and Duties of the Historical Zoning Commission
1. The Historic Zoning Commission shall review applications
regarding the creation of historic districts and landmarks.
The review of such applications shall be in accordance with
the criteria set forth in Subsection D., of this article. The
commission shall furnish to the city council, in writing, its
recommendations regarding the creation of any
recommendations of the commission prior to the
establishment of such districts or landmarks.
APP 1-195
2. Prior to the establishment of a historic district or landmark,
and subsequent to adoption of the district or landmark, the
Historic Zoning Commission shall adopt for each such
proposed district or landmark a set of review guidelines,
which it will apply in ruling upon the granting or denial of
a certificate of appropriateness as provided for in this
article. Reasonable public notice and opportunity for public
comment, by public hearing or otherwise, shall be required
before the adoption of any such review guidelines.
3. It shall be the duty of the Historic Zoning Commission to
make the following determinations with respect to the
historic districts or landmarks when applicable:
a. Appropriateness of altering or demolishing any
building or structure within the historic district or
any landmark. The commission may require interior
and exterior photographs, architectural measured
drawings of the exterior, or other notations of
architectural features to be used for historical
documentation as a condition of any permission to
demolish a building or structure, such photographs,
drawings, etc., shall be at the expense of the
commission.
b. Appropriateness of exterior architectural features,
including signs and other exterior fixtures, of any
new buildings and structures to be constructed
within the historic district or of any landmark.
c. Appropriateness of exterior design of any new
extension of any existing building or structure within
the historic district or of any landmark.
d. Appropriateness of front yards, side yards, rear
yards, off-street parking spaces, location of entrance
drives into the property, sidewalks, along the public
right-of-way, which might affect the character of any
building or structure within the historic district or
landmark.
e. Appropriateness of the general exterior design,
arrangement, texture, material, of the building or
other structure in question and the relation of such
APP 1-196
factors to similar features of buildings in the
immediate surroundings and entire district.
However, the Historic Zoning Commission shall not
consider interior arrangement or design.
(1) historical or architectural value of the present
structure;
(2) the relationship of the exterior architectural
features of such structure to the rest of the
structures, to the surrounding area, and to the
character of the district.
(3) the general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement, texture, and materials proposed
to be used; and
(4) to any other factor, including aesthetic, which
is reasonably related to the purpose of this
Article.
4. The commission, its members and employees, in the
performance of its work, may enter upon any land within its
jurisdiction and make examinations and surveys and place
or remove public notices as required by this ordinance, but
there shall be no right of entry into any building without the
consent of the owner.
5. Any member of the Historic Zoning Commission who shall
have a direct or indirect interest in any property which is
the subject matter of, or affected by, a decision of said
commission shall be disqualified from participating in the
discussion, decision, or proceedings of the Historic Zoning
Commission in connection therewith.
F. Construction, Alteration, Repair, Moving, or Demolition
1. There shall be no construction, alteration, remodeling, or
change of color that affects the external appearance of a
historic site without the prior approval of the Historic
Zoning Commission. Such approval shall be signified by a
Certificate of Approval which shall be issued by the
commission in such form as the commission shall deem
advisable.
APP 1-197
a. Applications
Applications for Certificate of Approval shall be made
at the office of the Building Inspector of the City of
Lawrenceburg. The Building Inspector shall notify
the Historic Zoning Commission of such applications,
which shall be in for form of preliminary scale
drawings and specifications, and such other
documents as are appropriate to acquaint the
commission with the details of the proposed project.
If the preliminary drawings and other data are
sufficiently clear, the commission may grant final
approval upon the basis of them. However, the
commission shall have the power to require drawings
signed by registered architects or engineers and such
other documentation as required.
b. Consideration of Applications
All applications for Certificates of Approval received
by the Building Inspector ten (10) days prior to the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic
Zoning Commission shall be considered by the
commission at the next meeting date. Any
application not granted final approval shall be
considered at the next regular meeting before which
the application submits whatever documentation
required by the commission at its preliminary
consideration of the project.
c. Approval or Disapproval
Within thirty (30) days following the availability of
sufficient data and documentation, the Historic
Zoning Commission shall issue its Certificate of
Approval with or without attached condition or refuse
to grant a Certificate of Approval. If the commission
should refuse to grant a Certificate of Approval, it
shall state its grounds for refusal in writing and
communicate such grounds to the applicant.
2. No historic site may be demolished or partially demolished
without the prior approval of the Historic Zoning
Commission. Any application to demolish or partially
APP 1-198
demolish a structure in the historic district shall be
forwarded to the Historic Zoning Commission.
G. Moratorium on Alteration or Demolition
The commission shall have the power to require a one hundredeighty
(180) day moratorium on any request to demolish or alter
any structures covered by this ordinance. If no action has been
taken or no provisions made for acquiring or restoring the
structure within this period of time, the proposed demolition or
alteration shall be deemed to have been approved by the
commission.
1. Demolition by Neglect
Structures located within a historic district which
contribute architecturally or historically to the character
and importance of the district and all landmarks shall be
preserved against decay and deterioration and kept free
from structural defects by the owner or such other person or
persons who may have legal custody and control thereof.
The owner or other person having custody and control, in
keeping with the city's housing standards, shall repair any
exterior or interior portions of such building, sites,
structure, or object which is becoming deteriorated, decayed,
or damaged and tending to cause the structure to fall into a
state of disrepair.
2. The Historic Zoning Commission, on its own initiative, may
file a petition with the Building Inspector requesting that he
proceed under the public safety and housing regulations to
require correction of defects or repairs to a structure covered
under Section 5.092, G, 1, above, so that such structure
shall be preserved and protected in accordance with the
purposes of this ordinance.
3. If any structure covered by Section 8.1, above, shall have to
be demolished as a public safety hazard and the owner of
the structure shall receive two or more notices from the
Building Inspector of building neglect in violation of this
ordinance and other city ordinances, no application for a
permit for a project on the property may be considered for a
period of two (2) years from the date of demolition of the
structure. Additionally, no permit for a curb cut needed for
APP 1-199
the operation of a surface parking lot shall be granted by
any city office during this period.
H. Determination of Economic Hardship
Each application for removal or demolition shall be considered,
taking into account economic hardship. The commission may,
after reasonable notice, set an application for public hearing and
may consider any or all of the following:
1. Estimate of the cost of the proposed redevelopment,
alteration, demolition, or removal and an estimate of any
additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the
recommendations of the commission for changes necessary
for the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
2. A report from a licensed engineer or architect with
experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness
of any structure of the property and their suitability for
rehabilitation.
3. Estimated market value of the property in its current
condition; after completion of the proposed redevelopment,
alterations, demolition, or removal; after any changes
recommended by the commission; and, in the case of a
proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing
property for continued use.
4. In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an
architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or
other real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate
professional experienced in rehabilitation or reuse of the
existing structure on the property.
5. Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the
party from whom purchased, including a description of the
relationship, if any, between the owner of record or
applicant and the person from whom the property was
purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller
and buyer.
6. If the property is income-producing, the annual gross
income from the property for the previous two (2) years;
itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the
APP 1-200
previous two (2) years; and depreciation deduction and
annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any,
during the same period.
7. Any other information considered necessary by the
commission to a determination as to whether the property
does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.
Request for reconsideration shall be taken up at a public
hearing with reasonable notice and consideration given to
any or all of the factors listed above.
I. Jurisdiction and Appeals
Appeals from any decision of the Historic Zoning Commission may
be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law.
Nothing in this Article shall be interpreted as giving the
commission any authority to consider, review, examine or control
the use of property classified as a historic zoning district or
landmark. Use shall be controlled solely by the zoning controlling
such property prior to its classification as a historic district or
landmark or as may be rezoned by subsequent amendments.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #810, Sept. 1994, and
Ord. #1220, Jan. 2018 Ch4_03-28-19)
5.100 AIRPORT ZONING PROVISIONS
5.101 Statutory Authorization
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. #926,
May 2000)
5.102 Definitions
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT - The Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION - Nine hundred thirty-six (936) feet above
mean-sea-level.
APP 1-201
APPROACH SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on the
extended runway center line, extending outward and upward from
the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the
approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Subsection 5.104,
of this ordinance. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL
ZONES - These zones are set forth in Subsection 5.103, of this
ordinance.
BOARD OF APPEALS - The duly appointed Board of
Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning Appeals to hear and decide on
issues related to adjustments, appeals, special exceptions or
variances to the established zoning ordinance. The Board of
Appeals may also be referred to as the Board of Zoning Appeals.
CONICAL SURFACE - A surface extending outward and upward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to
one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION - An obstruction determined to
have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient
utilization of the navigable air space.
HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all
zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the
datum shall be mean-sea-level elevation, unless otherwise
specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE - A horizontal plane one hundred fifty
(150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of
which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is
constructed for and intended to be used by propeller drive aircraft
of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds
maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE - Any pre-existing structure, object of
natural growth, or use of land that is inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance or an amendment, thereto.
APP 1-202
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument
approach procedure has been approved or planned.
OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object, including
a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in
Subsection 5.104, of this ordinance.
PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or government entity; includes
a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or similar representative of any
of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument
Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It
also means a runway for which a precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or
any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinal centered on a
runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared hard
surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet
beyond each end of that runway. The width and elevation of the
primary surface is set forth in Subsection 5.083 of this ordinance.
RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and
take-off of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURAL - An object, including a mobile object, constructed
or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings,
towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead
transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES - These surfaces extend outward at
ninety (90) degree angles to the runway center line and the
runway center line extended at a slope of seven (7) feet
horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary
and approach surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of
the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond
the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
APP 1-203
surface and at ninety (90) degree angles to the extended runway
center line.
TREE - Any object of natural growth.
VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway included solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures. (Ord. #926, May 2000)
5.103 Airport Overlay Districts
In order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, there are, hereby,
created and established certain zones that include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces,
and conical surfaces as they apply to the Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County
Airport. Such zones are to be included as overlay districts to the existing
Official Zoning Atlas of Lawrenceburg. An area located in more than one
of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitation. The various airport overlay districts are
hereby established and defined as follows:
A. Primary Surface Zone
Established as the imaginary surface five hundred (500) feet wide,
longitudinally centered on the runway and extends a length of two
hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway. The elevation
of any point on the longitudinal profile on the primary surface
coincides with the elevation of the center line of the runway. The
highest determined elevation of the Lawrenceburg/Lawrence
County Airport is nine hundred thirty-six (936) feet above meansea-
level.
B. Horizontal Zone
All the airspace that lies directly under an imaginary horizontal
surface one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport
elevation, or a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above meansea-
level. The horizontal zone is, hereby, established as being an
area defined by two semi-circles, each having a radius point
located two hundred (200) feet beyond the runway ends and on the
runway center line extended, the radius of each semi-circle being
ten thousand (10,000) feet; and lines parallel with the runway
center line connecting the semi-circles. The horizontal zone does
not include the approach/departure zones and the transitional
zones.
APP 1-204
C. Conical Zones
All the airspace that lies directly under an imaginary surface
extending upward and outward from the periphery of the
horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) (20 feet
outward for each foot upward) and extending to a height of three
hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation, or four
thousand (4000) feet above mean-sea-level.
D. Approach/Departure Zone (Runway 17, Nonprecision
An approach/departure zone is established at each end of the
runway which shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet at a
distance two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway,
widening, thereafter, uniformly to a width of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) feet at a distance of ten thousand two hundred
(10,200) feet beyond the end of runway 17, its center line being the
continuation of the center line of the runway. The
approach/departure surface inclines upward from the base
elevation at a slope of thirty-four to one (34:1) (34 feet outward for
each foot upward) at the end of Runway 17.
E. Approach/Departure Zone (Runway 35, Visual)
An approach/departure zone is established at each end of the
runway which shall have a width of five hundred (500) feet at a
distance two hundred (200) feet beyond each of the runway,
widening, thereafter, uniformly to a width of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) feet at a distance of ten thousand two hundred
(10,200) feet beyond the end of Runway 35, its center line being the
continuation of the center line of the runway. The approach/
departure surface inclines upward from the base elevation at a
slope of thirty-four to one (34:1) (34 feet outward for each foot
upward) at the end of Runway 35.
F. Transitional Zone
All the airspace which lies directly under an imaginary surface
extending upward and outward perpendicular to the runway
center line (and extended runway center line) at a slope of seven
to one (7:1) from the sides of the primary surface and approach/
departure surface until they intersect the horizontal surface.
(Ord. #926, May 2000)
APP 1-205
5.104 Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in the ordinance, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in
any zone created by this ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable
height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height
limitations are, hereby, established for each of the zones in question as
follows:
A. Approach/Departure Zones
One foot in height for each thirty-four (34) feet in a horizontal
distance beginning at a point of two hundred (200) feet beyond and
at the elevation of the end of the runway extending to a point ten
thousand two hundred (10,200) feet from the end of the runway.
B. Transition Zones
One foot in height for each seven (7) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at a point two hundred fifty (250) feet normal to and at
the elevation of the center line of the runway extending two
hundred (200) feet beyond each end, thereof, and extending to a
maximum height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation which is nine hundred thirty-six (936)
feet above mean-sea-level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits of one foot vertical for each seven (7) feet
horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones
extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect
the horizontal surface.
C. Horizontal Zone
One hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation
or a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) feet above mean-sealevel.
D. Conical Zone
One foot in height for each twenty (20) feet of horizontal distance
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone extending to a
height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation
or four thousand (4,000) feet above mean-sea-level.
APP 1-206
E. Except Height Limitations
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree
to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land.
(Ord. #926, May 2000)
5.105 Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this ordinance in
such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make
it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others,
result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or, otherwise, in any
way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord. #926, May 2000)
5.106 Nonconforming Uses
A. Regulations Not Retroactive
The regulations prescribed in this ordinance shall not be construed
to require the removal, lowering, or other charge or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations at the
effective date of this ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein
shall require any change on the construction, alteration, or
intended use of any structure; the construction or alteration of
which was begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance and
is diligently executed.
B. Marking and Lighting
Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner
of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is, hereby, required
to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance, thereon, of
such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport Board to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the
Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport. (Ord. #926, May 2000)
APP 1-207
5.107 Administration
A. Future Uses
Except as specifically provided in A, B, and C, hereunder, no
material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure
shall be erected, or otherwise, established, and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created, unless a permit, therefore,
shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a
permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired,
with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit may be granted. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance shall be granted,
unless a variance has been approved by a Board of appeals or
adjustments in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Zoning Ordinance of Lawrenceburg.
1. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone
and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure
would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.
2. In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but
at a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred
(4,200) feet or more from each end of the runway, no permit
shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventyfive
(75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except
when such tree or structure would extend above the height
limit prescribed for such transition zones.
3. In areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five
(75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such tree or structure because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such transition zones.
APP 1-208
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any tree or structure in excess of any of the height
limitations established by this ordinance, the Lawrenceburg
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Existing Uses
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this ordinance or any amendments,
thereto, or than it is when the application for such a permit is
made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit may
be granted.
C. Permit Issuance
The Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport Board shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the approving authority of zoning permit
issuance on all new construction, and the alteration or
maintenance of any existing tree or structure in the approach
zones and transition zones requiring a permit under the provisions
of this ordinance. All permit applicants shall apply to the
Lawrenceburg Office of Planning and Zoning, which has zoning
jurisdiction in the territory in question affected by the
development or maintenance proposal. Permits shall be issued
under the terms and requirements of the pertinent Zoning
Ordinance and the regulations herein prescribed. No permit shall
be issued until the applicant has provided substantial information
regarding the nature of the project, including the precise location,
proposed use and height limitation of any and all structures or
trees.
D. Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the Lawrenceburg Building Inspector, duly
appointed, to enforce the zoning codes of each jurisdiction to
administer, inspect, and enforce the provisions set forth in this
ordinance.
APP 1-209
E. Appeals and Adjustments
Applicants may seek adjustments, appeals, special exceptions and
interpretations to this ordinance through the Board of Zoning
Appeals in Lawrenceburg, which has zoning jurisdiction over the
territory in question. The Lawrenceburg/Lawrence County Airport
Board, the Lawrenceburg Municipal/Regional - Planning
Commission, and/or the Lawrence County Planning Commission
may make recommendations to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
F. Penalties
Any violation of this ordinance or any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder, shall be issued penalties as prescribed
within the Lawrenceburg Zoning Ordinance, which has jurisdiction
over the territory in question. (Ord. #926, May 2000)
5.108 Validity and Interpretation
A. Conflicting Regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in the ordinance and any other regulations
applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect
to the height of structures or trees, and the use of land, or any
matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern
and prevail.
B. Severability
If any of the provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof
to any person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity
shall not effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable. (Ord. #926, May 2000)
APP 1-210
ARTICLE VI
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION
6.010 Scope
6.020 Nonconforming Uses
6.030 Bulk and Lot Size Noncompliance
6.040 Exceptions to Height Limitations
6.050 Lots of Record
6.060 Exceptions to Setback Requirements
6.070 Absolute Minimum Lot Size
6.010 SCOPE
Article VI, of this ordinance, is devoted to providing for the necessary exceptions
and modifications to the specific zoning district provisions and the
supplementary provisions provided in Article IV and Article V. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
6.020 NONCONFORMING USES
The districts established in this ordinance (as set forth in district regulations in
Article V) are designed to guide the future use of land in Lawrenceburg,
Tennessee by encouraging the development of desirable residential, commercial,
and industrial areas with appropriate groupings of compatible, and related uses
and thus promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
As a necessary corollary, in order to carry out such purposes, nonconforming
uses which adversely affect the development of such areas must be subject to
certain limitations. The provisions governing nonconforming uses set forth in
this article are therefore established to contain the existing undesirable
conditions resulting from such incompatible nonconforming uses, which are
detrimental to the achievement of such purposes. While such uses are generally
permitted to continue, this ordinance is designed to restrict any expansion of
such uses beyond the site which the use occupied upon the effective date of this
ordinance.
In the case of buildings or other structures not complying with the bulk
regulations of this ordinance, the provisions governing noncomplying buildings
or other structures set forth in this article are established in order to permit the
continued use of such buildings or other structures, but to limit the creation of
additional noncompliance or increase in the degree of noncompliance.
APP 1-211
These provisions are thus designed to preserve the character of the districts
established in this ordinance in light of their suitability to particular uses, and
thus to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
6.021 Provisions Governing Nonconforming Uses
A. Applicability
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all uses which are
not permitted within the districts in which they are located.
Additionally, buildings and other structures located within the
floodway are considered within the regulations of nonconforming
uses.
B. Construction or Use Permit Approved Prior to Ordinance Adoption
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall
layout, plans, construction, site or designated use of any
development, building, structure, or part thereof where official
approvals and required building permits have been granted before
the enactment of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto, the
construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been
started prior to the effective date of this ordinance and completion
thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six
(6) months period, and not discontinued until completion except for
reasons beyond the builder's control.
In the event that the activity or construction of such building or
other structures is not substantially underway and being diligently
pursued within the six (6) month period following the issuance of
a building permit, then such permit shall automatically lapse and
the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
C. Repairs and Alterations
Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe by proper authority.
D. Zone Lot Containing Nonconforming Use
A zone lot containing a nonconforming use shall not be reduced in
area except to comply with Section C.
APP 1-212
E. Continuation of Nonconforming Use
Any nonconforming use which existed lawfully at the time of
enactment of this ordinance and which remains nonconforming
under the provisions contained herein or any use which shall
become nonconforming upon enactment of this ordinance, or any
subsequent amendments thereto, may be allowed to continue in
operation and be permitted provided that no change in use is
undertaken.
F. Change of Nonconforming Use
1. General Provisions
For the purpose of this chapter, a change in use is a change
to another use either under the same activity type or any
other activity type or major class of activity; however, a
change in occupancy or ownership shall not, by itself,
constitute a change of use.
A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming
use, and the applicable bulk regulations and accessory offstreet
parking requirements shall apply to such change of
use or to alterations made in order to accommodate such
conforming use.
2. Land with Incidental Improvements
In all districts a nonconforming use of land, not involving a
building or structure, or in connection with which any
building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to
the principal use of the land, shall be changed only to a
conforming use.
3. Nonconforming to Conforming Use
Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming
use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a
nonconforming use.
APP 1-213
G. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses
1. General Provisions
Any nonconforming use which shall become nonconforming
upon enactment of this ordinance, or any subsequent
amendments thereto, may be allowed to expand operations
and construct additional facilities which involve an actual
continuance and expansion of the nonconforming use
provided that any such expansion shall not violate the
provisions as set out below.
2. Land with Incidental Improvements
In all districts a nonconforming use of land, not involving a
building or structure, or in connection with which any
building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to
the principal use of the land, shall not be allowed to expand
through the addition of buildings or other structures.
3. Adequate Space for Expansion
No expansion or any nonconforming use shall infringe upon,
or increase the extent of any infringement existing at the
time of adoption of this ordinance, upon any open space
required by this ordinance. All required yard setback
requirements must be adhered to in any such expansion
project.
4. Expansion Limited
Any expansion of a nonconforming use permitted under the
provisions of this section shall take place only upon the zone
lot(s) on which said use was operating at the time the use
became nonconforming. Nothing within this provision shall
be construed so as to permit expansion of any
nonconforming use through the acquisition and
development of additional land.
5. Expansion upon Land Subject to Flood
No expansion of any nonconforming use shall violate the
provisions of Section 5.080.
APP 1-214
H. Damage or Destruction
1. General Provisions
Any nonconforming use which shall become nonconforming
upon enactment of this ordinance, or any subsequent
amendments thereto, may be permitted to reconstruct
damaged or destroyed facilities which involve any actual
continuance of the nonconforming use provided that any
such reconstruction shall not violate the provisions set out
below.
2. Change in Use Prohibited
No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities may
occur which shall act to change the nonconforming use (as
required in Section G., above) to other than a permitted use.
3. Land with Incidental Improvements
In all districts, when a nonconforming building or other
structure or improvements located on "land with incidental
improvements" (as defined by this ordinance) is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of twenty-five (25) percent or more
of the assessed valuation of all buildings, and other
structure or other improvements located thereon (as
determined from the assessment rolls effective on the date
of damage or destruction), such nonconforming use shall
terminate and the tract of land shall therefore be used only
for a conforming use.
4. Infringement upon Open Space Restricted
No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities utilized
by a nonconforming use shall increase the extent of any
infringement upon any open space required by this
ordinance.
5. Reconstruction of Flood Damaged Property
The provisions of Section 6.030, shall apply to the
reconstruction of all buildings and structures associated
with any nonconforming use located within floodway the
district.
APP 1-215
I. Discontinuance
When a nonconforming use of land or the active operation of
substantially all the nonconforming uses in any building or other
structure or tract of land is discontinued for a period of thirty (30)
months, then the land or building or other structure shall
thereafter be used only for conforming use. Intent to resume
active operations shall not affect the foregoing provision.
(Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #1044, July 2008)
6.030 BULK AND LOT SIZE NONCOMPLIANCE
A. General Provisions
The provisions of this chapter shall control buildings and other
structures which do not meet the bulk or any other provisions
applicable in the districts in which they are located except those
provisions which pertain to activity or use.
B. Continuation of Use
The use of a noncomplying building or other structure or parcel
may be continued, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
C. Repairs and Alterations
Repairs, incidental alterations, or structural alterations may be
made in noncomplying buildings or other structures subject to the
provisions of Section 6.030, D., through 6.030, F.
D. Enlargements or Conversions
A noncomplying building or other structure may be enlarged or
converted, provided that no enlargement or conversion may be
made which would either create a new noncompliance or increase
the degree of noncompliance of any portion of a building or other
structure or parcel.
E. Buildings Noncomplying as to Lot Area
If a building does not comply with the applicable district
regulations on lot area per dwelling unit (lot area being smaller
than required for the number of dwelling units on such zone lot)
such building may be converted (except when in the floodway
APP 1-216
district), provided that the deficiency in the required lot area is not
thereby increased (for example, a noncomplying building on a lot
of thirty-five hundred (3,500) square feet, which before conversion
required a lot area of five thousand (5,000) square feet and was,
therefore, deficient by fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet, can be
converted into any combination of dwelling units allowed in the
zoning district in question requiring a lot area of no more than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
F. Damage or Destruction of Noncomplying Uses
A noncomplying building which is damaged or destroyed may be
reconstructed, provided that the reconstruction will not either
create a new noncompliance or increase the degree of
noncompliance of a building or structure or parcel or portion
thereof. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
6.040 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments,
water towers, transmission towers, windmills not in residential zones,
chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, public and semi-public radio
towers, masts and aerials. Height exceptions for radio towers and windmills in
residential zoning districts shall be allowed only when approved by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
6.050 LOTS OF RECORD
The following provisions shall apply to all existing lots of record:
A. Where the owner of a lot consisting of one or more adjacent lots of official
record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance does not own
sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard or other requirements
of this ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a variance from the terms of this ordinance. Such lot may be
used as a building site, provided, however, that the yard and other
requirements of the district are complied with as closely as possible in the
opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
B. No lot which is now or hereafter built upon shall be so reduced in area
that the yards and open space will be smaller than prescribed by this
ordinance, and no yard, court, or open space provided around any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions hereof, shall
APP 1-217
again be considered as a yard, court, or other open space for another
building.
C. Where two (2) or more lots of record with a continuous frontage are under
the same ownership, or where a substandard lot of record has continuous
frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lots shall be
combined to form one or more building sites meeting the minimum
requirements of the district in which they are located. (Ord. #789, June
1993)
6.060 EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
The front setback requirement of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to
any lot where the average depth of existing setbacks on the developed lots
located within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot is less than the
minimum required front yard depth. In such cases, the front yard setback may
be less than required but not less than the average of the existing depth for
front yards on developed lots within one hundred (100) feet on each side of the
lot. In residential districts, however, the setback shall in no case be less than
fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
6.070 ABSOLUTE MINIMUM LOT SIZE
In no case shall the Building Inspector or the Board of Zoning Appeals permit
any zone lot in a residential district to be used as building site which is less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet in total area and thirty (30) feet in width at its
narrowest point, or has a front setback of less than fifteen (15) feet and a side
setback of less than five (5) feet, with the exception of officially approved
planned developments. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-218
ARTICLE VII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
7.010 Administration of the Ordinance
7.020 The Enforcement Officer
7.030 Building Permits
7.040 Temporary Use Permits
7.050 Certificate of Occupancy
7.060 Board of Zoning Appeals
7.070 Variances
7.080 Procedure for Authorizing Special Exceptions
7.090 Amendments to the Ordinance
7.100 Penalties
7.110 Remedies
7.120 Separability
7.130 Interpretation
7.140 Effective Date
7.010 ADMINISTRATION OF THE ORDINANCE
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall after the effective date
of this ordinance be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected,
altered, or moved unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this ordinance shall be considered minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity,
and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances, resolutions, or
regulations heretofore adopted or which may be adopted hereafter impose
greater restrictions than those specified herein, compliance with such other
ordinances, resolutions, or regulations is mandatory. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.020 THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the City
Building Inspector. In performance of administering and enforcing this
ordinance, he shall:
A. Issue all Building Permits and make and maintain records thereof.
B. Issue all Certificates of Occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof.
APP 1-219
C. Issue and renew, where applicable, all Temporary Use Permits and make
and maintain records thereof.
D. Maintain and keep current zoning maps and records of amendments
thereto.
E. Receive, file and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all applications
for variances or other matters on which the Board is required to act under
the provisions of this ordinance.
F. Conduct inspections as required in this ordinance and such other
inspections as are necessary to insure compliance with the various other
general provisions of this ordinance. The Building Inspector shall posses
the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making
inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his authorized
duties. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.030 BUILDING PERMITS
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any
building or other structure, including accessory structures, to commence the
moving, alteration, or repair of any structure, or to commence the filling of land
without a permit therefore, issued by the Building Inspector. If said excavation
or construction is begun without a proper building permit the building permit
fee shall be double or twice the original cost of the permit if legal compliance had
been obtained as is required.
No Building Permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector, except in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, unless there is received a
written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals in the form of an administrative
review, special exception, or variance as provided by this ordinance.
A. Application
Application for a Building Permit shall be made in writing to the Building
Inspector on forms provided for that purpose. All applications for
Building Permits shall be accompanied by a plan or a plat in duplicate,
drawn to scale, and showing the following:
1. The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon.
APP 1-220
2. The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to
be erected, altered, or moved and of buildings or other structures
already on the lot and the elevation of the building site.
3. The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other
structures.
4. Location and design of off-street parking areas and off-street
loading areas, and such other information concerning the lot or
adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the
provisions of this ordinance are being observed.
B. Site Plan Requirements
Site plans containing the information required for the particular use by
this section must be submitted to the Building Inspector at the time of an
application for a building permit. It is specifically anticipated that the
approval process for one- and two-family detached houses and individual
mobile homes shall be administratively approved by the Building
Inspector. All other uses shall only be approved in the manner set forth
in 7.030, B., 2., below.
1. Site Plans Required for One- and Two-Family Detached Houses
and Individual Mobile Homes
a. The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be
built upon.
b. The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other
structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of buildings
or other structures already on the lot and the elevation of
the building site.
c. The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other
structures, upon it, including the number of dwelling units
the building is intended to accommodate.
d. The size and location of all yards and open areas required
by this ordinance.
e. The dimension and location of all public water and sewer
lines from which the property is to be served.
APP 1-221
f. The location and approximate dimension of all points of
access to a public street or road.
g. Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots
as may be essential for determining whether the provisions
of this ordinance are being observed.
h. Where subsoil sewage disposal is anticipated, certification
from the county health department approving the lot for
such use.
2. Site Plans Required for All Other Buildings and Activities
This procedure is to be utilized for all buildings and activities,
except those subject to the provisions of 7.030, B., 1. Unless
otherwise specified, the reviewing agency shall be the
Lawrenceburg Planning Commission. Proposals for planned
developments and mobile home parks shall follow separate
provisions outlined elsewhere in this ordinance, but such proposals
shall also be reviewed by the Planning Commission.
The following information shall be included in the site plan:
a. General Location Sketch Map at a Scale not Smaller than
1"=2,000', Showing:
(1) The approximate boundaries of the site.
(2) External (public access streets or roads in relation to
the site).
(3) Surrounding development (i.e., general residential,
commercial, and industrial areas) within the general
vicinity of the site.
(4) Any public water and sewer systems in relation to
site.
b. Site Plan Drawn at a Scale no Smaller than 1"=100';
Showing:
(1) The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot.
APP 1-222
(2) The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other
structures already on the lot.
(3) The existing and intended use of the lot and of such
structures upon it, including, for residential
activities, the number of dwelling units the buildings
are intended to accommodate.
(4) Topographic features, both existing and proposed
with contours at a vertical interval no greater than
two (2) feet.
(5) Location of all driveways and entrances.
(6) Location of all accessory off-street parking areas to
include a plan showing design and layout of such
parking facilities where five (5) or more accessory offstreet
parking spaces are to be provided.
(Dimensions shall be shown.)
(7) Location of all accessory off-street loading berths.
(8) Location of open space.
(9) Proposed ground coverage, floor area, and building
heights.
(10) Position of fences and walls to be utilized for
screening (materials specified).
(11) Position of screen planting (type of planting
specified).
(12) Proposed means of surface drainage, including all
drainage ways and facilities.
(13) Location of all easements and rights-of-way.
(14) Location of areas subject to flooding.
(15) Location and size of all utilities, including all fire
hydrants.
(16) Location, type, and size of proposed signs.
APP 1-223
c. The Planning Commission as the Reviewing Body May:
(1) Recommend approval of the plan as submitted to the
Building Inspector.
(2) Recommend disapproval of the plan.
(3) Recommend approval of the plan with conditions or
recommendations for alterations.
If no "actual construction" has begun in the development within
two (2) years from the date of approval of the site plan, said
approval of the site plan shall lapse and be of no further effect.
3. Building and Structures Exempt from Site Plan Requirements
Building additions and building structures five hundred (500)
square feet or less and accessory structures one thousand (1,000)
square feet or less, that do not increase the capacity of the
principal use are exempt from submitting a complete site plan as
required in Section 7.030, B, 2, of this ordinance. In lieu of a site
plan, the owner or developer shall submit to the Planning
Commission a site sketch plan containing the following
information.
The following information is required on a site sketch plan:
a. General location map (no scale required).
b. Map of the site drawn by a licensed surveyor showing
existing or proposed plan-o-metrics in relation to property
lines.
c. Proposed location of the addition or accessory structure,
drawn at a scale no smaller than 1"=100' showing property
lines and the outline of the existing building in this area.
d. A drainage plan will be required for any addition or
accessory structure that is not placed on an impervious
area. Plan is required to meet all provisions of the city's
drainage ordinance.
e. Location and size of any public utilities in the area of
construction.
APP 1-224
f. On sites located adjacent to residential areas a plan for
screening and buffering will be required.
g. A revised ground coverage recap of the site.
h. A review fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
C. Fee
The Lawrenceburg City Commission shall establish a schedule of fees and
a collection procedure for Building Permits. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Building Inspector and City Hall. Only the City
Commission may after or amend the fee schedule. Until the appropriate
fee has been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application.
D. Issuance of Permit
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration as set forth
in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance,
the Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for such excavation
or construction. If an application for a Building Permit is not approved,
the Building Inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause
for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed
as a waiving of any provisions of this ordinance.
E. Construction Progress
Any Building Permit issued becomes invalid if work authorized is not
commenced within six (6) months of the date of issuance or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or discontinued for a period of one
(1) year. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by Ord. #950, March 2002)
7.040 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
It shall be unlawful to commence construction or development of any use of a
temporary nature unless a permit has been obtained from the City Building
Inspector, as provided for in Article IV, Section 4.030, of this ordinance.
Application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be made in writing to the
Building Inspector on the form provided for that purpose. A schedule of fees
shall be established by the Lawrenceburg City Commission. Such schedule shall
be posted in the office of the Building Inspector and City Hall. Until the
appropriate fee has been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
APP 1-225
7.050 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved,
or altered in its use shall be used until the Building Inspector shall have issued
a Certificate of Occupancy stating that such land, structure, or part thereof is
found to be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Within three (3)
days after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for
occupancy of use, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to make a final
inspection thereof, and to issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the building or
premises or part thereof is found to conform with provisions of this ordinance,
or, if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause for
such refusal. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.060 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
In accordance with 13-7-205 Tennessee Code Annotated, a Lawrenceburg Board
of Zoning Appeals, consisting of five members, is hereby established. All
members of such Board shall be appointed by the City Commission.
A. Term of Office of Board Members, Removal, and Vacancies
The members of the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall serve for a three (3)
year term, or until their respective successors are appointed and
qualified. The Board first appointed shall serve respectively for the
following terms: one for one (1) year, two for two (2) years, and two for
three (3) years. All members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall serve
with such compensation as may be fixed by the City Commission and may
serve with such compensation as may be fixed by the City Commission
and may be removed from membership on the Board of Zoning Appeals
for continued absence or just causes. Any member being so removed shall
be provided, upon his/her request, a public hearing upon the removal
decision. Vacancies of said Board of Zoning Appeals shall be filled for the
unexpired term of those members whose position has become vacant in
the manner provided herein for the appointment of such member.
B. Procedure
Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure and shall
keep records and action taken thereon. The records and minutes shall be
filed in the office of the Building Inspector and shall be of public record.
APP 1-226
C. Appeals to the Board
An appeal to the Lawrenceburg Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by
any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by, or by any governmental
office, department, board, or bureau affected by, any decision of the
Building Inspector based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this
ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of Zoning
Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Building
Inspector shall transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed was taken.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, given
public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and
decided the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any
person or party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney.
D. Powers of the Board
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. Administrative Review
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision,
determination or refusal made by the Building Inspector or other
administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any
provision of this ordinance.
2. Special Exceptions
To hear and decide applications for special exceptions as specified
in this ordinance, hear requests for interpretation of the Zoning
Map, and for decision on any special questions upon which the
Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to pass.
3. Variances
To hear and decide applications for variances from the terms of
this ordinance.
E. Rules and Regulations of the Board
The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. Such rules
shall at the minimum require that:
APP 1-227
1. The presence of three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum and the concurring vote of at least three (3) members of
the Board shall be necessary to deny or grant any application
before the Board.
2. No action shall be taken by the Board on any case until after a
public hearing and notice thereof. Said notice of public hearing
shall be a legal notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Lawrence County at least ten (10) days before the
hearing of an appeal. No appeal shall be considered and heard by
the Board less than fifteen (15) days after filing such appeal. If
new information is uncovered regarding an action of the Board
that could not have been reasonably presented in a public hearing
before the Board, the Board shall establish a date for the purpose
of rehearing in accordance with the appropriate procedures herein.
3. The Board may call upon any other office or agency of the county
government for information in the performance of its duties and it
shall be the duty of such other agencies to render such information
to the Board as may be reasonably required.
4. The Planning Commission shall be permitted to submit an
advisory opinion on any matter before the Board and such opinion
shall be made part of the record of such public hearing.
5. Any officer, agency, or department of the county or other agency,
or department of the county or other aggrieved party may appeal
any decision of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction as
provided for by State law.
6. Any decision made by the Board on a special exception shall
indicate the specific section of this ordinance under which the
permit is being considered and shall state clearly the specific
conditions imposed in granting such permit.
7. Appeals will be assigned for hearing in the order in which they
appear on the calendar thereof, except that appeals may be
advanced for hearing by order of the Board, good, and sufficient
cause being shown.
8. At the public hearing of the case before the Board, the appellant
shall appear in his own behalf or be represented by counsel or
agent. The appellant's side of the case shall be heard first and
APP 1-228
those in objection shall follow. To maintain orderly procedure,
each side shall proceed without interruption from the other side.
F. Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, after such notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate such stay would cause eminent
peril to life or property. In such instance, the proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction on application, on notice
to the Building Inspector, and on due cause shown.
G. Liability of Board Members, Building Inspectors and Employees
Any board member, building inspector, or other employee charged with
the enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City of Lawrenceburg,
within the scope of the responsibilities assigned him under this ordinance
shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability and shall be held harmless by the city
of any damage that may occur to persons or property as the result of any
act required or permitted in the proper discharge of their duties. Any suit
brought against any board member, building inspector, or employee
charged with the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance shall be
defended by legal representatives furnished by the city, until the final
termination of such proceedings.
H. Right of Entry upon Land
Upon notice to property owners, the Board, its members and employees
in the performance of its work, may enter upon any land within its
jurisdiction and make examinations and surveys and place or remove
public notices as required by this ordinance.
I. Rehearings
1. No rehearing of the decision by the Board shall be had except:
a. On motion to reconsider the vote; or
b. On a written request for a hearing.
APP 1-229
2. If the motion to reconsider receives a majority affirmative vote, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may vote on the motion to grant the
request for a rehearing, subject to such conditions as the Board
may, by resolution in each case, stipulate.
3. No request to grant a rehearing will be entertained unless new
evidence is submitted which could not reasonably be presented at
the previous hearing.
If the request for a rehearing is granted, the case shall be put on
the calendar for a rehearing. In all cases, the request for a
rehearing shall be in writing, reciting the reasons for the request
and shall be duly verified and accompanied by the necessary data
and diagrams. The persons requesting the rehearing shall be
notified to appear before the Board on a date to be set by the
Board.
4. No rehearing for a variance shall be granted and applicant found
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in willful violation of the
express provisions of a prior variance granted under the authority
of this article. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.070 VARIANCES
The purpose of this variance is to modify the strict application of the specific
requirements of this ordinance in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow,
shallow, or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby such
strict application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
which would deprive an owner of the reasonable use of his land. The variance
shall be used only where necessary to overcome some obstacle which is
preventing an owner from using his property under this ordinance.
A. Application
After written denial of a permit, a property owner may make application
for a variance, using any form which might be made available by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
B. Hearings
Upon receipt of an application and fee, the Board shall hold a hearing to
decide whether a variance to the ordinance provisions is, in fact,
necessary to relieve unnecessary hardships which act to deprive the
property owner of the reasonable use of his land. The Board shall
APP 1-230
consider and decide all applications for variances within thirty (30) days
of such hearing and in accordance with the standards provided below.
C. Fee
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged to cover review and
processing of each application for a variance, except that the fee shall be
waived for a governmental agency.
D. Standards for Variances
The Board shall not grant a variance, except where special circumstances
or conditions, fully described in the findings of the Board, do no apply
generally in the district. The burden of showing that the variance should
be granted shall be upon the person applying for the variance. In
granting a variance, the Board shall ascertain that the following criteria
are met:
1. The particular physical surroundings, shape, topographic
conditions of the specific property involved that would result in a
particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict application of this ordinance were
carried out must be stated.
2. The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based
would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the
same district.
3. The granting of the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to
other land structures, or buildings in the same district.
4. Financial returns only shall not be considered as a basis for
granting a variance.
5. The variance is the minimum variance that will relieve such
difficulties or hardship and thereby make possible the reasonable
use of the land, building, or structure.
6. The variance will not authorize activities otherwise excluded from
the particular district in which requested.
7. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare, injurious to other property or improvements in the
APP 1-231
area in which the subject property is located, or a substantial
impairment to the intent and purpose of the zoning district
wherein such property is located or of the general provisions of this
ordinance.
8. The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire,
endanger the public safety.
9. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been knowingly and
intentionally created by any person having an interest in the
property after the effective date of this ordinance.
D. Restrictions and Variances
1. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming
use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
2. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a
variance to allow a "USE" not permissible under the terms of this
ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by
implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said
district.
3. The Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions set out in Section 7.070, C., above, to reduce or
minimize the injurious effect to such variation upon surrounding
property and better carry out the general intent of this ordinance.
The Board may establish expiration dates as a condition or as a
part of any variances. (Ord. #789, June 1993, as amended by
Ord. #1103, Jan. 2013)
7.080 PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZING SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
The following procedure is established to provide procedures for review of a
proposed use as a conditional use or special exception by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. The procedure shall be the same whether review is required under
Section 13-7-206, of the Tennessee Code Annotated, by this ordinance, or
whether a review is requested by the Building Inspector to determine whether
a proposed use is potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive.
APP 1-232
A. Application
An application shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals for review.
Said application shall show the location and intended uses of the site, the
names of the property owners, existing land uses within two hundred
(200) feet, and any other material pertinent to the request which the
Board may require.
B. General Requirements
A conditional use permit (a special exception) shall be granted provided
the Board finds that it:
a. Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated so that the
public health, safety, and welfare will be protected.
b. Will not adversely affect other property in the area in which it is
located.
c. Is within the provisions of "Special Exceptions" as set forth in this
ordinance.
d. Conforms to all applicable provisions of this ordinance for the
district in which it is to be located as well as the provisions cited
in Section 7.080, and is necessary for public convenience in the
location planned.
C. Criteria for Review
Prior to the issuance of a special exception, the Board shall make written
findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual
special exceptions (Section 7.080, H.), and that satisfactory provisions
and arrangements have been made concerning all the following where
applicable:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon
with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
catastrophe.
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with
particular attention to the items in Item 1. above, and the
economic, noise, vibrations, glare, or odor effects of the special
APP 1-233
exception on or by adjoining properties and properties generally in
or near the district.
3. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in
1. and 2., above.
4. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and
compatibility.
5. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and
character.
6. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to
glare, traffic, safety, economic effect, and compatibility and
harmony with properties in the district.
7. Required yard and other open space
8. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property
in the district.
D. Restrictions
In the exercise of its approval, the Board may impose such conditions
upon the proposed uses of buildings or land as it may deem advisable in
the furtherance of the general purposes of this ordinance.
E. Validity of Plans
All approved plans, conditions, restrictions, and rules made a part of the
approval of the Board shall constitute certification on the part of
applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such regulations at all
times.
F. Time Limit
All applications reviewed by the Board shall be decided within sixty (60)
days of the date of application, and the applicant shall be provided with
either a written notice of approval or denial.
G. Special Exceptions Appeals
Any person or agency of the county government may appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction from the Board's decision as provided under
APP 1-234
statutes of the State of Tennessee. The judgement and findings of the
Board on all questions of fact that may be involved in any appeal, cause,
hearing or proceeding under this Article shall be final, and subject to
review only for illegality or want of jurisdiction. A fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) shall be charged to cover review and processing of each
application for a special exception.
H. Specific Standards for Residential Activities
A special exception shall not be granted for the residential activities
specified below unless the standards established there are met as a part
of the conditions for issuing such permit in the applicable zone districts.
1. Special Conditions for Multi-Family Dwelling and Mobile Home
Park Activities
In addition to the standards contained elsewhere in this ordinance
for these type developments, the Board of Appeals shall specifically
find that there will be no adverse impact upon adjoining properties
or the neighborhood in which such use is proposed. In making this
finding, the Board shall consider the effect upon traffic congestion,
overcrowding of schools, availability of necessary public utilities,
character of adjoining structures, suitability of the site for the use,
and such other factors as the Board may deem necessary.
2. Special Conditions for Upper Story Residential Conversion in the
Central Business District
In addition to the standards contained elsewhere in this ordinance
for the Central Business District, the Board of Appeals shall
consider the effects on the quality of the Central Business District.
In consideration of these cases, the board shall consider the
commercial uses in the area and ensure that all plans for upper
story renovation meets all local and state codes with total
involvement by the building inspector and the local fire chief.
I. Specific Standards for Community Facility Activities
In addition to the requirements of the applicable district and the general
requirements set forth above, a special exception shall be granted for the
community facility activities specified below only when the standards
established are met as part of the condition for issuing the permit in the
applicable zoning district.
APP 1-235
1. Special Conditions for Administrative Services
a. There must be a demonstrated need for such activities to
serve the neighborhood or the total community.
b. All lot, yard, and bulk regulations of the zone district shall
apply.
c. Appropriate off-street parking requirements shall apply.
d. Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as
appropriate to protect surrounding properties and reduce
any potential adverse impact.
e. The site and architectural plans shall be approved by the
Planning Commission.
2. Day Care Centers
For purposes of this ordinance day care facilities are classified into
two types as defined below:
Day Care Home - includes day care in an occupied residence of
not more than seven (7) children including children living in the
home.
Day Care Center - includes day care for more than seven (7)
preteenage children in any kind of building.
a. Day Care Home
(1) The required lot size, yard, and bulk regulations of
the district shall apply. No variances shall be
permitted for lots on which such use is to be located.
(2) All public utilities and sanitary sewers shall be
available and connected to the site unless the site is
over one (1) acre in size. The fire department shall
approve the facility for safety.
(3) All requirements of the State of Tennessee that
pertain to the use shall be met.
APP 1-236
(4) An outdoor play area of at least two hundred (200)
square feet per child in size shall be available and
shall be fenced.
(5) The facility shall be located so as to be compatible
with the surrounding area and provide safety to those
using the facility.
(6) Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be
provided as appropriate to protect the surrounding
area.
b. Day Care Center
(1) No such facility shall be permitted on a zone lot
unless it contains a minimum of forty thousand
(40,000) square feet.
(2) All bulk and setback regulations of the district shall
be met.
(3) One (1) accessory off-street parking space for each
five (5) children accommodated in the child care
facility shall be provided.
(4) Special passenger loading and unloading facilities
shall be provided on the same zone lot for vehicles to
pick-up or deliver passengers. Such facilities shall
provide for driveways that do not require any back-up
movements by vehicles to enter or exit the zone lot.
(5) All regulations of the State of Tennessee that pertain
to the use shall be met.
(6) The facility shall be located so as to be compatible
with the surrounding area and provide safety to those
using such facility.
(7) Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be
provided as appropriate to protect the surrounding
area.
(8) The site and architectural plans of such a facility
shall be approved by the Planning Commission
APP 1-237
taking into account the above conditions as well as
any other pertinent factors.
3. Special Conditions for All Other Personal and Group Care
Activities
a. No such facility shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless it
contains a minimum of one (1) acre.
b. All bulk regulations of the district shall be met.
c. The requirements of the accessory off-street parking
regulations of this ordinance shall apply.
d. All regulations of the State of Tennessee shall be met.
e. All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available
and connected to the site, and the site and architectural
plans for such a facility be approved by the Planning
Commission taking into account the above conditions as
well as any other pertinent factors.
4. Special Conditions for Community Assembly
a. No such facilities shall be permitted on a lot unless it
contains one (1) acre provided, however, that if such
community assembly includes outdoor activities, the
minimum lot area shall be four (4) acres.
b. All bulk regulations of the zone district shall apply.
c. Off-Street Parking
(1) For nonprofit clubs, lodges, meeting halls and
recreation centers, one (1) space for each four (4)
seats in an assembly area within the facility, or one
(1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater, shall be
provided.
(2) For temporary nonprofit festivals, the required
number of off-street parking spaces shall be
determined by the Board, taking into account the
APP 1-238
traffic generation of such facility, the hours of other
such factors as affect the need for off-street parking.
d. Except for temporary nonprofit festivals fencing, screening
and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate for such
facility, except that no landscaped screen shall be located
closer than fifteen (15) feet of any vehicular entrance or exit
to the property.
e. The location and operation of such community assembly
facility shall be in keeping with the character of the
surrounding area and shall not adversely affect the
properties within the surrounding area.
f. All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available
and connected to the site.
Except for temporary nonprofit festivals, the site and/or
architectural plans shall first be approved by the Planning
Commission taking into account the above conditions.
5. Special Conditions for Cultural and Recreational Services
a. No such activity shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it
contains twice the lot area requirements of the district.
b. All bulk regulations of the district shall apply.
c. The off-street parking requirements of this ordinance shall
apply.
d. Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as
appropriate to protect the surrounding area and shall not
have an adverse affect on properties within the surrounding
areas.
e. The location and operation of such facility shall be in
keeping with the character of the surrounding area and
shall not have an adverse affect on properties within the
surrounding area.
f. The site and architectural plans shall first be approved by
the Planning Commission taking into account the above
conditions.
APP 1-239
6. Special Conditions for Community Education
a. No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot unless
such lot contains the acreage recommended for such
facilities by the appropriate state agency.
b. The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely
accommodated along the streets which will provide access
to the site.
c. The location and design of such facilities shall not have an
adverse effect upon surrounding properties.
d. The off-street parking requirements of this ordinance shall
apply.
7. Special Condiions for Health Care
a. Minimum Lot Area
(1) No health clinic shall be permitted on a zone lot,
unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of
the district.
(2) No hospitals, or centers for observation or
rehabilitation shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless
it contains a minimum of five (5) acres.
b. The minimum side and rear yards for hospitals and centers
for observation or rehabilitation shall be fifty (50) feet for a
one (1) or two (2) story building, increased by five (5) feet for
each story above two (2).
c. All other regulations of the district shall apply.
d. There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries
fencing, screening, and landscaping as appropriate to
protect the surrounding residential area.
e. The location and operation of such facility shall be in
keeping with the character of the surrounding area and
shall not have an adverse effect on the properties in the
surrounding area.
APP 1-240
f. All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available
and connected to the site.
g. The site and/or architectural plans shall first be approved
by the Planning Commission taking into account the above
conditions.
h. The following activity classes and types may be permitted
accessory to the Health Care Activities provided they
appropriately complement the Health Care Activity, will not
impose an adverse impact on the surrounding land use, and
be subject to all other provisions of the zoning district;
(1) Community Facility Activities
(2) Commercial Activities
Convenience Sales and Services
Automotive Parking
Food Service
Medical Service
8. Special Conditions for Intermediate and Extensive Impact
a. The location, size and design of such facilities shall be such
that the proposed development shall be compatible with the
development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the
impact upon the surrounding area.
b. The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely
accommodated along major arterials or collectors without
traversing local minor streets.
c. The proposed facility shall provide a basic community
function or essential service necessary for a convenient and
functional living environment in order to be located on the
proposed site.
d. The off-street parking requirements shall be determined by
the Board taking into account characteristics of the use.
e. The site plan for such facilities shall be approved by the
Planning Commission taking into account the above
APP 1-241
conditions as well as any other pertinent factors related to
the use and operation of such facility.
9. Special Conditions for Essential Public Transport, Communication,
and Utility Services
a. The location of such facility shall be within an area in order
to provide the most efficient service to the community.
b. All of the bulk regulations of the zone district shall apply.
c. The location of such facility shall not materially increase
traffic on surrounding streets.
d. The location of such a facility shall not have an adverse
effect on surrounding properties.
e. There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries
fencing, screening, and landscaping, as appropriate to
protect the surrounding residential area.
f. The site plan for such facility is first approved by the
Planning Commission taking into account the above
conditions as well as any other pertinent factors.
10. Special Conditions for Religious Facilities
a. No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it
contains one (1) acre.
b. The location, size, and design of such facilities shall be
situated so that the proposed facility shall be compatible
with the development within the surrounding area thus
reducing the impact upon such area.
c. All bulk regulations of the district shall be met.
d. The off-street parking requirements of this ordinance shall
apply.
APP 1-242
J. Specific Standards for Commercial Activities
A special exception shall not be granted for the commercial activities
specified below unless the standards established therein are met as a
part of the conditions for issuing such permit in the applicable districts.
1. Specific Conditions for Group Assembly Activities
a. The location, size, and design of such facilities shall be
situated so that the proposed development shall be
compatible with the development within the surrounding
area thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area.
b. The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely
accommodated along major streets without traversing local
minor streets.
c. The off-street parking requirements shall be based on the
type of use and the needs of the use to adequately
accommodate the expected groups of people.
d. The site plan for such facilities shall be approved by the
Planning Commission taking into account the above
conditions as well as any other pertinent factors related to
the use and operation of such facilities.
e. When an application for a group assembly permit includes
amusement parks, sports arenas, fairgrounds, racetracks,
and similar recreational pursuits, the following
requirements shall be observed.
(1) The minimum size site shall be twenty-five (25)
acres.
(2) The minimum setbacks of all structures from all
public roads shall be one hundred (100) feet.
(3) Such facility shall be situated so that no residential
use is located closer than five hundred (500) feet from
building entrance of the principal use at the time of
approval.
(4) Access to such facility shall be by a paved road and
such road shall be either a major arterial or major
APP 1-243
collector. Traffic shall not be directed through
residential subdivisions or on minor residential
streets.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum of
one (1) space for each four (4) patrons or seats. For
those facilities which are not utilized on a regular
and frequent basis, parking may be provided on
adjacent parcels of land provided further that any
parcel so used is located no more than five hundred
(500) feet from the lot boundary.
(6) Any lighting provided at such facilities shall be
designed so that no direct light falls on adjacent
residential property.
(7) Accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with
the principal use of the property provided that such
uses are physically designed as a part of or within the
principal structure. Such uses may include food
sales, beverage sales, gift or souvenir shops, and
similar activities.
(8) Accessory structures may be permitted which are
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
Such structure may not be located within any
required setback or buffer area.
f. When an application for a Group Assembly Permit includes
a private campground, the following standards shall be met:
(1) Such campground shall have on site management.
(2) The campground may include convenience
commercial establishments such as camp stores,
laundry facilities, and personal services; provided
that such convenience establishments are
subordinate to the recreational character of the
campground; are located, designed and intended to
serve exclusively the patrons staying in the
campground; and such establishment and their
parking areas shall not occupy more than ten (10)
percent of the area of the parking or one (1), acre
whichever is smaller.
APP 1-244
(3) Such Campground Shall Meet the Following
Standards:
Minimum size - Ten (10) acres.
Maximum density - Ten (10) campsites per gross acre.
Sanitary facilities, including flush toilets and
showers - Within three hundred (300) feet walking
distance of each campsite.
Dump station for travel trailers.
Potable water supply - One (1) spigot for each four (4)
campsites.
Trash receptacle - One (1) for each two (2) campsites.
Parking - One (1) space per campsite.
Picnic table - One (1) per campsite.
Fireplace or grill - One (1) per campsite.
Administration or safety building - Open at all times
wherein a portable fire extinguisher in operable
condition and first aid kit is available, and a
telephone is available for public use.
(4) Such Campground Shall Meet the Following Design
Requirements:
Vegetation screen or ornamental fence which will
substantially screen the campsites from view of
public right-of-way and neighboring properties shall
be provided around or near the perimeter or that part
of the campground containing campsites. Such
vegetation or fence shall be maintained in good
condition at all times.
Each campground shall reserve at least twenty-five
(25) percent of its total area as natural open space
excluding perimeter screening. Such open space may
include recreation and water areas, but may not
APP 1-245
include utility areas, administration building,
commercial areas, or similar activities.
Each campsite shall have a minimum setback of
twenty-five (25) feet from any public road of fifty (50)
feet.
Each separate campsite shall contain a minimum of
thirty two hundred (3,200) square feet. (A campsite
shall be considered to consist of trailer or tent space,
parking space, picnic table, fireplace, and one-half
(½) the roadway providing access.)
Each campsite shall be directly accessible by an
interior road.
All interior roads shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet
wide for one (1) way traffic and eighteen (18) feet
wide for two-way traffic.
All interior roads shall meet the following curve
requirements:
Minimum radius for a 90 degree turn - 40 feet
Minimum radius for a 60 degree turn - 50 feet
Minimum radius for a 45 degree turn - 68 feet
No camping vehicle or camping equipment shall be
used for human habitation for a period exceeding
thirty (30) consecutive days.
K. Specific Standards for Agricultural and Extractive Activities
A special exception permit shall not be granted for the agricultural and
extractive activity specified, below, unless the standards established
therein are met as a part of the conditions for issuing such permit in the
applicable zone districts.
1. Special Conditions for Mining and Quarrying Activities
a. The location of such an activity shall be in an area sparsely
developed during the length of time the mining or quarrying
activity is anticipated.
APP 1-246
b. Any permit issued hereunder shall be based on a site plan
or other documents submitted with an application which
shall provide for the following:
(1) Existing contours of the site and up to one hundred
(100) feet beyond the site boundary. Contour
intervals shall be at two (2) foot intervals.
(2) Location of the area in which the proposed quarrying
activity is to be conducted.
(3) Location of all proposed buildings, crusher and
screening equipment, roadways and other facilities
proposed on the site.
(4) Proposed method of drainage of the quarry area.
(5) Proposed fencing of the quarry area. Fencing shall be
provided around all open excavations.
(6) Methods proposed for blasting. Open blasting
commonly referred to as "pop shots" shall be
prohibited.
(7) Methods proposed to control noise, vibration and
other particulate matter.
(8) Finished contours of the site after the quarrying
operation has been terminated. The site shall be
graded and/or filled so as to be in substantial
conformity with the topography of the surrounding
lands. All fill material shall be nontoxic,
nonflammable, and noncombustible solids. All areas
that are back-filled shall be left so that adequate
drainage is provided.
c. Approval for mining and quarrying activity may also include
accessory concrete batching plants, asphaltic cement mixing
plants and/or rock crushing activities on the same zone lot
or adjoining zone lots which may have directly opposing
frontages on the same public street. If such accessory
activities are included on the quarry site, the total site must
meet all the special condition requirements for mining and
quarrying activities; however, in conditions of multiple zone
APP 1-247
lots, the outer perimeter of the site shall be considered the
lot line.
d. Before issuing a permit the Board shall require the owner
of the quarry facility to execute a bond in an amount to be
determined by the Planning Commission per acre of active
quarry throughout a five (5) year period to restore the lands
in the manner prescribed herein, including the removal of
all structures and machinery.
e. Any permit issued hereunder shall not be for a period
exceeding five (5) years. After the expiration date of such
special permit, the Board may review and grant an
extension of time in the manner and procedure as
prescribed for an original application.
f. The site plan is first approved by the Planning Commission
taking into account the above conditions as well as any
other factors related to the use and operation of such
facilities.
2. Special Conditions for Commercial Storage of Explosives
a. The location of such an activity is in an area likely to be
sparsely developed for reason of topography, lack of existing
or planned utilities, accessibility or for similar cause.
b. Such facility shall not be located on a site having an area of
less than fifty (50) acres.
c. All regulations of the State Fire Marshal relating to the
storage of explosives shall be met.
d. Any special permit issued hereunder shall be for a period
not exceeding five (5) years. After the expiration date of
such special permit, the Board may review and grant an
extension of time in the same manner and procedure as
prescribed for an original application.
e. The site plan is first approved by the Planning Commission
taking into account the above conditions as well as any
other factors related to the use of such facilities.
APP 1-248
L. Specific Standards for Intermediate Manufacturing Activities
1. Specific Standards for Intermediate Manufacturing Activities
A special exception permit shall not be granted, unless the
standards below are met:
a. The activity takes place in completely enclosed buildings
with no outdoor storage of materials or finished products.
b. Access for heavy trucks and employees is from a major
thoroughfare or industrial access road from a major
thoroughfare with residential streets unaffected.
2. Specific Standards for Extensive Manufacturing Activities
A special exception shall not be granted unless the standards
below are met:
a. No such facility shall be located on a lot unless such lot
contains at least one (1) acre.
b. Access for heavy trucks and employees is from a major
thoroughfare or industrial access road from a major
thoroughfare with residential streets unaffected.
c. State permits for air pollution standards, ground water and
emissions must be obtained and kept up-to-date.
d. The site plan is first approved by the Planning Commission
taking into account factors related to the use and operation
of the facility. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.090 AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may
from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed by the
Lawrenceburg Commission. Any member of the City Commission may introduce
such legislation, or any official, board, or any other person may present a
petition to the City Commission requesting an amendment or amendments to
this ordinance.
No amendment to this ordinance shall become effective, unless it is first
submitted to the Lawrenceburg Regional Planning Commission for review and
APP 1-249
recommendation. The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days within
which to submit its recommendation to the City Commission. If the Planning
Commission disapproves the amendment, it shall require the favorable vote of
a majority of the City Commission to become effective. If the Planning
Commission fails to submit a report within the sixty (60) day period, it shall be
deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
No change or departure from the text or maps as certified by the Planning
Commission shall be made, unless such change or departure be first submitted
to the Planning Commission and approved by it, or, if disapproved, received the
favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the City Commission.
Before finally adopting any such amendment, the City Commission shall hold
a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place
of which shall be given by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county; and any such amendment shall be published at least
once in the official newspaper of the county or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county.
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) due and payable at the time of filing of petition
shall be posted with requests to amend a provision or provisions of this zoning
ordinance. The fee is to be used by Lawrenceburg to defray costs resulting from
such petition and any subsequent amendment of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.091 Application for Rezoning
A proposed change of zoning district boundaries shall be initiated by the
filings of an application with the Lawrenceburg Planning Commission.
Said application shall contain:
1. The name and address of the owner and/or owners of the subject
property and the written certification of the authorized agent.
2. A written legal description of the subject property including the
Lawrence County Tax Plat number and acreage.
3. A description of the proposed zone change, modification or repeal
together with written justifications for the requested zone change.
4. The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners
including those property owners across streets, roads, highways,
and/or railways, and waterways which border the applicant's
property.
APP 1-250
5. Two (2) copies of a map depicting the property requested for
rezoning. These maps shall be at a scale of no less than 1"=100'
and no larger than 1"=30' and show the following information.
a. Title, north arrow, graphic scale, date, civil district, and the
acreage of the property to be rezoned.
b. Dimensions in feet of property to be rezoned.
c. All roads and easements within or adjoining property to be
rezoned.
d. Location, size, type and current use of any building on the
property requested for rezoning.
e. Location of the adjoining property owners in relation to the
property to be rezoned.
6. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.100 PENALTIES
Any persons violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day such
violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.110 REMEDIES
In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used, in violation
of this ordinance, the Building Inspector or any other appropriate authority or
any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged
by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation; or to prevent
occupancy of such building, structure, or land. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.120 VALIDITY
Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, this judgment shall
APP 1-251
not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any other part of this
ordinance be judged invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. #789, June 1993)
7.130 INTERPRETATION
Whenever the conditions of this ordinance are less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or any other
resolution, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
7.140 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect from and after the effective date of its passage
and publication as required by law, the public welfare requiring it.
Certified by the Lawrenceburg Regional Planning Commission. (Ord. #789,
June 1993)
-- ORDINANCE NO. 1025
.~ AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODIFICATION AND REVISION OF THE
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE.
WHEREAS, some ofthe ordinances ofthe City of Lawrenceburg are obsolete, and
WHEREAS, some ofthe other ordinances ofthe city are inconsistent with each other or are
otherwise inadequate, and
WHEREAS, the Board ofMayor and Commissioners of the City of Lawrenceburg, Tennessee,
has caused its ordinances ofa general, continuing, and permanent application or of a penal nature to be
codified and revised and the same are embodied in a code ofordinances known as the "Lawrenceburg
Municipal Code," now, therefore;
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY
OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE, THAT;
SECTION 1. Ordinances codified. The ordinances of the city of a general, continuing, and
permanent application or of a penal nature, as codified and revised in the following "titles", namely
"titles" 1 to 20, both inclusive, are ordained and adopted as the "Lawrenceburg Municipal Code,"
hereinafter referred to as the "municipal code."
~
~
SECTION 2. Ordinances repealed. All ordinances of a general, continuing, and permanent
application or of a penal nature not contained in the municipal code unless the ordinances(s) were
adopted after March 9, 2004, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date ofsaid code, except
as hereinafter provided in Section 3 below.
SECTION 3. Ordinances saved from repeal. The repeal provided for in Section 2 of this
ordinance shall not affect: Ordinance numbers 974, 975, 976, 977, 978, 979, 980, 981, 982, 983, 984,
985,986,987,988,989,990,991,992,993,995,996,997,998,999,1000,1001,1002,1003,1004,
1005,1006,1007,1008,1009,1010, lOll, 1012, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1020,
1021,1022, 1023 and any other ordinances adopted or amended afterJuly 19, 2007; any ordinance(s)
adopted after March 9, 2004 during the pendency ofthe revision ofthe municipal code; any offense or
act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date ofthe municipal code; any ordinance or resolution promising or
requiring the payment ofmoney by or to the city or authorizing the issuance ofany bonds or other
evidence ofsaid city's indebtedness; any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of
taxes or any Midget ordinance; any contract or obligation assumed by or in favor ofsaid city; any
ordinance establishing a social security system or providing coverage under that system; any
administrative ordinances or resolutions not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such code;
the portion of any ordinance not in conflict with such code which regulates speed, direction of travel,
passing, stopping, yielding, standing, or parking on any specifically named public street or way; any
right or franchise granted by the city; any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc. any street or public way; any ordinance
establishing and prescribing the grade ofany street; any ordinance providing for local improvements and
special assessments therefore; any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat of subdivision; any
prosecution, suit, or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date
of said code; any zoning ordinance oramendment thereto or amendment to the zoning map; nor shall
such repeal affect any ordinance annexing territory to the city.
SECTION 4. Continuation of existing provisions. Insofar·as the provisions ofthe municipal
code are the same as those ofordinances eXisting and in force on its effective date, said provisions· shall
be considered to be continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
SECTION 5. Penalty clause. Unless otherwise specified in a title, chapter or section ofthe
municipal code, including the codes and ordinances adopted by reference, whenever in the municipal
code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be a civil offense, or whenever in the municipal code
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be a civil offense, the violation
of any such provision of the municipal code shall be punished by a civil penalty ofnot more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) or the maximum allowed by Tennessee state law, whichever is greater, and costs for
each separate violation; provided, however, that the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of
this municipal code shall not prevent the revocation ofany permit or license or the taking of other
punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions ofthe municipal code or
other applicable law. In any place in the municipal code the term "it shall be a misdemeanor" or "it shall
be an offense" or "it shall be unlawful" or similar terms appears in the context ofa penalty provision of
this municipal code, it shall mean "it shall be a civil offense". Anytime the word "fine" or similar term
appears in the context of a penalty provision ofthis municipal· code, it shall mean "a civil penalty".!
I State law reference
For authority to allow deferred payment offines, or payment by installments, see Tennessee Code
Annotated. § 40-24-101 et seq.
ORDINANCE FILED:
Passed First Reading: _
Passed Second Reading:
When a civil penalty is imposed on any person for violating any provision ofthe municipal code
and such person defaults on payment ofsuch penalty, he maybe required to perform hard labor, within
,~ or without the workhouse, to the extent that his physical condition shall permit, until such civil penalty
is discharged by payment, or until such person, being credited with such sum as may be prescribed for
each day's hard labor, has fully discharged said penalty.
Each day any violation of the municipal code continues shall constitute a separate civil offense.
SECTION 6". Severability clause. Each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, and clause of
the municipal code, including the codes and ordinances adopted by reference, is hereby declared to be
separable and severable. The invalidity of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or clause in the
municipal code shall not affect the validity of any other portion ofsaid code, and only any portion
declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deleted there from.
SECTION 7. Reproduction and amendment of code. The municipal code shall be
reproduced in loose-leaf form. The Board ofMayor and Commissioners, by motion or resolution, shall
fix, and change from time to time as considered necessary, the prices to be charged for copies of the
municipal code and revisions thereto. After adoption ofthe municipal code, each ordinance affecting
the code shall be adopted as amending, adding, or deleting, by nUIilbers, specific chapters or sections of
said code. Periodically thereafter all affected pages ofthe municipal code shall be revised to reflect such
amended, added or deleted material and shall be distributed to city officers and employees having copies
ofsaid code and to other persons who have requested and paid for current revisions. Notes shall be
inserted at the end ofamended or new sections, referring to the numbers ofordinances making the
amendments or adding the new provisions, and such references shall be cumulative if a section is
amended more than once in order that the current copy ofthe municipal code will contain references to
all ordinances responsible for current provisions. One copy ofthe municipal code as originally adopted
and one copy ofeach amending ordinance thereafter adopted shall be furnished to the Municipal
Technical Advisory Service immediately upon final passage and adoption.
SECTION 8. Construction of conflicting provisions. Where any provision of the municipal
code is in conflict with any other provision in said code, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection ofthe public health, safety, and welfare shall prevail.
SECTION 9. Code available for public use. A copy ofthe municipal code shall be kept
available in the recorder's office for public use and inspection at all reasonable times.
SECTION 10. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its fina1 passage,
the public welfare requiring it, and the municipal code, including all the codes .and ordinances therein
adopted by reference, shall be effective on and after that date, the public welfare requiring it.
This Ordinance approved as to form by:
.:I:.~ 3 ,2007
:\",' ~ S' ,2007 :tJfy 11 ,2007
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS OF THE
CITY OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE THIS l?lh, DAY OF ;:[J Li ,2007.
CITY OF LAWRENCEBURG, TENNESSEE, A
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
/~U~
~
ATTEST:
/~ ;("~~~~
CFfYADMINISfRATORI
ACTING CITY RECORDER
MAIDR~ - -. /