THE CODE OF THE CITY OF - MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
	
	
	
Linda Elam 	Sheila Luckett 
Mayor 	City Recorder 
	
___________ 	___________ 
	
	Andy Garrett 
Will Sellers, Vice Mayor 	Chief of Police 
James Bradshaw 	
Ted Floyd 	___________ 
Ed Hagerty 	
Board of Commissioners 	Marlin Keel 
	Public Works Director 
___________ 	
	___________ 
	
Randy Robertson 	Dennis Buchanan 
City Manager 	Parks Director 
	
___________ 	___________ 
	
Jason Holleman 	John Rossmaier 
City Attorney 	Finance Director 
	
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
	
	
	
Ed Hagerty 	Sheila S. Luckett, MMC 
Mayor 	Deputy City Manager/ 
City Recorder 
	
___________ 	___________ 
	
	James Hambrick 
James Maness, Vice Mayor 	Chief of Police 
Brian Abston 	
Ray Justice 	___________ 
Art Giles 	
Board of Commissioners 	Jessica Gure 
	Public Works Director 
___________ 	
	___________ 
	
Kenneth D. Martin 	Roger "Rocky" Lee 
City Manager 	Parks Director 
	
___________ 	___________ 
	
L. Gino Marchetti, Jr. 	John Rossmaier 
City Attorney 	Finance Director 
	
 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1997 Code, as supplemented through March 9, 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1997 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Michael E. Raabe, Code Attorney, and Deborah J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Sheila Luckett, City Recorder, Mr. Jason Holleman, City Attorney, and Mr. Randy Robertson, City Manager for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
©  ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 2010. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-06 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE : 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 32, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 14, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in Chapter 1 of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 14, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective on the earliest date allowed by law. 
PASSED: 	_______ 
Linda C. Elam, Mayor 
	
FIRST READING: 4/12/10 	
SECOND READING: 4/26/10 	
	
ATTEST: 	
_______ 
Sheila S. Lucket 
City Recorder 	
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 	
	_______ 
Randy Robertson, City Manager 
_______ 
Jason Holleman 
City Attorney 	
 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, held on the 26 day of April, 2010. 
Shiela S Luckett 
City Clerk;rr;  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Mount Juliet, Tennessee, was incorporated in 1972 under the Uniform City Manager-Commission Charter as set out in chapters 18 through 29 of title 6, Tennessee Code Annotated. The voters of the city voted to become a "home rule" municipality. The city's charter, as set forth herein, is the Uniform City Manager-Commissioner Charter as it existed at the time the city elected to become a "home rule" city. No home rule charter amendments have been passed as of 2008. Therefore, the city's charter, as extracted from the Tennessee Code Annotated and set forth herein, is the Uniform City Manager-Commission Charter as amended. 
Note— This compilation includes chapters 18—23 of Title 6, Tennessee Code Annotated, which contain the basic organizational provisions for this form of government, as amended. Important note: There are many other general laws affecting municipalities organized under this charter which have been omitted from this compilation because they apply to all municipalities. These are found in various parts of the Tennessee Code Annotated. This compilation has been amended to reflect legislation passed in the 2008 session of the Tennessee General Assembly. 
The word "Section" or "Sec" has been added to each section for clarity. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. The table of contents, title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
CHAPTER 18. - CITY MANAGER-COMMISSION CHARTER; ADOPTION OR SURRENDER 
 
Sec. 6-18-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  The words "city" in chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title shall refer to any city which may adopt the provisions of these chapters, and the word "county" shall refer to the county in which any such city is located. 
(b)  Whenever the "county election commission" is referred to in chapters 18 through 23 of this title, it means the county election commission of the county in which the territory proposed to be incorporated or the municipality is situated. If the territory proposed to be incorporated or the municipality includes parts of two (2) or more counties, it means the county election commission in each of such counties and they shall act jointly in performing the functions required of county election commissions in chapters 18 through 23 of this title.  
Sec. 6-18-102. - Construction of chapters 18 to 23. 
In the construction of any portion of chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title whose meaning or application is in dispute, it is intended that its phraseology shall be liberally construed to effect the substantial objects of these chapters.  
Sec. 6-18-103. - Right to adopt city manager form; incorporation within specified distances from existing cities. 
(a)  The residents of any incorporated municipality or of any territory which it is desired to incorporate shall have the right to adopt the provisions of chapters 18 to 22, inclusive, of this title in the manner herein provided; and thereupon such city or territory shall be and become incorporated and be governed as herein set forth. No unincorporated territory shall be incorporated under the provisions of chapters 18 to 22, inclusive, of this title unless such territory contains not less than fifteen hundred (1,500) persons, who shall be actual residents of the territory, and shall also contain real estate included in the territory worth not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000). No unincorporated territory shall be allowed to hold a referendum on the question of whether or not to incorporate under this charter until a plan of services is documented setting forth the identification and projected timing of municipal services proposed to be provided and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. The plan of services shall be attached to the petition to incorporate when such petition is filed with the county election commission. The plan of services shall include, but not be limited to: police protection, fire protection, water service, sanitary sewage system, solid waste disposal, road and street construction and repair, recreational facilities, a proposed five-year operational budget, including projected revenues and expenditures, and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. Municipalities that are first incorporated on or after July 1, 1993, that produce no local own source revenues in any fiscal year shall not receive any state-shared revenues during the next fiscal year. Prior to filing the petition with the county election commission, a public hearing on the referendum on the question of whether or not to incorporate under this charter and plan of services shall be conducted. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation for two (2) consecutive weeks. 
(b)  No unincorporated territory shall be incorporated within three (3) miles of an existing municipality or within five (5) miles of an existing municipality of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more in population, according to the latest census certified by the State Planning Office. "Existing municipality" and "existing municipality of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more in population" do not include any county with a metropolitan form of government with a population of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more according to the latest census certified by the State Planning Office. 
(c), (d)  [Deleted by 1995 amendment.] 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) to the contrary, a territory may be incorporated if the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1)  The territory contains two hundred twenty-five (225) residents or more; 
(2)  The territory is composed of property which is sixteen hundred (1600) feet or more above sea level on the western border of the territory and contiguous with a county boundary on the eastern border of the territory; 
(3)  The territory is located within an area which is bordered on the west, north and east by the Tennessee River and on the south by the border between Tennessee and another State; and 
(4)  The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area. 
(f)  (1)  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section to the contrary, a territory may be incorporated that meets the following conditions: 
(A)  The territory contains three hundred (300) residents or more; 
(B)  The territory's western boundary is contiguous with the western boundary of the county in which it is located; 
(C)  The territory is located within an area bordered on the north by the Loosahatchie River, on the south of the Wolf River; 
(D)  The territory's eastern boundary is approximately parallel with the western boundary, but in no place is more than eight (8) miles from the western boundary; and 
(E)  The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area. 
(2)  The territory described in this subsection may incorporate notwithstanding the provisions and restrictions in § 6-18-103(a) and (b). 
(g)  Notwithstanding the requirements of § 6-18-104, or any other provision of law to the contrary, the petition for incorporation of the territory described in this subsection may consist of a letter from a resident of the territory desiring to incorporate to the county election commission requesting that the question of incorporating the territory be placed on the ballot. The letter shall describe the exact boundaries of the proposed municipality, indicate the name of the proposed municipality, and indicate under which charter the territory desires to incorporate. The letter shall be treated as a petition meeting all the requirements of law. 
(h)  (1)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, whenever the governing body of any existing city affected by this section, by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of its governing body, indicates that it has no interest in annexing the property to be incorporated, and when a certified copy of such resolution and a petition requesting that an incorporation election be held are filed with the county election commission, then the proceedings shall continue as provided in this chapter as though the proposed new incorporation were not within the specified distance of such existing city as provided in this section. 
(2)  The provisions of this act shall only apply in counties having a population of not less than 80,000 nor more than 83,000 according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census; provided, that in any adjoining county an existing municipality that is within the specified distance may also use the procedure authorized by this subsection.  
Sec. 6-18-104. - Election to adopt city manager form. 
(a)  An election for the purpose of determining whether or not chapters 18-22 of this title shall become effective for any city shall be included on the ballot at the next election, as defined in § 2-1-104, by the county election commission upon the request or petition in writing of thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/3 %) of the registered voters of the city or territory, which petition shall state therein in a sufficient manner the boundaries of the proposed municipal corporation, which may be done by a general reference to the boundaries then existing if there is one. The county election commission shall, in addition to all other notices required by law, publish one (1) notice of the election in a newspaper of general circulation within the territory of the city or of the proposed city and post the notice in at least ten (10) places in the territory. 
(b)  At any time not less than thirty (30) days prior to the election provided for herein, the request or petition may be withdrawn or may be amended to call for a smaller territory for the proposed municipal corporation so long as all of the proposed smaller territory is contained within the boundaries of the territory described in the first petition or request. The withdrawal or amendment shall be valid if filed with the county election commission in writing and executed by twenty percent (20%) of the number of the registered voters voting at the last election within the boundaries of the territory described in the original request or petition, and if signed by not less than fifty-one percent (51%) of those who signed the original request or petition. In the event such an amended request or petition is filed, all provisions relating to time periods in § 6-18-103 shall be controlled by the date of the filing of the original petition, notwithstanding the filing of the amended request or petition, and the county election commission shall publish the notice of the election as provided for herein. A petition for request to withdraw, when filed with and validated by the county election commission, shall render the original request or petition null and void. 
(c)  Following the defeat of an incorporation in an election held pursuant to this section, no new request for petition for an election may be filed until after the expiration of four (4) years. Provided, however, that if the territory included in the boundaries of the newly proposed municipal corporation includes less than fifty percent (50%) of the territory subject to incorporation in such previous election and if the territory subject to incorporation in such election comprises less than fifty percent (50%) of the territory included in the boundaries of the newly proposed municipal corporation, the four (4) year waiting period shall not be required. 
(d)  (1)  If a proposal to incorporate a territory is defeated in an election held pursuant to this section by a number of negative votes comprising more than sixty percent (60%) of the persons voting, no further incorporation election shall be held for a period of four (4) years from the previous election unless the conditions established in subsection (c) are met. 
(2)  If a proposal to incorporate a territory is defeated in an election held pursuant to this section by a number of negative votes comprising less than sixty percent (60%) of the persons voting, no further incorporation election shall be held for a period of two (2) years from the previous election unless the conditions established in subsection (c) are met.  
Sec. 6-18-105. - Registration of voters; qualifications to vote; certification of result. 
(a)  The county election commission shall use such methods authorized by title 2 as it judges necessary to facilitate registration before the election. 
(b)  All registered voters of the city or of the territory of the proposed city are eligible to vote in the election. 
(c)  The county election commission shall determine and declare the results of the election and shall certify the results within forty-eight (48) hours after it completes its duties under § 2-8-105(3). It shall publish the certificate in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or territory and if the city is already incorporated, shall file the certificate with the city council or other legislative body of the city at its first meeting after the certification. The certificate shall be entered at large on the minutes of the body with which it is filed.  
Sec. 6-18-106. - Effect of favorable vote. 
If it shall thereupon be found that the majority of the votes cast are in favor of the adoption of chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title it shall be deemed to have been adopted. Except for the provisions of chapters 18-22 of this title that are adopted by reference in other municipal charters, the provisions of chapters 18-22 of this title apply only to those cities that have adopted chapters 18-22 of this title by referendum as authorized by law.  
Sec. 6-18-107. - Succession to old corporation. 
(a)  Chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title shall take effect in any city immediately after the election and organization of the first board of commissioners provided for herein, and thereupon any then existing charter of such city shall immediately become abrogated and null; provided, however, that the right, title and ownership of all property of the city and all of its uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, and chooses in action, and all of its rights of every kind whatsoever, shall immediately become vested in the corporation so chartered under these chapters; and the new corporation shall answer and be liable for all debts, contracts, and obligations of the corporation which it succeeds in the same manner and proportion and to the same extent as the former corporation was liable under existing laws; and provided further, that all ordinances, laws, resolutions, and bylaws duly enacted and in force under the preexisting charter and not inconsistent with the provisions of chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title shall remain in full force until repealed, modified, or amended as herein provided. 
(b)  The zoning ordinance duly enacted and in force in any county shall apply to any unincorporated territory in the county incorporated under the provisions of chapters 18 through 23, inclusive, of this title, until such incorporated city shall duly enact zoning ordinances, or for a period of six (6) months from the date the first board of commissioners shall take their respective offices, whichever occurs first.  
Sec. 6-18-108. - Surrender of charter. 
(a)  After the adoption of this charter and the election of the commissioners, a majority of whom are elected for a period of four (4) years as hereinafter provided, no election for the surrender of this charter shall be called or held for a period of four (4) years from the date the first board of commissioners shall take their respective offices. 
(b)  After the expiration of the four (4) year period and upon the filing of a petition in the same manner as provided for the adoption of chapters 18 through 23, inclusive, of this title, containing the signatures of the same number of registered voters and praying for a surrender of such charter, an election shall be held to determine whether or not the same shall be surrendered, provided that in case of a failure to surrender such charter, election shall not be held more frequently than at two (2) year intervals thereafter, and provided further, that for a period of four (4) years after the first board of commissioners shall take office, the cost of calling and holding such an election shall be borne by those petitioning therefor, if such election does not result in a surrender of this form of charter. Should such election, however, result in a surrender, the cost of such election shall be borne by the city and following the expiration of such four (4) year period the cost of such election shall be borne by the city.  
Sec. 6-18-109. - Conduct of surrender election. 
The county election commission has the same duties with respect to an election for the surrender of a charter as it has with respect to an election to adopt a charter under this title. Any registered voter of the city may vote in the election.  
Sec. 6-18-110. - Termination of charter; new charter. 
If a majority of the votes cast in the election herein provided shall favor the termination of such form of government the provisions of such charter shall terminate at 12:01 a.m. on the sixtieth (60th) day next following the date of such election unless the same falls upon Sunday, in which case it shall terminate at 12:01 a.m. on the next day. If previous to the adoption of this form of charter such city or town functions under a different charter, thereupon such prior charter shall become effective at the time above mentioned, and territory previously unincorporated shall revert to that status; provided, however, that if by law in the case of unincorporated territory another charter may be adopted by vote of the electors, the question as to whether or not such other form of charter shall be adopted may be placed upon the ballots to be used in the election herein mentioned, if the petition filed requests the same, and if all other necessary legal steps to adopt such other form of charter have been taken prior thereto.  
Sec. 6-18-111. - Election of new officers after surrender of charter. 
In case there shall be a previously incorporated city or if a new charter shall be adopted as provided herein, the county election commission shall call an election not less than forty (40) days nor more than fifty (50) days following the election for surrender of the charters provided herein, at which time municipal officials for the newly adopted form of government shall be chosen who shall take office upon the date fixed for the termination of the previous charter. The qualifying deadline for filing nominating petitions shall be noon of the sixth Thursday before the election. All registered voters of the municipality may vote in the election.  
Sec. 6-18-112. - Succession to assets and liabilities after surrender of charter. 
In case of a reversion to a former form of charter or adoption of a new one simultaneously with the surrender of the old, all assets, liabilities and obligations of such city shall become such of the new municipality, and in the event that a city shall revert to an unincorporated status, the governing body of such city thereupon shall become trustees of the property and funds of such former city and under such bonds as may be required by the county legislative body, shall proceed to terminate the affairs of the city and dispose of its property.  
Sec. 6-18-113. - Liquidation of affairs. 
Should the property and funds be more than sufficient to meet the city's obligations, the surplus shall be paid into the treasury of the county to become a part of its general fund. Should the property and funds be insufficient to meet all the city's current obligations, the county legislative body is hereby authorized to levy and collect taxes upon the property within the boundaries of the former city and to pay same over to the trustees for the purpose of meeting such current deficit. The trustees shall terminate the affairs of the city as soon as possible, but in no event shall the trusteeship continue for more than thirty-six (36) months. Any matters, including obligations maturing after thirty-six (36) months, not disposed of within the period herein designated shall become the responsibility of the county legislative body of the county wherein the city is located.  
Sec. 6-18-114. - New incorporations; situs based taxes. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, whenever a new municipality incorporates under any form of charter, the county or counties in which the new municipality is located shall continue to receive the revenue from all state and local taxes distributed on the basis of situs of collection, generated within the newly incorporated area, until July 1 following the incorporation, unless the incorporation takes effect on July 1. 
(b)  If the incorporation takes effect on July 1, then the municipality shall begin receiving revenue from such taxes generated within its corporate boundaries for the period beginning July 1. 
(c)  Whenever a municipality incorporates, the municipality shall notify the Department of Revenue of such incorporation prior to the incorporation becoming effective for the purpose of tax administration. 
(d)  Such taxes shall include the local sales tax authorized in § 67-6-103, the income tax on dividends authorized in § 67-2-102, and all other such taxes distributed to counties and municipalities based on the situs of their collection.  
CHAPTER 19. - POWERS UNDER CITY MANAGER-COMMISSION CHARTER 
 
Sec. 6-19-101. - General power to enact ordinances. 
Every city incorporated under Chapters 18-22 of this title may: 
(1)  Assess, levy, and collect taxes for all general and special purposes on all subjects or objects of taxation, polls and privileges taxable by law for state, county or city purposes; 
(2)  Adopt such classifications of the subjects and objects of taxation as may not be contrary to law; 
(3)  Make special assessments for local improvements; 
(4)  Contract and be contracted with; 
(5)  Incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise, and to give any appropriate evidence thereof, in the manner hereinafter provided; 
(6)  Issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner dispose of, negotiable or nonnegotiable interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing bonds, warrants, promissory notes or orders of the city, upon the credit of the city or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or solely upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local improvements, or upon any two (2) or more such credits; 
(7)  Expend the money of the city for all lawful purposes; 
(8)  Acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of property, real or personal, and any estate or interest therein, within or without the city or state; 
(9)  Condemn property, real or personal or any easement, interest, or estate or use therein, either within or without the city, for present or future public use; such condemnation to be made and effected in accordance with the terms and provisions of title 29, chapter 16, or in such other manner as may be provided by general law; 
(10)  Take and hold property within or without the city or state upon trust; and to administer trusts for the public benefit; 
(11)  Acquire, construct, own, operate, and maintain, or sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any estate or interest therein, or any other utility of service to the city, its inhabitants, or any part thereof; 
(12)  Grant to any person, firm, association, or corporation franchises for public utilities and public services to be furnished the city and those therein. Such power to grant franchises shall embrace the power hereby expressly conferred, to grant exclusive franchises, and whenever an exclusive franchise is granted, it shall be exclusive not only as against any other person, firm, association, or corporation, but also as against the city itself. Franchises may be granted for the period of twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer. The board of commissioners may prescribe in each grant of a franchise, the rate, fares, charges, and regulations that may be made by the grantee of the franchise. Franchises may by their terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the city at the date of the franchises, and as the corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing streets, alleys, and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened; 
(13)  Make contracts with any person, firm, association or corporation, for public utilities and public services to be furnished the city and those therein. Such power to make contracts shall embrace the power, expressly conferred, to make exclusive contracts; and when an exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive not only against any other person, firm, association, or corporation, but also as against the city itself. Such contracts may be entered into for the period of twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer. The board of commissioners may prescribe in each such contract entered into, the rates, fares, charges, and regulations that may be made by the person, firm, association, or corporation with whom the contract is made. Such contracts may by their terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the city at the date of the contract, and as the corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing streets, alleys, and thoroughfares and to any other streets, alleys and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened; 
(14)  Prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the construction, maintenance, equipment, operation and service of public utilities and compel, from time to time, reasonable extensions of facilities for such services, but nothing herein shall be construed to permit the alteration or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any exclusive franchise granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under subdivisions (12) and (13) of this section; 
(15)  Establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter, widen, extend, grade, improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light, sprinkle, and clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public grounds, and squares, wharves, bridges, viaducts, subways, tunnels, sewers, and drains within or without the corporate limits and to regulate the use thereof within the corporate limits, and property may be taken and appropriated therefor under the provisions of §§ 7-31-107—7-31-111 and 29-16-114, or in such other manner as may be provided by general laws; 
(16)  Construct, improve, reconstruct and reimprove by opening, extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling, macadamizing, draining, or otherwise improving any streets, highways, avenues, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits, and to assess a portion of the cost of such improvements upon the property abutting upon or adjacent to such streets, highways or alleys under and as provided by title 7, chapters 32 and 33; 
(17)  Assess against abutting property within the corporate limits the cost of planting shade trees, removing from sidewalks all accumulations of snow, ice, and earth, cutting and removing obnoxious weeds and rubbish; street lighting, street sweeping, street sprinkling, street flushing, and street oiling; the cleaning and rendering sanitary or removal, abolishing, and prohibiting of closets and privies, in such manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the board of commissioners; 
(18)  Acquire, purchase, provide for, construct, regulate, and maintain and do all things relating to all marketplaces, public buildings, bridges, sewers and other structures, works and improvements; 
(19)  Collect and dispose of drainage, sewage, ashes, garbage, refuse or other waste, or to license and regulate such collection and disposal, and the cost of such collection regulation or disposal may be funded by taxation or special assessment to the property owner; 
(20)  License and regulate all persons, firms, corporations, companies, and associations engaged in any business, occupation, calling, profession, or trade not forbidden by law; 
(21)  Impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business, vocation, pursuit, privilege, or calling not prohibited by law; 
(22)  Define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent, and regulate all acts, practices, conduct, business, occupations, callings, trades, use of property and all other things whatsoever detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and to exercise general police powers; 
(23)  Prescribe limits within which such business occupations and practices liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the health, morals, security or general welfare of the people may lawfully be established, conducted or maintained; 
(24)  Inspect, test, measure, and weigh any article for consumption or use within the city, and to charge reasonable fees therefor; and to provide standards of weights, tests and measures; 
(25)  Establish, regulate, license, and inspect weights and measures; 
(26)  Regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area, lot, location, height, construction and materials of all buildings and structures, and to inspect all buildings, lands and places as to their condition for health, cleanliness and safety, and when necessary, prevent the use thereof and require any alteration or changes necessary to make them healthful, clean, or safe; 
(27)  Provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive, or penal institutions, departments, functions, facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences, and services; 
(28)  Purchase or construct, maintain, and establish a workhouse or farm colony, for the confinement and detention of any person convicted in the city court of offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city who fails to secure the fine and costs imposed upon him, or to contract with the county to keep such persons in the workhouse of the county and to provide by that contract and by ordinance for the commitment of such persons to the workhouse so provided, until such fines and costs shall be fully paid; 
(29)  Enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by fines, forfeitures, and penalties, and by other actions or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction; 
(30)  Establish schools, determine the necessary boards, officers, and teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation, to purchase or otherwise acquire land for schoolhouses, playgrounds and other purposes connected with the schools; to purchase or erect all necessary buildings and to do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain, and operate a complete educational system within the city; 
(31)  Regulate, tax, license or suppress the keeping or going at large of animals within the city; to impound the same and in default of redemption to sell or kill the same; 
(32)  Call elections as hereinafter provided; and 
(33)  Have and exercise all powers which now or hereafter it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein.  
Sec. 6-19-102. - Enumeration of powers not exclusive. 
The enumeration of particular powers in this charter is not exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words or phrases granting powers, nor shall a grant or failure to grant power in this chapter impair a power granted in any other part of this charter and whether powers, objects, or purposes are expressed, conjunctively or disjunctively, they shall be construed so as to permit the city to exercise freely any one (1) or more such powers as to any one (1) or more such objects for any one (1) or more such purposes.  
Sec. 6-19-103. - School systems. 
Such town may establish, erect, and maintain public schools, and may assess and levy taxes for such purpose.  
Sec. 6-19-104. - Purchasing and contract procedures. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for all city purchasing, but he may delegate the duty to make purchases to any subordinate appointed by him. 
(b)  Competitive prices for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained whenever practicable and in accordance with regulations established by ordinance, and the purchase made from or the contract awarded to the lowest and best bidder; provided, that the city may reject any and all bids. 
(c)  Formal sealed bids shall be obtained in all transactions involving the expenditure of an amount to be set by ordinance. The amount set shall be equal to or greater than the amount set in chapter 56, part 3 of this title, but may not be greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000). The transaction shall be evidenced by written contract. In case where the board indicates by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting, based upon the written recommendation of the manager, that it is clearly to the advantage of the city not to contract with competitive bidding, it may authorize noncompetitive contracts. 
(d)  The city manager may reject all bids and authorize the making of public improvements or accomplishment of any other city work by any city department. 
(e)  Purchasing and contract procedures not prescribed by this charter or other law may be established by ordinance. 
(f)  The board of commissioners may by ordinance delegate to the city manager the authority to enter into binding contracts on behalf of the city, without specific board approval, in routine matters and matters having insubstantial long-term consequences. The ordinance shall enumerate the types of matters to which the city manager's authority extends and may place other limitations on the city manager's authority under this subsection. As used in this subsection, "routine matters and matters having insubstantial long-term consequences" means any contract for which expenditures during the fiscal year will be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000).  
Sec. 6-19-105. - Retirement benefits. 
The board of commissioners may provide for the retirement of the city's full time nonelective officers and employees and make available to them any group, life, hospital, health, or accident insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement or other employee welfare benefits otherwise provided by law.  
CHAPTER 20. - COMMISSIONERS AND MAYOR UNDER CITY MANAGER-COMMISSION CHARTER  
PART 1. - ELECTION OF COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 6-20-101. - Number and terms of commissioners; districts. 
(a)  In all cities that adopt the provisions of chapters 18—23 of this title, commissioners as herein provided for shall be elected in the manner herein prescribed. 
(b)  If such city or territory has a population of five thousand (5,000) or over by the last federal census, there shall be elected at the first election five (5) commissioners, the three (3) receiving the highest number of votes to hold for four (4) years, and the other two (2) for two (2) years; and, if such city or territory has a population of less than five thousand (5,000) by the last federal census, there shall be elected at the first election three (3) commissioners, the two (2) receiving the highest number of votes to hold for four (4) years and the third for two (2) years; and the term of all commissioners thereafter elected shall be for four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Provided, however, that any such city which has a population of not less than two thousand nine hundred twenty (2,920) nor more than two thousand nine hundred twenty-two (2,922) according to the federal census of 1960 or any subsequent federal census, five (5) commissioners shall be elected as provided for above for cities of more than five thousand (5,000) population. The deadline for filing nominating petitions for the first commissioners is thirty-five (35) days before the incorporation election. 
(c)  Any city having a population of less than five thousand (5,000) shall have the option of increasing the number of commissioners to five (5) by ordinance. In the next regular city election after the adoption of such an ordinance, voters shall be entitled to vote for three (3) commissioners, or four (4) commissioners as the case may be, and at the same election the approval of the ordinance shall also be submitted to the voters. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance shall be for approval and the number of commissioners to be elected is three (3), the two (2) receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office for four (4) years, and the third for two (2) years. If the number of commissioners to be elected is four (4), the two (2) receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office for four (4) years, and the other two (2) for two (2) years. The terms of all commissioners thereafter elected shall be for four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. An ordinance approved by the voters may not be repealed or amended. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance shall not be for approval, the ordinance shall be null and void, and the results of the election shall be certified as though the election were for one (1) commissioner, or two (2) commissioners as the case may be, and as though no ordinance had been adopted. 
(d)  An ordinance increasing the number of commissioners to five (5) may also be submitted to the voters in an election on the question which the board of commissioners directs the county election commission to hold. At such election voters shall be entitled to vote for two (2) commissioners to serve until the next regular city election. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance shall be for approval, the two (2) candidates for commissioner receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. At the next regular city election if the number of commissioners to be elected is four (4), the three (3) receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office for four (4) years, and the fourth for two (2) years; if the number of commissioners to be elected is three (3), they shall hold office for four (4) years. The terms of all commissioners thereafter elected shall be for four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance in the special election shall not be for approval, the ordinance and the election of the two (2) commissioners shall be null and void. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)—(d), a city with a population of not less than six hundred (600) nor more than six hundred twenty-five (625) persons according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, located in a county with a population in excess of seven hundred thousand (700,000) persons also according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, shall elect all commissioners at one (1) time for a four-year term so that the city may be spared the expense of conducting elections every two (2) years. In order to effectuate this provision, all commissioners to be elected at the 1983 election shall be elected to a two-year term only, to serve until the 1985 election at which time, and every four (4) years thereafter, all commissioners shall be elected to four-year terms. The provisions of this subsection shall have no effect unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the governing body of any municipality to which it may apply. 
(f)  Cities which have adopted § 6-20-201(a)(3) to provide for popular election of the mayor shall have two (2) or four (4) commissioners as the case may be under subsection (b) or (c). 
(g)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)—(f), any city incorporated under or adopting this charter may, by ordinance, choose to elect the members of the board of commissioners by district. If the board chooses to elect commissioners by district, the board shall by ordinance create contiguous single-member districts equal to the number of commissioners. The districts shall be equitably apportioned according to population. The establishment of the districts and the fixing of their boundaries shall be accomplished not less than twelve (12) months prior to the regular city election at which commissioners are to be elected, and any change in district boundaries shall also be accomplished within this time limitation. The board shall within ten (10) years from the initial establishment of districts, and at least once in every ten (10) years thereafter, reapportion the districts so that the apportionment shall comply with the requirements of this section. One (1) commissioner shall be elected from each district of the city. The ordinance providing that the commissioners will be chosen by districts may provide that each district commissioner will be elected by the voters of the city at-large or by only the voters of the district. A person must reside in a district to run for or hold the office of commissioner from that district. The ordinance providing that commissioners will be chosen by district may also provide for transition provisions, including increasing the terms of the number of commissioners necessary so that the initial election from all districts shall take place at the same time. The ordinance may provide that all commissioners initially elected serve four-year terms or that some serve four (4) years and some serve two (2) years. If some are elected for two (2) years, their successors shall be elected for four (4) years, so that the commissioners have staggered terms. After the initial election, all commissioners shall be elected for four-year terms. 
(h)  Any city having a population of more than twenty thousand (20,000), according to the last federal census, shall have the option of increasing the number of commissioners to seven (7) by ordinance. Upon adoption of such an ordinance, it shall be filed with the county election commission, which shall submit approval of the ordinance to the voters of the city at the next general election or regular city election that follows the filing period required pursuant to § 2-3-204(b). If a majority of those voting on the ordinance are not for approval, the ordinance shall be null and void. If a majority of those voting on the ordinance are for approval, then at the next regular city election, voters shall be entitled to vote for four (4) commissioners, or five (5) commissioners, as the case may be, in order to provide for a total of seven (7) commissioners. If the number of commissioners to be elected is four (4), each shall hold office for four (4) years. If the number of commissioners to be elected is five (5), the three (3) receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office for four (4) years, and the other two (2) for two (2) years. The terms of all commissioners thereafter elected shall be for four (4) years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. An ordinance approved by the voters pursuant to this section may not be repealed or amended. 
(Acts 1921, ch. 173, art. 2, § 1; Shan. Supp., § 1997a125; Code 1932, § 3522; Acts 1963, ch. 114, § 1; 1967, ch. 79, § 1; 1968, ch. 438, § 1; 1972, ch. 740, § 4(32); T.C.A. (orig. ed.), § 6-2001; Acts 1983, ch. 14, § 1; 1989, ch. 61, § 2; 1989, ch. 175, § 5; 2006, ch. 540, § 1.)  
Sec. 6-20-102. - Date of elections. 
(a)  The first election of commissioners in any city under chapters 18 to 23, inclusive, of this title shall be had on the fourth Tuesday following the election at which the provisions of these chapters have been adopted. The board of commissioners shall fix the date of all subsequent elections, providing that any date so designated shall fall within ninety (90) days of the annual anniversary of the first election of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Provided, however, in any city having a population of not less than three hundred seventy-five (375) nor more than four hundred twenty-five (425), in any county having a population of not less than twenty-eight thousand (28,000) nor more than twenty-eight thousand one hundred (28,100), all according to the 1970 federal census or any subsequent federal census, the board of commissioners shall fix the date of all subsequent elections, providing that any date so designated shall be set at least one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date such election is to be held. The presiding officer of the board of commissioners shall certify such election date, or any subsequent change thereto, to the secretary of state. 
(c)  (1)  In addition to the authority granted by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the board of commissioners may by an ordinance approved by an affirmative two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of its membership fix the date of subsequent regular municipal elections, as the date of the regular November election as defined in section 2-1-104. 
(2)  (A)  During the transition period, if a term expires six (6) months or less before a regular November election, the board of commissioners may by ordinance extend the length of the term of an incumbent to coincide with the next regular November election. 
(B)  During the transition period, if a term expires more than six (6) months before a regular November election, the board of commissioners shall fix the date of the election as long as any date so designated falls within ninety (90) days of the annual election anniversary of the first election of the board of commissioners. In such election, the term of office shall be a transitional one which shall extend only until the next regular November election which occurs more than three (3) years after such scheduled election. 
(C)  After the transitional period, all terms of office for members of the board of commissioners shall be four (4) years. 
(D)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to remove any incumbent from office or abridge the term of any incumbent prior to the end of the term for which an elected official was selected. 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection shall have no effect unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners of any municipality to which it may apply. The presiding officer of the board of commissioners shall certify the approval of this subsection and a timetable of transitional elections which implement this subsection to the secretary of state.  
Sec. 6-20-103. - Persons eligible as commissioners or as mayor. 
A qualified voter of the city, other than a person qualified to vote based only on nonresident ownership of real property under the provisions of § 6-20-106(b), shall be eligible for election to the office of commissioner or mayor. No person may serve simultaneously as a commissioner or mayor and in an elected office within the county, sate or federal government. A person who holds an elected office within the county, state or federal government shall resign that office prior to taking the oath of office as a commissioner or mayor, and a person who holds office as a commissioner or mayor shall resign that office prior to taking the oath of office as an elected official in the county, state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2010-40, § 1, 8-9-2010, passed at referendum 11-2-2010)  
Sec. 6-20-104. - Disqualification from office. 
No person shall become commissioner who shall have been convicted of malfeasance in office, bribery, or other corrupt practice, or crime, or of violating any of the provisions of § 6-20-108 in reference to elections, and if any commissioner shall be so convicted he shall forfeit his office.  
Sec. 6-20-105. - Calling elections. 
The board of commissioners has the power by ordinance to direct the calling by the county election commission of municipal elections, including all elections respecting bond issues.  
Sec. 6-20-106. - Qualifications of voters. 
(a)  In any election of commissioners under this charter, registered voters of the city or territory may vote. 
(b)  However, in cities having populations of not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) nor more than one thousand three hundred seventy-five (1,375), according to the United States census of 1970 or any subsequent United States census, registered voters who own real property located in any such city shall be entitled to vote in all municipal elections and municipal referendums held in such city, but in cases of multiple ownership of real property, no more than two (2) owners who are registered voters shall be eligible to vote under this subsection. This subsection shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners of any city to which it applies. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of such board and certified by such presiding officer to the secretary of state. 
(c)  However, in cities having a population of not less than four thousand five hundred fifty (4,550) nor more than four thousand six hundred eight (4,608) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, all registered voters who own real property located in any such city shall also be entitled to vote in all municipal elections and municipal referendums held in such city. 
(d)  However, in any city having a population of not less than one thousand nine hundred forty (1,940) nor more than two thousand (2,000) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, a registered voter who resides outside the boundaries of the city, but who owns at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet of real property located within the boundaries of the city, shall be entitled to vote in all municipal elections and municipal referenda held in the city; provided, that in any case of multiple ownership of such real property, the nonresident voter must own at least one-half (½) interest of such property. This subsection shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners of any city to which it applies. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of such board and certified by such presiding officer to the secretary of state. 
(e)  In municipalities having a population of not less than one thousand ten (1,010) and not more than one thousand fifteen (1,015) according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census, all registered voters who own real property located in any such municipality shall also be entitled to vote in all municipal elections and municipal referenda held in such city but in cases of multiple ownership of real property, no more than two (2) owners who are registered voters are eligible to vote under this subsection. This subsection shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners of any city to which it applies. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of such municipality and certified by the presiding officer to the secretary of state.  
Sec. 6-20-107. - Declaration of results. 
The county election commission shall determine and declare the results of the election. The requisite number of candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.  
Sec. 6-20-108. - Improper solicitation of political support. 
No candidate for any office nor any other person shall, directly or indirectly, give or promise any person or persons any office, employment, money, benefit, or anything of value for the purpose of influencing or obtaining political support, aid, or vote for any candidate. Any person violating this section shall be punished by fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.  
Sec. 6-20-109. - Beginning of terms of office. 
The terms of all commissioners shall begin at the beginning of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners following the date of their election.  
Sec. 6-20-110. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Any vacancy on the board occurring prior to a regular city election shall be filled by the remaining members of the board until that election. At the election, the remaining unexpired term shall be filled. No member shall be appointed under this section at any time when the board already has one (1) member so appointed. In the case of any additional vacancy, the board shall by ordinance or resolution, call upon the county election commission to call a special election for the purpose of filling such additional vacancy. If a city has chosen to elect commissioners from districts, any vacancy in a district commissioner's office shall be filled by the appointment or election of a qualified person who resides in the district. 
(b)  If, within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of a vacancy, the vacancy has not been filled by the remaining members of the commission in accordance with subsection (a), then the mayor, or, if a vacancy exists in the position of mayor, then the city manager, or, if a vacancy exists in the positions of mayor and city manager, then the city recorder, shall notify the county election commission within five (5) business days following the passage of such ninety-day period. The county election commission shall call a special election for the purpose of filling the vacancy; provided, however, that such special election shall be held in conjunction with the next general election or city election, if such election is scheduled to occur more than seventy-five (75) days but less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the county election commission is notified of the unfilled vacancy. 
(Acts 1921, ch. 173, art. 4, § 8; Shan. Supp., § 1997a142; Code 1932, § 3539; Acts 1972, ch. 740, § 4(36); 1973, ch. 222, § 1; T.C.A. (orig. ed.), § 6-2011; Acts 1989, ch. 175, § 6; 2005, ch. 255, § 1)  
PART 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD 
 
Sec. 6-20-201. - Election of mayor; absence or disability of mayor. 
(a)  (1)  The commissioners, at the first regular meeting after each biennial election, shall elect one (1) of their number mayor for a term of two (2) years, and thus organized the body shall be known as the board of commissioners. 
(2)  In cities holding elections every four (4) years under the terms of § 6-20-101(e), the commissioners, at the first regular meeting after the quadrennial election and every two (2) years subsequent thereto, shall elect one (1) of their number mayor for a term of two (2) years, and the body so organized shall be known as the board of commissioners. The provisions of this subdivision shall have no effect unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the governing body of any municipality to which it may apply. 
(3)  (A)  [Dependent upon referendum] Cities holding elections every four (4) years under the terms of § 6-20-101 and having a population of not less than one thousand twenty (1,020) nor more than one thousand thirty (1,030) according to a 1987 state certified census, or any subsequent federal census, shall have the option of a popular election of a mayor, to serve four (4) consecutive years, as the board of commissioners directs the county election commission to hold under the provisions of § 6-20-102. Voters shall be entitled to vote for a mayor and two (2) or four (4) commissioners dependent upon those provisions of § 6-20-101 in effect for that city. 
(B)  The provisions of this subdivision (a)(3) shall have no effect unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the governing body of any municipality to which it may apply. 
(b)  (1)  Rather than being elected by the board of commissioners, the mayor may be elected by popular vote if this method of electing the mayor is approved in a referendum in the city. In the referendum, the question on the ballot shall appear in substantially this form: 
Shall the mayor of this city be elected by popular vote rather than by the board of commissioners? 
The referendum may be called by resolution of the board of commissioners or by petition of ten percent (10%) of the registered voters of the city. The referendum shall be held by the county election commission as provided in the general election law for elections on questions, or the resolution or petition may provide that the referendum be held a the next regular city election. 
(2)  Once the popular election of the mayor has been approved by a majority of those voting, the board of commissioners shall designate by ordinance one (1) of the commissioner positions as that of mayor. The popular election of the mayor shall take effect at the next election for the position designated. In the mayoral election, the person receiving the most votes shall become the mayor. The term of the popularly elected mayor shall be four (4) years. 
(3)  In a city that has chosen to elect commissioners from districts and that also has chosen to elect the mayor by popular vote, the board of commissioners shall establish one (1) fewer district than the number of commissioners, and the mayor shall be elected at-large for a four-year term. 
(4)  The popularly elected mayor shall have the same powers and duties as a mayor chosen by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  During the absence or disability of the mayor, the board shall designate some properly qualified person to perform his duties.  
Sec. 6-20-202. - Appointment of vice-mayor. 
At the first meeting of the board, and thereafter at the first meeting after a general city election, the board shall choose from its membership a member to act in the absence, inability, or failure to act of the mayor.  
Sec. 6-20-203. - Duties of vice-mayor. 
Such member shall act as mayor during any temporary absence, inability, or failure to act of the mayor, and whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor such member shall become mayor and hold office as such for the unexpired term.  
Sec. 6-20-204. - Compensation of mayor and commissioners. 
(a)  The salary of the mayor shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300) per month, and the salary of each other commissioner shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per month; except that in cities which have a population of not less than one thousand (1,000) according to the federal census of 1970, or any subsequent federal census, the salary of the mayor shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500) per month, and the salary of each other commissioner shall not exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450) per month; and provided further, that no increase in the salaries permitted by this section shall become effective unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  (1)  The salary of the mayor and commissioners shall be set by the board of commissioners. In cities with a population of less than one thousand (1,000), however, the salary of the mayor shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500) per month, and the salary of each commissioner shall not exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450) per month. In cities with a population of one thousand (1,000) or more, the salary of the mayor shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) per month, and the salary of each commissioner shall not exceed nine hundred fifty dollars ($950) per month. No increase in salaries of the mayor and commissioners shall be effective unless approved by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the members to which the board of commissioners is entitled. Populations referred to in this section shall be as determined by the latest federal decennial census. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall only apply in counties having a population of not less than four hundred seventy thousand (470,000) nor more than four hundred eighty thousand (480,000) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census. 
(c)  (1)  Notwithstanding the limits established in the preceding subsections, the salaries of the mayor and commissioners may be established annually by the board of commissioners at the time of adoption of the annual operating budget; provided, however, that such salaries shall not be increased or diminished prior to the end of the term for which such officials were elected. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall become effective upon approval by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 6-20-205. - Legislative powers of board; conflict of interest. 
(a)  The legislative and all other powers except as otherwise provided by this charter are delegated to and vested in the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may by ordinance or resolution not inconsistent with this charter prescribe the manner in which any powers of the city shall be exercised, provide all means necessary or proper therefor, and do all things needful within or without the city or state to protect the rights of the city. 
(b)  (1)  Any member of a local governing body of a county or a municipality who is also an employee of such county or municipality may vote on matters in which he has a conflict of interest if the member informs the governing body immediately prior to the vote as follows: "Because I am an employee of (name of governmental unit), I have a conflict of interest in the proposal about to be voted. However, I declare that my argument and my vote answer only to my conscience and to my obligation to my constituents and the citizens this body represents." 
(2)  In the event a member of a local governing body of a county or a municipality has a conflict of interest in a matter to be voted upon by the body, he may abstain for cause by announcing such to the presiding officer. Any member of a local governing body of a county or municipality who abstains from voting for cause on any issue coming to a vote before the body, shall not be counted for the purpose of determining a majority vote. 
(3)  The vote of any person having a conflict of interest who does not inform the governing body of such conflict as provided in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall be void if challenged in a timely manner. As used in this subdivision, [the term] "timely manner" means during the same meeting at which the vote was cast and prior to the transaction of any further business by the body. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as altering, amending or otherwise affecting the provisions of § 12-4-101(a). In the event of any conflict between this subsection and § 4-101(a), the provisions of § 12-4-101(a) shall prevail.  
Sec. 6-20-206. - Exercise of board's powers. 
The board shall exercise its powers in session duly assembled, and no member or group of members thereof shall exercise or attempt to exercise the powers conferred upon the board except through proceedings adopted at some regular or special session.  
Sec. 6-20-207. - Regular meetings. 
The board of commissioners shall by ordinance fix the time and place at which the regular meetings of the board shall be held, and until otherwise provided by ordinance, the regular meetings of the board shall be held at eight o'clock (8:00 p.m.) on the first and third Thursdays of each month.  
Sec. 6-20-208. - Special meetings. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or city manager, or of any two (2) commissioners, the welfare of the city demands it, the mayor or the recorder shall call special meetings of the board of commissioners upon at least twelve (12) hours written notice to each commissioner, the city manager, recorder, and city attorney, served personally or left at his usual place of residence. Each call for a special meeting shall set forth the character of the business to be discussed at such meeting and no other business shall be considered at such meeting.  
Sec. 6-20-209. - Mayor presiding. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 6-20-210. - Quorum. 
A majority of all the members of the board shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of the absentees in such manner and under such penalties as the board may provide.  
Sec. 6-20-211. - Procedural powers and duties of board. 
(a)  The board may determine the rules of its proceedings, subject to this charter, and may arrest and punish by fine any member or other person guilty of disorderly or contemptuous behavior in its presence. 
(b)  (1)  The board has the power and may delegate it to any committee to: 
(A)  Subpoena witnesses, and order the production of books and papers relating to any subject within its jurisdiction; 
(B)  Call upon its own officers or the chief of police to execute its process; and 
(C)  Arrest and punish by fine or imprisonment, or both, any person refusing to obey such subpoena or order. 
(2)  The refusal to obey a subpoena or order of the board is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor, and each day's continuance in any refusal as aforesaid shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  The board's presiding officer or the chairperson of any committee may administer oaths to witnesses. 
(e)  The board shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and the yeas and nays on all questions shall be entered thereon.  
Sec. 6-20-212. - Board sessions public. 
All sessions of the board shall be public and subject to change of plan in case of emergency.  
Sec. 6-20-213. - Powers of mayor. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of commissioners and perform such other duties consistent with his office as may be imposed by it and he shall have a seat, a voice, and a vote, but no veto. He shall sign the journal of the board and all ordinances on their final passage, execute all deeds, bonds, and contracts made in the name of the city, and he may introduce ordinances in the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 6-20-214. - Style of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall begin, "Be it ordained by the city of (here inserting name) as follows:"  
Sec. 6-20-215. - Ordinance procedure. 
(a)  Every ordinance shall be read two (2) different days in open session before its adoption, and not less than one (1) week shall elapse between first and second readings, and any ordinance not so read shall be null and void. Any city incorporated under chapters 18—23 of this title may establish by ordinance a procedure to read only the caption of an ordinance, instead of the entire ordinance, on both readings. Copies of such ordinances shall be available during regular business hours at the office of the city recorder and during sessions in which the ordinance has its second reading. 
(b)  An ordinance shall not take effect until fifteen (15) days after the first passage thereof, except in case of an emergency ordinance. An emergency ordinance may become effective upon the day of its final passage, provided it shall contain the statement that an emergency exists and shall specify with distinctness the facts and reasons constituting such an emergency. 
(c)  The unanimous vote of all members of the board present shall be required to pass an emergency ordinance. 
(d)  No ordinance making a grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or regulating the rate to be charged for its service by any public utility shall ever be passed as an emergency ordinance. No ordinance shall be amended except by a new ordinance.  
Sec. 6-20-216. - Voting by board. 
In all cases under § 6-20-215 the vote shall be determined by yeas and nays, the names of the members voting for or against an ordinance shall be entered upon the journal.  
Sec. 6-20-217. - Recording of ordinances. 
Every ordinance shall be immediately taken charge of by the recorder and by him numbered, copied in an ordinance book, filed and preserved in his office.  
Sec. 6-20-218. - Publication of penal ordinances; effective date. 
(a)  Each ordinance of a penal nature, or the caption of each ordinance of a penal nature, shall be published after its final passage in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall take effect until the ordinance, or its caption, is published except as otherwise provided in chapter 54 part 5 of this title.  
Sec. 6-20-219. - Mayoral duties required by ordinance. 
The mayor shall have power and it is hereby made his duty to perform all acts that may be required of him by any ordinance duly enacted by the board of commissioners, not in conflict with any of the provisions of this charter.  
Sec. 6-20-220. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  (1)  The mayor or any commissioner may be removed from office by the board of commissioners for a crime or misdemeanor in office, for grave misconduct showing unfitness for public duty, or for permanent disability, by a majority vote of the other members of the board voting for such removal. The proceedings for such removal shall be upon specific charges in writing, which, with a notice stating the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the accused or published at least three (3) times on three (3) successive days in a daily newspaper circulating in the city. 
(2)  The hearing shall be public and the accused shall have the right to appear and defend in person or by counsel and have process of the board to compel the attendance of witnesses in his behalf. Such vote shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the members voting for or against such removal shall be entered in the journal. 
(3)  Immediately upon the vote for removal the term of the accused shall expire and his official status, power, and authority shall cease without further action. 
(4)  Anyone removed hereunder shall have the right of appeal. 
(b)  (1)  Rather than being removed by the board of commissioners, the holder of any elective office may be removed by popular vote. 
(2)  The holder of any elective office of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, whether by election, succession, or appointment to fill a vacancy, is subject to removal from office at a recall election in the manner provided in the Tennessee Code Annotated § 2-5-151, with the exceptions that petitions shall be signed by at least thirty two and a half percent (32.5%) of those registered to vote in the municipality and the completed petitions shall be filed with the county election commission within sixty (60) days after final certification by the county election commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-28, § 1, 4-23-2012, ref. of 11-2012)  
CHAPTER 21. - CITY MANAGER, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
PART 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-21-101. - Appointment and removal of city manager. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint and fix the salary of the city manager, who shall serve at the will of the board; provided, however, that he may not be removed within twelve (12) months from the date on which he assumed his duties, except for incompetence, malfeasance, misfeasance, or neglect of duty. In case of his removal within that period, he may demand written charges and a public hearing thereon before the board prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect; but the decision and action of the board on such hearing shall be final, and pending such hearing, the board may suspend him from duty.  
Sec. 6-21-102. - Subordinate officers and employees. 
(a)  The city manager may appoint, promote, suspend, transfer and remove any officer or employee of the city responsible to him; or he may, at his discretion, authorize the head of a department or office responsible to him to take such actions regarding subordinates in such department or office. The manager shall appoint such heads of administrative offices or organizational units as he deems necessary. The manager may combine, or personally hold, any such administrative offices herein or otherwise established, or may delegate parts of the duties of the manager's office to designated subordinates. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the compensation of all officers and employees of the city shall be fixed by the city manager within the limits of the appropriations ordinance and in accordance with a comprehensive pay plan adopted by the board of commissioners.  
Sec. 6-21-103. - Oath of office. 
Every officer, agent, and employee holding a position upon an annual salary shall, before entering upon his duties, take and subscribe and file with the recorder, an oath or affirmation that he has all the qualifications named in this charter for the office or employment he is about to assume, that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of this state and the charter and ordinances of the city and that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office or employment.  
Sec. 6-21-104. - Surety bond. 
The city manager and every officer, agent, and employee having duties embracing the receipt, disbursement, custody, or handling of money shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a fidelity bond with some surety company authorized to do business in the state of Tennessee, as surety (except that bonds for five hundred dollars ($500) or less may be given with personal surety), in such amount as shall be prescribed by ordinance of the board of commissioners, except where the amount is prescribed in this charter. All such bonds and sureties thereto shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The cost of making these bonds is to be paid by the city.  
Sec. 6-21-105. - Additional bond. 
If at any time, it appears to the mayor, city manager, or recorder that the surety or sureties on any official bond are insufficient, the officer or employee shall be required to give additional bond, and if such officer or employee fails to give additional bond within twenty (20) days after he shall have been notified, his office shall be vacant.  
Sec. 6-21-106. - Political activities of officers and employees; penalties. 
(a)  Neither the city manager, recorder, city judge, chief of police nor any person in the employ of the city, under any of such officers, shall take any active part in or contribute any money toward the nomination or election of any candidate for election to the board of commissioners, except to answer such questions as may be put to them and as they may desire to answer. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall subject the offenders to removal from office or employment and to punishment by fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.  
Sec. 6-21-107. - Manager as administrative head; absence; time devoted to office. 
(a)  In addition to all the powers conferred upon the city manager, he shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the board of commissioners; and he shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs and need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of his appointment. 
(b)  During the absence or disability of the city manager, the board of commissioners may designate some properly qualified person to perform the functions of the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall not be required to give his entire time to the affairs of the city, unless the city commissioners, when employing the city manager, make his employment conditional upon his devoting his entire time to the interest of the city.  
Sec. 6-21-108. - Powers and duties of [city] manager. 
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be: 
(1)  To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced, and upon knowledge or information of any violation thereof, to see that prosecutions are instituted in the city court; 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, appoint, promote, demote, suspend, transfer, remove, and otherwise discipline all department heads and subordinate employees at any time, subject only to any personnel rules and regulations adopted by ordinance or resolution by the commission. Any hearings on, or appeals from, the city manager's personnel decisions provided for in the personnel rules and regulations shall be exclusively before the city manager or a hearing officer designated by the city manager; 
(3)  To supervise and control the work of the recorder, the chief of police, the city attorney, treasurer, and all other officers, and of all departments and divisions created by this charter or which hereafter may be created by the board of commissioners; 
(4)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility or franchise are faithfully done, kept and performed, and, upon knowledge or information of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the city attorney, who is hereby required to take such steps as are necessary to enforce the same; 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, with the right to take part in the discussion, but not to vote; 
(6)  To recommend to the board of commissioners for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  To act as budget commissioner and to keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and need of the city; 
(8)  To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all material, supplies and equipment for the proper conduct of the city's business as provided in § 6-19-104; and 
(9)  Execute contracts on behalf of the city when this authority is delegated to the city manager by ordinance; and 
(10)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners.  
PART 2. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 6-21-201. - Qualifications. 
The city attorney shall be an attorney at law entitled to practice in the courts of the state.  
Sec. 6-21-202. - Duties and compensation. 
(a)  The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Direct the management of all litigation in which the city is a party, including the functions of prosecuting attorney in the city courts; 
(2)  Represent the city in all legal matters and proceedings in which the city is a party or interested, or in which any of its officers are officially interested; 
(3)  Attend any meetings of the board of commissioners when required by the board of commissioners; 
(4)  Advise the board of commissioners and committees or members thereof, the city manager, and the heads of all departments and divisions, as to all legal questions affecting the city's interest; and 
(5)  Approve as to form all contracts, deeds, bonds, ordinances, resolutions and other documents to be signed in the name of or made by or with the city. 
(b)  He shall receive a salary to be fixed by the board of commissioners.  
PART 3. - DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-21-301. - Departments of city. 
That the work and affairs of the city may be classified and arranged conveniently and conducted efficiently, there are hereby established the following departments: 
(1)  Department of finance; 
(2)  Department of public safety; 
(3)  Department of public works and welfare; and 
(4)  Department of education.  
Sec. 6-21-302. - Creation and control of departments by board. 
The board of commissioners may by ordinance create new departments or combine or abolish existing departments and prescribe their duties and functions, but before doing so must receive the written recommendations of the city manager.  
Sec. 6-21-303. - Supervision of departments by manager. 
The city manager shall supervise and control all departments now or hereafter created except as otherwise provided by this charter.  
PART 4. - CITY RECORDER 
 
Sec. 6-21-401. - City recorder; appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint a city recorder, who also may be appointed to the positions of finance director or treasurer or both.  
Sec. 6-21-402. - Recorder pro tem. 
In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the recorder, the city manager may appoint a recorder pro tempore.  
Sec. 6-21-403. - Recorder's functions at board meeting. 
It shall be the duty of the recorder to be present at all meetings of the board of commissioners, and to keep a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the same to be preserved in permanent book form.  
Sec. 6-21-404. - Custody of official records. 
The recorder shall have custody of, and preserve in his office, the city seal, the public records, original rolls of ordinance, ordinance books, minutes of the board of commissioners, contracts, bonds, title deeds, certificates, and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds (except his bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor), and all other bonds, oaths and affirmations and all other records, papers, and documents not required by this charter or by ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates, and contents, and keep an accurate and modern index thereof.  
Sec. 6-21-405. - Copies of records and ordinances. 
The recorder shall provide, and when required by any officer or person, certify copies of records, papers, and documents in his office, and charge therefor, for the use of the city, such fees as may be provided by ordinance, cause copies of ordinances to be printed, as may be directed by the board of commissioners, and keep them in his office for distribution.  
PART 5. - CITY COURT 
 
Sec. 6-21-501. - City judges; jurisdiction; appointment; qualifications and compensation; elections. 
(a)  There shall be a city court presided over by a city judge. The city judge shall have jurisdiction in and over all cases for the violation of and all cases arising under the laws and ordinances of the city. The board of commissioners may appoint a city judge who shall serve at the will of the board. He shall have such qualifications and receive such compensation as the board may provide by ordinance. Whenever the office of city judge is not filled by the appointment of some other person, the recorder shall be the city judge. 
(b)(1)  (A)  The provisions of this subsection shall become effective in any municipality incorporated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 18 of this title, having a population of not less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) nor more than one thousand seven hundred (1,700) according to the federal census of 1970, or any subsequent federal census, which lies within a county having a population of not less than thirty-four thousand (34,000) nor more than thirty-five thousand (35,000) according to the federal census of 1970, or any subsequent federal census, upon approval within fifteen (15) days after May 15, 1979, by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the governing body of such municipality and upon certification of such approval by the presiding officer of the governing body to the secretary of state, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary. 
(B)  The provisions of subsection (b) shall also become effective in any municipality incorporated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 18 of this title, having a population of not less than four thousand fifty (4,050) nor more than four thousand one hundred fifty (4,150) according to the federal census of 1970, or any subsequent census, which lies within a county having a population of not less than thirty-four thousand four hundred (34,400) nor more than thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) according to the federal census of 1970, or any subsequent federal census, upon approval within fifteen (15) days after May 15, 1981, by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the governing body of such municipality and upon certification of such approval by the presiding officer of the governing body to the secretary of state, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary. 
(C)  In municipalities incorporated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 18 of this title, having a population of not less than eight hundred ninety-five (895) nor more than nine hundred (900) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, which are located within a county having a population of not less than thirty-four thousand seventy-five (34,075) nor more than thirty-four thousand one hundred seventy-five (34,175) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, the city judge shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the general sessions judges and circuit court judges to try persons charged with the offense of driving while under the influence of an intoxicant as prohibited by § 55-10-401, within the geographic boundaries of such municipalities. 
(D)  In municipalities incorporated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 18 of this title, having a population of not less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) nor more than one thousand six hundred thirteen (1,613) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, which are located within a county having a population of not less than thirty-four thousand seventy-five (34,075) nor more than thirty-four thousand one hundred seventy-five (34,175) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, the city judge shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the general sessions judges and circuit court judges to try persons charged with the offense of driving while under the influence of an intoxicant as prohibited by § 55-10-401, within the geographic boundaries of such municipalities. 
(E)  The provisions of this subsection shall also apply in any city having a population of not less than six thousand three hundred seventy-five (6,375) and not more than six thousand four hundred seventy-five (6,475) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census, which is located in any county having a population of not less than twenty-eight thousand six hundred sixty (28,660) and not more than twenty-eight thousand six hundred ninety (28,690) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census. 
(2)  There shall be a city court presided over by a city judge. The city judge shall have jurisdiction in and over all cases for the violation of and all cases arising under the laws and ordinances of the city. In addition, the city judge shall be vested with concurrent jurisdiction and authority with courts of general sessions of the county, as set forth in title 40, in all cases of the violation of the criminal laws of the state of Tennessee within the limits of such municipality. 
(3)  The board of commissioners shall appoint a city judge who shall be an attorney-at-law entitled to practice in the courts of the state and who shall serve at the will of the board. He shall receive such compensation as the board may provide by ordinance. All fees shall be paid into the treasury of the city and are not to be considered a part of the compensation of the city judge. In the absence or disability of the city judge, the mayor may designate a qualified person to serve as city judge. Any vacancy in the office of city judge shall be filled by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  (1)  At the regular general election in August of 1990, the candidate for city judge who receives the highest number of votes shall be elected to the position of city judge for a term of eight (8) years and shall be a licensed attorney authorized to practice in the courts of this state. The city judge shall be not less than thirty (30) years of age and shall be a resident of the county within which the city lies. The city judge shall receive such compensation as the board by ordinance may establish; provided, however, that such compensation shall not be altered for the term for which the city judge is elected. 
(2)  All fees shall be paid into the treasury of the city and are not to be considered as part of the compensation of the city judge. In the absence or disability of the city judge, a general sessions court judge of the county within which the city lies shall sit temporarily as city judge. Any vacancy in the office of city judge shall be filled by the board until the next regularly scheduled election is conducted. 
(3)  The city judge shall have jurisdiction in and over all cases for the violation of and all cases arising under the laws and ordinances of the city. In addition, the city judge shall be vested with concurrent jurisdiction and authority with courts of general sessions of the county, as set forth in title 40, in all cases of the violation of the criminal laws of the state of Tennessee within the limits of such city. 
(4)  This subsection shall be local in effect and shall become effective in a particular municipality upon the contingency of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the legislative body of the municipality approving the provisions of this subsection. Unless the municipality's charter provides otherwise, by the same vote, the legislative body of the municipality may revoke the approval of the provisions of this subsection, and this subsection shall become ineffective upon the end of the term of the city judge elected under it. 
(5)  (A)  The provisions of this subsection shall only apply in counties having a population in excess of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent federal census. 
(B)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply in any county having a population greater than seven hundred seventy thousand (770,000) according to the 1980 federal census or any subsequent census. 
(C)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply in any county having a population of not less than four hundred seventy thousand (470,000) nor more than four hundred eighty thousand (480,000) according to the 1980 federal census of population or any subsequent federal census. 
(d)  If a city judge is unable to preside over city court for any reason, then the judge shall appoint a general sessions judge of the county within which the city lies to sit in his stead. If there is not a general sessions judge available, then the city judge shall appoint an attorney meeting the same qualifications as a general sessions judge, to sit temporarily.  
Sec. 6-21-502. - Power to enforce ordinances. 
(a)  The city judge has the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose fines, costs, and forfeitures, and punish by fine for violation of city ordinances; 
(2)  Preserve and enforce order in such city judge's court; 
(3)  Enforce the collection of all such fines, costs, and forfeitures imposed by such city judge; and 
(4)  In default of the payment, of good and sufficient security given for the payment of any such fines, costs, or forfeitures imposed by such city judge, the city judge has the power, and it is such city judge's duty, to commit the offender to the workhouse or other place provided for such purpose, and to such labor as may be provided by ordinance until such fines, costs or forfeitures are fully paid, at the rate set in § 40-24-104; provided that no such imprisonment shall exceed the period of time established for a Class C misdemeanor for any one (1) offense; and that fines may be paid in installments in such manner as may be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  The city judge may remit, with or without condition, fines and costs imposed for violation of any ordinance or charter provision.  
Sec. 6-21-503. - Docket. 
The city judge shall keep or cause to be kept a court docket or dockets embodying complete detailed records of all cases handled by him.  
Sec. 6-21-504. - Arrest warrant. 
(a)  Only one (1) warrant shall be issued for the same offense, the warrant to embrace all the parties charged with the same offense. 
(b)  No arrest shall be made except upon a warrant duly issued, unless the offense is committed in the presence of the officer making the arrest, or unless in a case of felony. 
(c)  The affidavit upon which the warrant is issued shall especially state the offense charged.  
Sec. 6-21-505. - Appearance bond. 
Whenever any person is arrested for the violation of any city ordinance in the presence of a police officer and no warrant has been issued or served, he may execute an appearance bond in an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), and file same with a police desk sergeant, or he may, in lieu of the execution of an appearance bond, deposit a sum not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), with a police desk sergeant and be given a receipt for same, and on the appearance of such person before the city court at the time specified in the receipt such deposit shall be returned to him. On the failure of such person to appear at the time specified, the amount so deposited shall be forfeited to the municipality and he shall not be entitled to the return of any part thereof and it shall not be necessary to issue a scire facias; provided, however, that within two (2) days of the imposition of the forfeiture the city judge shall have the power to set aside the conditional judgment imposing such forfeiture when it shall be made to appear that the failure of the accused to appear and defend his suit was due to no fault or negligence of the accused. After the expiration of the two (2) days, there may be a final judgment imposing a forfeiture.  
Sec. 6-21-506. - Disposition of fines and labor. 
(a)  All fines imposed by the city judge for violations of city ordinances shall belong to and be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(b)  Any labor performed in the execution of a workhouse or prison sentence for such violation or violations shall be performed for the city under the direction of the city manager.  
Sec. 6-21-507. - Collection of fines and costs. 
(a)  The city judge in all cases heard or determined by him for offenses against the corporate laws and ordinances shall tax in the bill of costs the same amounts and for the same items allowed in courts of general sessions for similar work in state cases, and in addition shall add thereto one dollar ($1.00), as a tax on the same. He shall certify to the chief of police for collection, all fines, costs, and forfeitures imposed by him for offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city. Costs in favor of any person paid a fixed salary by the city shall belong to the city and be paid into its treasury. It shall be the duty of the city judge to collect and receipt for all fines imposed by him and he shall render a monthly report to the board of commissioners of all costs and fines collected and of all assessed and uncollected. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any other person or officer to collect or receipt for such fines, costs, and recoveries, but the city judge may authorize the chief of police to collect and receipt for fines and costs. 
(c)  Municipal court judgments that have gone unpaid will be sent to collections at one hundred twenty (120) days and interest will be charged starting on the 120th day. Interest shall be computed at the effective rate of ten percent (10%) per annum and shall be collected by the collection agency and forwarded to the City of Mt. Juliet Police Department for deposit into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2012-43, 7-9-2012)  
Sec. 6-21-508. - Appeal from city judge's judgment. 
Any person dissatisfied with the judgment of the city judge in any case or cases heard and determined by the city judge, may, within ten (10) entire days thereafter, Sundays exclusive, appeal to the next circuit court of the county, upon giving bond with good and sufficient security as approved by the city judge for his appearance or the faithful prosecution of the appeal; provided, however, that in prosecutions for violations of the city ordinances the bond shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250).  
PART 6. - POLICE 
 
Sec. 6-21-601. - Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint a chief of police and such police officers and other members of the police force as may be provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 6-21-602. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the members of the police force to: 
(1)  Preserve order in the city; 
(2)  Protect the inhabitants and property owners therein from violence, crime, and all criminal acts; 
(3)  Prevent the commission of crime, violations of law and of the city ordinances; and 
(4)  Perform a general police duty, execute and return all processes, notices, and orders of the mayor, city manager, city attorney, and recorder, and all other processes, notices, and orders as in this charter or by ordinance may be provided.  
Sec. 6-21-603. - Emergency assistance to police. 
In time of riot or other emergency, the mayor or city manager shall have power to summon any number of male inhabitants to assist the police force.  
Sec. 6-21-604. - Duties in prosecution of violations. 
Members of the police force, whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the ordinances of the city, shall procure the issuance of warrants, serve the same, and appear in the city courts as prosecutors, relieving complaining citizens insofar as practical of the burden of instituting cases involving the violation of city ordinances; but this section shall not be construed to relieve any person from the duty of appearing in court and testifying in any case.  
Sec. 6-21-605. - [Repealed.]  
PART 7. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 6-21-701. - Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department and such other members of the department as may be provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 6-21-702. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and the members thereof to take all proper steps for fire prevention and suppression.  
Sec. 6-21-703. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  When any fire department or company recognized as duly constituted by the Commissioner of Commerce and Insurance pursuant to Section 68-102-108 is requested to respond to a fire, hazardous materials incident, natural disaster, service call, or other emergency, it may, regardless of where the emergency exists, proceed to the emergency site by the most direct route at the maximum speed consistent with safety. While responding to, operating at, or returning from such emergency, the chief of the responding fire department or company, or any member serving in capacity of fire officer-in-charge, shall also have the authority: 
(1)  To control and direct the activities at the scene of the emergency; 
(2)  To order any person or persons to leave any building or place in the vicinity of such scene for the purpose of protecting such person(s) from injury; 
(3)  To blockade any public highway, street or private right-of-way temporarily while at such scene; 
(4)  To trespass at any time of the day or night without liability while at such scene; 
(5)  To enter any building or premises, including private dwellings, where a fire is in progress, or where there is reasonable cause to believe a fire is in progress, for the purpose of extinguishing the fire; 
(6)  To enter any building or premises, including private dwellings, near the scene of the fire for the purpose of protecting the building or premises, or for the purpose of extinguishing the fire which is in progress in another building or premises; 
(7)  To inspect for preplanning all buildings, structures, or other places in his fire district, except the interior of a private dwelling, where any combustible material, including waste paper, rags, shavings, waste, leather, rubber, crates, boxes, barrels, rubbish, or other combustible material that is or may become dangerous as a fire menace to such buildings, structures, or other places has been allowed to accumulate, or where such chief or his designated representative has reason to believe that such combustible material has accumulated or is likely to accumulate; 
(8)  To direct without liability the removal or destruction of any fence, house, motor vehicle, or other thing, if he deems such action necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire; 
(9)  To request and be furnished with additional materials or special equipment at the expense of the owner of the property on which the emergency occurs, if deemed necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire or hazardous condition; and 
(10)  To order disengagement or discouplement of any convoy, caravan, or train of vehicles, craft, or railway cars, if deemed necessary in the interest of safety of persons or property. 
(b)  When any fire department or company responds to any emergency outside its fire district, however, it shall at all times be subject to the control of the fire chief or designated representative in whose district the emergency occurs.  
Sec. 6-21-704. - Fire marshal. 
The city manager may appoint a fire marshal whose duty shall be, subject to the chief of the fire department, to investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires and the loss occasioned thereby, and assist in the prevention of arson.  
PART 8. - SCHOOLS 
 
Sec. 6-21-801. - Authority of city manager. 
The city manager of any municipality incorporated under chapters 18 to 23 inclusive, of this title shall have full power to manage and control the public or city schools.  
Sec. 6-21-802. - Officers and employees. 
The city manager shall appoint, prescribe the duties and powers of, and fix the salary of the superintendent of schools of the city and appoint, fix the salaries of, and have power to remove all other officers and all teachers, agents, and employees of the department of education.  
Sec. 6-21-803. - Building plans. 
All plans for the erection or improvement of school buildings or other buildings used for educational purposes shall be subject to the approval of the city manager.  
Sec. 6-21-804. - Equipment and supplies. 
All material, supplies, and equipment for educational purposes shall be purchased by the city manager.  
Sec. 6-21-805. - State and county school funds. 
In apportioning the state and county school funds of the county, the county board of education (or other apportioning and disbursing body) shall apportion and pay over to the treasurer of the city such portion of the state and county school funds as by law is applicable to the schools within the limits of the city.  
Sec. 6-21-806. - Disbursements from school fund. 
The board of commissioners shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which the state, county, and city taxes apportioned to the school fund shall be paid over by the city treasurer.  
Sec. 6-21-807. - Board of education; election; powers. 
(a)  The provisions of §§ 6-21-801 and 6-21-802 notwithstanding, the board of commissioners by ordinance may delegate the power to manage and control the city public schools to an elected board of education. 
(b)  The board of education shall have the same number of members as the board of commissioners and shall be elected on the same day and in the same manner as the board of commissioners. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners is elected by district, the board of education shall also be elected by district. 
(d)  The board shall exercise the power otherwise granted to the city manager in this article.  
CHAPTER 22. - FISCAL AFFAIRS UNDER CITY MANAGER-COMMISSION CHARTER 
 
Sec. 6-22-101. - Duties of finance director. 
The city manager or an officer appointed by him shall serve as finance director and shall: 
(1)  Exercise a general supervision over the fiscal affairs of the city, and general accounting supervision over all the city's property, assets, and claims and the disposition thereof; 
(2)  Be the general accountant and auditor of the city; 
(3)  Have custody of all records, papers, and vouchers relating to the fiscal affairs of the city, and the records in his office shall show the financial operations and conditions, property, assets, claims, and liabilities of the city, all expenditures authorized and all contracts in which the city is interested; 
(4)  Require proper fiscal accounts, records, settlements, and reports to be kept, made, and rendered to him by the several departments and officers of the city, including all deputies or employees of his department charged with the collection or expenditures of money, and shall control and audit the same; and 
(5)  At least monthly, adjust the settlements of officers engaged in the collection of the revenue.  
Sec. 6-22-102. - Taxes and assessments under department of finance. 
The assessment, levy, and collection of taxes and special assessments shall be in charge of the department of finance, subject to the limitations elsewhere found in this charter.  
Sec. 6-22-103. - Property and privileges taxable. 
All property, real, personal and mixed subject to state, county, and city taxes, and all privileges taxable by law, shall be taxed and taxes thereon collected by the city for municipal purposes as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 6-22-104. - Ad valorem tax. 
The ad valorem tax upon the stocks, accounts, and equipment may be assessed and collected in like manner as state and county merchant's ad valorem tax is assessed upon the same property. It is the duty of the county tax assessor and of the comptroller of the treasury to prepare a separate assessment book or roll showing real, personal and mixed property assessable by him (or it) lying within the limits of the city.  
Sec. 6-22-105. - Certification of assessments. 
These records shall be certified to the finance director of the city upon the completion of the work of the boards of equalization, after they have been copied by the county clerk or the department of revenue.  
Sec. 6-22-106. - Tax books. 
(a)  As soon as practicable in each year after the assessment books for the state and county are complete (which shall be after equalization boards provided for by general laws shall have finished their work), it shall be the duty of the finance director to prepare or cause to be prepared, from the assessment books of the county and of the comptroller of the treasury, a tax book similar in form to that required by laws of the state to be made out for the county trustee, embracing, however, only such property and persons as are liable for taxes within the city. 
(b)  Such tax books, when certified to be true, correct, and complete by the finance director, shall be the assessment for taxes in the city for all municipal purposes; provided, that there may be an assessment by the finance director at any time, of any property subject to taxation found to have been omitted, and such assessment shall be duly noted and entered on the assessment books of the city; and further provided, that, instead of the assessment made by county and state officials as herein provided, the city may, by ordinance insofar as not prohibited by general laws, provide for and regulate an assessment to be made by its own tax assessor.  
Sec. 6-22-107. - Statement of taxable property; tax levy. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the finance director, in each year, as soon as the assessment roll for the city is complete, to submit to the board of commissioners a certified statement of the total amount of the valuation or assessment of the taxable property for the year within the city limits (including the assessment of all railroads, telephone, telegraph, and other public utility properties), together with a certified statement of the revenue derived by the city from privilege taxes, merchant's ad valorem taxes, street labor taxes, fines for the preceding fiscal year, and miscellaneous revenue. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such statements by the finance director, the board of commissioners shall proceed by ordinance to make the proper levy to meet the expenses of the city for the current fiscal year.  
Sec. 6-22-108. - Effective date of levy. 
The board of commissioners of the city shall have full power to levy and collect taxes as of January 10 of each and every year.  
Sec. 6-22-109. - Extension of levy on tax books. 
It shall be the duty of the finance director, immediately after the levy of taxes by the board of commissioners, to cause the levy to be extended upon the tax book prepared by the finance director in the same manner that extensions are made upon the tax books in the hands of the county trustee.  
Sec. 6-22-110. - Due date of taxes; tax collector; distress warrants. 
(a)  All taxes due the city, except privilege and merchant's ad valorem taxes and street labor taxes, shall, until otherwise provided by ordinance, be due and payable on November 1 of the year for which the taxes are assessed. 
(b)  The treasurer shall be custodian of the tax books and shall be the tax collector of the city. 
(c)  Distress warrants may issue for the collection of taxes and any such distress warrant shall be executed by the chief of police or any police officer of the city by a levy upon, and sale of goods and chattels under the same provisions as prescribed by law for the execution of such process of courts of general sessions.  
Sec. 6-22-111. - Tax liens; errors and irregularities in assessment. 
(a)  All municipal taxes on real estate in the city, and all penalties and costs accruing thereon, are hereby declared to be a lien on such realty from and after January 1 of the year for which same are assessed, superior to all other liens except the liens of the United States, the state of Tennessee and the county, for taxes legally assessed thereon, with which it shall be a lien of equal dignity. 
(b)  No assessment shall be invalid because the size and dimensions of any tract, lot or parcel of land shall not have been precisely named nor the amount of the valuation or tax not correctly given, nor because the property has been assessed in the name of a person who did not own the same, nor because the same was assessed to unknown owners, nor on account of any objection or informality merely technical, but all such assessments shall be good and valid. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall have power to correct any errors in the tax assessments upon a certificate filed by the assessor or assessing body.  
Sec. 6-22-112. - Delinquency penalties; discount. 
(a)  On December 1 of the year for which the taxes are assessed, or other date provided by ordinance, a penalty of two percent (2%) upon all taxes remaining unpaid shall be imposed and collected by the city and paid into the city treasury. An additional penalty of two percent (2%) shall be added for each month thereafter for twelve (12) months. 
(b)  If any taxpayer elects to pay his taxes prior to October 1, he shall be entitled to a discount of two percent (2%) from the amount of his bill.  
Sec. 6-22-113. - Change of due dates; semiannual installments. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may, by ordinance passed by unanimous vote, change the due date and delinquent date of all taxes, and may provide for the semiannual payment of taxes and a discount for the prompt payment thereof. 
(b)  In case a semiannual installment of taxes is made due and payable before the assessment and levy of taxes in the city for the current year is complete, the amount of the installment so collected as a tax upon any property shall be not more than fifty percent (50%) of the taxes levied on the property for the preceding year, such installment to be credited on the current year's taxes when determined and levied.  
Sec. 6-22-114. - Sale of real property for delinquency. 
The finance director shall, under the provisions of the state law for the collection of delinquent taxes, certify to the trustee of the county a list of all real estate upon which municipal taxes remain due and unpaid, or which is liable for sale for other taxes and the same shall be sold in like manner and upon the same terms and conditions as real estate is sold for delinquent state and county taxes.  
Sec. 6-22-115. - Complaints in chancery to collect special assessments. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power, and is hereby given authority, to file complaints in the chancery court in the name of the city for the collection of assessments and levies made for payment for improvements or service in the city, such as paving, sidewalks, curbing, guttering, sewers and other improvements, or services for which assessments may be made under the charter, or by any other acts of the legislature, and the cost of which is made a charge on property owners abutting the improvements and a lien on abutting property, the suits commenced by such complaints to be conducted as other suits in chancery for the enforcement of like liens and under the rules of law and practice provided for the same; provided, that the complaints shall not be objectionable because the owners of different parcels or lots of land are made parties thereto, it being the intention that all persons in the same improvement district, or liable for portions of the same assessment and levy for improving a portion of the city as aforesaid, and on whose property the assessment or levy is a lien, shall be made parties defendant to one (1) complaint.  
Sec. 6-22-116. - License taxes. 
(a)  License taxes may be imposed by ordinance upon any and all privileges, businesses, occupations, vocations, pursuits, or callings, or any class or classes thereof, now or hereafter subject to such taxation under the laws of Tennessee; and a separate license tax may be imposed for each place of business conducted or maintained by the same person, firm, or corporation. 
(b)  The treasurer shall enforce the collection of merchants' taxes and all other license taxes, and for the purpose shall have and exercise the powers of law vested in, and follow the procedure and methods prescribed for, county clerks.  
Sec. 6-22-117. - Accounting system. 
The finance director, with the approval of the city manager, shall cause an efficient system of accounting for the city to be installed and maintained.  
Sec. 6-22-118. - Fiscal forms. 
The finance director shall cause all forms used in connection with either the receipt or disbursement of city funds to be numbered consecutively, and all spoiled or unused forms shall be accounted for.  
Sec. 6-22-119. - Appointment and duties of treasurer. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a treasurer. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the treasurer to collect, receive and [issue] receipt for the taxes and all other revenue (and bonds) of the city, and the proceeds of its bond issues, and to disburse the same. 
(c)  The city manager may appoint the recorder as treasurer.  
Sec. 6-22-120. - Depositories of city funds. 
Depositories of the municipal funds shall be designated by ordinance. The board shall require any financial institution that becomes a depository of municipal funds to secure such funds by collateral in the same manner and under the same conditions as state deposits under Title 9, Chapter 4, Parts 1 and 4, or as provided in a collateral pool created under Title 9, Chapter 4, Part 5.  
Sec. 6-22-121. - Budget commissioner; fiscal year. 
(a)  The city manager shall be budget commissioner. 
(b)  The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 unless otherwise provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 6-22-122. - Budget estimate submitted to commissioners. 
The city manager shall, on or before May 15 of each year, submit to the board of commissioners an estimate of the expenditures and revenue of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. This estimate shall be compiled from detailed information obtained from the several departments on uniform blanks to be furnished by the city manager.  
Sec. 6-22-123. - [Repealed.]  
Sec. 6-22-124. - Appropriation ordinance; publication; amendments. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such estimate, the board of commissioners shall prepare a tentative appropriation ordinance. 
(b)  The appropriation ordinance for each fiscal year shall be finally adopted before the first day of the fiscal year. 
(c)  Amendments may be made to the original appropriations ordinance at any time during a current fiscal year. Except for emergency expenditures under § 6-22-129, however, increased appropriations may be made only after the city manager has certified in writing that sufficient unappropriated revenue will be available.  
Sec. 6-22-125. - Reversion of appropriations to general fund. 
At the end of each year, all unencumbered balances or appropriations in the treasury shall revert to the general fund and be subject to further appropriations. Such balances shall be considered unencumbered only when the city manager shall certify in writing that the purposes for which they were appropriated have been completely accomplished and that no further expenditure in connection with them shall be necessary.  
Sec. 6-22-126. - Approval of claims against city. 
(a)  Except as by this charter or by law or ordinance otherwise provided, the finance director shall prescribe and regulate the manner of paying creditors, officers, and employees of the city. He shall audit all payrolls, accounts and claims against the city and certify thereon the balance as stated by him, but no payroll, account, or claim, or any part thereof, shall be audited against the city or paid unless authorized by law or ordinance and approved and certified by the city manager and the head of the department for which the indebtedness was incurred, and the amount required for payment of the same appropriated for that purpose by ordinance and in the treasury. 
(b)  Whenever any claim shall be presented to the city finance director, he shall have power to require evidence that the amount claimed is justly due, and is in conformity to law and ordinance, and for that purpose he may summon before him any officer, agent, or employee of any department of the municipality, or any other person, and examine him upon oath or affirmation relative thereto. 
(c)  The city manager, finance director and head of the department concerned, and their sureties, shall be liable to the municipality for all loss or damages sustained by the municipality by reason of the corrupt approval of any claim against the municipality.  
Sec. 6-22-127. - Issuance of warrants. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of § 6-22-126, warrants shall be issued by the finance director. 
(b)  Each warrant shall specify the particular departmental fund against which it is drawn and shall be payable out of no other fund. 
(c)  Any officer or employee in the finance director's office may be designated by him to draw warrants with the same effect as if signed by the finance director, such designation to be in writing, in duplicate, filed with the city manager; provided, that the city manager may make such designation if the finance director be absent or disabled and there be no one in his office designated to act. Any such designation may be revoked by the finance director while acting as such by filing the revocation in duplicate with the city manager and the treasury division.  
Sec. 6-22-128. - Certification of availability of funds to meet contract obligations. 
No contract, agreement, or other obligation involving the expenditure of money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution, or order for the expenditure of money be passed by the board of commissioners or be authorized by any officer of the city, unless the finance director shall first certify to the board of commissioners or the proper officer, as the case may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation, or expenditure, is in the treasury or safely assured to be forthcoming and available in time to comply with, or meet such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditures, and no contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money payable from the proceeds of bonds of the city, shall be entered into until the issuance and sale of such bonds have been duly authorized in accordance with the provisions of this charter in reference to city bonds.  
Sec. 6-22-129. - Emergency expenditures. 
No contract liability shall be incurred without previous authority of law or ordinance, but the board of commissioners may, by ordinance, empower the proper officials to pay out money or incur contract liability for the city for the necessary preservation of the city's credit, or in other extreme emergency, under such restrictions as may be provided in the ordinance; provided that any such liability shall mature not later than one (1) year from the date of its in occurrence.  
Sec. 6-22-130. - Annual operating budget; publication; budgetary comparison. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the governing body shall publish the annual operating budget and budgetary comparisons of the proposed budget with the prior year (actual) and the current year (estimated) which information shall include the following: 
(1)  Revenues and expenditures for the following governmental funds: general, streets/public works, general purpose school and debt service. 
(2)  Revenues for each fund shall be listed separately by local taxes, State of Tennessee, federal government and other sources. 
(3)  Expenditures for each fund shall be listed separately by salaries and other costs. 
(4)  Beginning and ending fund balances shall be shown for each fund. 
(5)  The number of full-time equivalent employee positions shall be shown for each fund. 
(b)  The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation and shall be published not less than ten (10) days prior to the meeting where the governing body will consider final passage of the budget.  
CHAPTER 23. - BONDS UNDER CITY MANAGER-COMMISSION CHARTER  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
2010-40 	 8- 9-2010 	1 	6-20-103 
2012-28 	 4-23-2012 	1 	6-20-220 
2012-43 	 7- 9-2012 	      Added 	6-21-507(c) 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as The Code of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the Mt. Juliet City Code.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the board of commissioners means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire board. 
Board. The term "board" or "commissioners" or "governing authority" means the board of commissioners of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" or "municipality" means the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, except as otherwise provided. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in T.C.A. § 1-3-102, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Wilson, State of Tennessee. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governing body. The term "governing body" means the city manager and/or the board of commissioners of the city, unless otherwise indicated. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and the board of commissioners. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Mt. Juliet" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises" means a place or places. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Tennessee. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
T.C.A. The abbreviation "T.C.A." means the Official Code of Tennessee Annotated, as amended. 
Tenant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" mean and include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, T.C.A. § 1-3-102; construction of definitions, meaning of certain words, T.C.A. § 1-3-101 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, T.C.A. § 1-3-109.  
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the board without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, T.C.A. § 1-3-110.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeals, T.C.A. § 1-3-101.  
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following, except those ordinances which have been amended as part of this recodification: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopt any subdivision regulations. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of such chapters, sections and subsections, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows: . . ." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11.  
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail, not exceeding 30 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(d)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties for violation of "home rule" municipal ordinances, T.C.A. § 6-54-306.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Soliciting signatures of on-duty city employees. 
No person shall solicit signatures of city employees while they are on duty for any political reason. 
(Ord. No. 2010-25, § 1, 4-26-2010)  
Secs. 2-2—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— commissioners and mayor under city manager-commission charter T.C.A. § 6-20-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Time and place of meetings. 
The regular meeting of the board of commissioners shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at city hall. The board of commissioners does not meet on holidays. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1-101; Ord. No. 98-10, 7-13-1999; Ord. No. 00-30, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2008-24, § 1, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2008-51, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2008-71, § 1, 12-18-2008) 
State Law reference— Time and place of meetings, T.C.A. § 6-20-207.  
Sec. 2-20. - Order of business. 
The board of commissioners shall follow the regular order of business unless approval by a two-thirds vote of the commissioners present vote to alter the order of business. The regular order of business shall be: 
(1)  Call to order by the mayor, quorum declared; 
(2)  Set agenda; 
(3)  Invocation and the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag of the United States; 
(4)  Approval of minutes of the prior meetings; 
(5)  Citizens' comments (three minutes per citizen); 
(6)  Commissioner reports and comments (five minutes for each commissioner); 
(7)  City manager's report (ten minutes); 
(8)  Unfinished business consent agenda; 
(9)  Unfinished business; 
(10)  New business consent agenda; 
(11)  New business; 
(12)  Announcements; 
(13)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1-102; Ord. No. 98-8, 4-19-1999; Ord. No. 00-06, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 2008-24, § 2, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2008-62, § 1, 10-13-2008)  
Sec. 2-21. - General rules of order. 
The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in the most recently published edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the transaction of business by and before the board of commissioners at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of the charter of the city, state law, and this Code. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1-103; Ord. No. 2007-27, 7-23-2007)  
Sec. 2-22. - Ordinance adoption procedure. 
(a)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-20-215, it is hereby established that only the caption of an ordinance or resolution to be considered by the board of commissioners must be read during the meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The city recorder shall provide copies of all ordinances and resolutions under consideration by making copies of such ordinances available to the public for review. 
(c)  The city recorder shall prepare the agenda of the board of commissioners meetings under the supervision of the city manager. The mayor, city manager, or any commissioner may sponsor a proposed ordinance or resolution for inclusion on the agenda of the meetings of the board of commissioners, with the exception of proposed budget amendments. Proposed budget amendments must first be forwarded and proposed to the city manager by a department head. The city manager then has up to 60 days to give a recommendation to the board of commissioners to approve or disapprove the proposed budget amendment. The city manager may consult with other department heads to ensure that a proposed budget amendment will not interfere with future plans that may be of a greater benefit to the City of Mt. Juliet. Once the city manager gives his recommendation to the board of commissioners the proposed budget amendment shall be placed on the next board of commissioners agenda. The board of commissioners may overrule the decision of the city manager by a simple majority vote. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1-104; Ord. No. 2007-38, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 2014-51, § 1, 7-14-2014) 
State Law reference— Ordinances, form, T.C.A. § 60-20-214.  
Sec. 2-23. - Videotape recordings of meetings. 
A videotape recording shall be made of each regular and special meeting of the board of commissioners. All such videotapes shall be retained for a period of 12 months as public records which are available to the public for reviewing and copying. The city recorder is charged with the responsibility for retaining and indexing such videotapes and making the tapes available to the public. The city recorder shall charge a reasonable fee for making copies of such tapes, based on the schedule provided by the office of open records counsel. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1-105)  
Sec. 2-24. - City commission district boundaries. 
New boundaries for the four city commission districts are hereby established as set forth upon, and delineated, by the map maintained by the county election commission, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2002-07, 2-11-2002)  
Sec. 2-25. - Indemnification of city officials. 
(a)  The city shall indemnify its current and former officials, whether elected or appointed, officers, employees, servants or members of any board, agency or commission (whether compensated or not), or any officer, employee or servant thereof, and the legal representatives, heirs and assigns of such persons, the indemnified from any and all claims, losses, damages, costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees, arising under state or federal law unless the act or omission complained of was willful, malicious, criminal or performed for personal financial gain. At the request of the indemnified, the city shall assume the legal defense of any claim. 
(b)  The provisions in this section shall be construed as being cumulative with and not exclusive of any insurance coverage obtained by the city. Any person receiving notice of a claim which may be subject to indemnification by the city shall promptly notify the city manager of the existence of such claim, and will cooperate in the defense of such claim. This indemnification shall apply to any act or omission, or claim thereof, while it is in effect, and such coverage may not be withdrawn retroactively by a change in its terms or applicability. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, 2-23-2009)  
Secs. 2-26—2-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City manager, general provisions, T.C.A. § 6-21-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-54. - City manager shall be bonded. 
Pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-21-104, the city shall execute a fidelity bond for the city manager with some surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of the bond shall be $5,000.00. The fidelity bond so executed shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The costs of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-2-101) 
State Law reference— Fidelity bonds, sureties, T.C.A. § 6-21-104; additional bonds, T.C.A. § 6-21-105.  
Sec. 2-55. - Authorization to execute contracts. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to execute contracts on behalf of the city, subject to the limitations set out in T.C.A. § 6-19-104, which prohibits the city manager from binding the city by the terms of any contract requiring the expenditure of $10,000.00 or more in any fiscal year. 
(Code 1997, § 1-2-102; Ord. No. 2001-10, 5-29-2001) 
State Law reference— City manager, powers and duties, T.C.A. § 6-21-108.  
Sec. 2-56. - Bidding procedures. 
The city manager shall advertise and receive formal bids for purchases or public improvements for and on behalf of the city in excess of $10,000.00 except where waived by the city commission in accordance with T.C.A. § 6-19-104. For purchases between $2,500.00 and $10,000.00 the city manager shall, wherever practicable, solicit a minimum of three competitive bids for the purpose of obtaining a fair price for the city. For purchases less than $2,500.00 the city manager shall use discretion and his best judgment in purchases for and on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-2-103; Ord. No. 2002-25, 8-12-2002)  
Sec. 2-57. - Residency requirements for city manager and chief of police. 
(a)  Residency requirement. The city manager shall live within the city limits of the city. The chief of police shall live no farther than five miles by way of a road from the closest boundary of the city to the place of residency. 
(b)  Beginning date. The requirements of this section shall be applied and enforced upon the employment of the next city manager and/or chief of police after passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  Applicability. Nothing in this section shall apply to the individuals currently holding the positions of city manager or chief of police, as to do so would constitute implementation of a retroactive job requirement and would not be legally permissible. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, to the fullest extent allowed by law, this section shall apply to the current city manager and/or chief of police if, at any time while they hold those respective positions, they move to or reside within the city limits for more than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2008-39, §§ 1—3, 7-28-2008)  
Secs. 2-58—2-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECORDER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to city recorder, T.C.A. § 6-21-401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-88. - Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint and supervise the recorder. 
(Code 1997, § 1-3-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, T.C.A. § 6-21-401.  
Sec. 2-89. - Recorder shall be bonded. 
The recorder shall be bonded in the sum of $100,000.00. The city commission shall approve the surety. The city shall post the bond prior to assuming the duties of recorder. 
(Code 1997, § 1-3-102; Ord. No. 74-3, § 2, 2-7-1974; Ord. No. 80-3, § 1, 2-18-1980)  
Sec. 2-90. - Duties of recorder; may be appointed to other positions. 
(a)  The recorder shall: 
(1)  Keep the minutes of all meetings of the board of commissioners and shall preserve the original copy of all ordinances in a separate ordinance book. 
(2)  Perform all administrative duties for the board of commissioners and for the city which are not expressly assigned by the charter or this Code to another corporate officer. 
(3)  Have custody of and be responsible for maintaining all corporate bonds, records, letters of credit and papers in such fireproof vault or safe as the city shall provide. 
(b)  The city manager may appoint the recorder to the positions of finance director or treasurer or both. 
(Code 1997, § 1-3-103) 
State Law reference— Duties of recorder, T.C.A. §§ 6-21-403—6-21-405.  
Secs. 2-91—2-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - POLICE AND ARREST[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Police, T.C.A. § 6-21-601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-109. - Appointment of chief and police officers. 
The city manager shall appoint the chief of police and an unlimited number of police officers necessary to preserve law and order in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, T.C.A. § 6-21-601.  
Sec. 2-110. - Duties of police force. 
The chief of police and the members of the police force shall preserve law and order in the city; they shall protect inhabitants and property from violence, crime and violations of law and ordinances; they shall execute and return all processes, notices and orders of the mayor, city manager, city attorney and recorder and shall perform such other duties as are provided by law. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-102) 
State Law reference— Duties of police chief and members of police force, T.C.A. § 6-21-602.  
Sec. 2-111. - Duties of police officers in prosecution of violations. 
Officers shall, whenever necessary to enforce the ordinances of the city, procure the issuance of warrants, serve the warrants, and appear in court as prosecutors. They shall relieve complaining citizens, insofar as practical, of the burden of instituting cases involving the violation of city ordinances. This duty shall not be construed to relieve any person from the duty of appearing in court and testifying in any case. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-103) 
State Law reference— Duties regarding warrants and prosecution, T.C.A. § 6-21-604.  
Sec. 2-112. - Emergency assistance to police. 
In time of riot or other emergency, the mayor or city manager shall have the power to summon any number of inhabitants to assist the police force. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-104) 
State Law reference— Identical provision, T.C.A. § 6-21-603.  
Sec. 2-113. - Police officers to wear badges and be armed. 
All police officers shall wear a badge and shall carry a service pistol and club at all times while on duty unless otherwise expressly directed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-105)  
Sec. 2-114. - When police officers to make arrests. 
A police officer shall arrest a person under the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the person. 
(2)  Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is threatened in the officer's presence by the person. 
(3)  Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has a reasonable cause to believe the person has committed the felony. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-106)  
Sec. 2-115. - Police officers may require assistance in making arrests. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to aid a police officer in making a lawful arrest when such person's assistance is requested by the police officer and is reasonably necessary to make the arrest. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-107)  
Sec. 2-116. - Disposition of persons arrested. 
Persons arrested for violating city ordinances shall be allowed to post bond. Persons arrested for violating state laws shall be transported to the county jail. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-108)  
Sec. 2-117. - Police department records. 
The police department shall keep a comprehensive and detailed daily record in permanent form showing: 
(1)  All known or reported offenses and crimes committed within the city. 
(2)  All arrests made by police officers. 
(3)  All police investigations made, burials convoyed, fire calls answered and other miscellaneous activities of the police department. 
(Code 1997, § 1-4-109)  
Secs. 2-118—2-147. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY COURT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Qualifications for city judge, T.C.A. § 6-21-501; powers, T.C.A. § 6-21-502; court dockets, T.C.A. § 6-21-503; arrests and warrants, T.C.A. § 6-21-504; appearance bond, T.C.A. § 6-21-505; fines and labor, T.C.A. § 6-21-506; costs and fines, T.C.A. § 6-21-507. 
 
Sec. 2-148. - City judge qualifications. 
The city judge shall be an attorney at law entitled to practice law in the state. The city judge shall be age 30 years or older and shall be a resident of the county. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-102)  
Sec. 2-149. - Due process in city court. 
(a)  The city judge will establish, maintain and amend as necessary procedures to ensure substantive and procedural due process by providing for fundamental fairness to all citizens and persons summoned to appear in the city court. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city that the prosecuting attorney for the city shall take such action as may be required to assure substantive and procedural due process in the form of fundamental fairness. The prosecutor may, in order to ensure fundamental fairness, on written notice setting forth particular circumstances and reasons, cause matters to be reschedules as the case may require. Any appeal or litigation in response to an appeal shall first be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-103; Ord. No. 98-1, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 2-150. - Maintenance of docket. 
The docket required by T.C.A. § 6-21-503 shall include for each defendant a name, warrant or summons number, alleged offense, disposition, fine, penalty, costs, collections, whether committed to jail and such other information as directed by the judge. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-104)  
Sec. 2-151. - Warrants, summonses and citations. 
No municipal official other than the city judge may issue arrest warrants for violation of municipal ordinances. Actions may be initiated in city court by citations issued pursuant to T.C.A. §§ 7-63-101 et seq. and 40-7-118. Actions may also be initiated by summons. Upon complaint that a person has committed acts which constitute a violation of a city ordinance the city judge, city court clerk, city manager, public works director, codes enforcement officer or any police officer may issue a citation or summons ordering the accused to appear in the city court at a date and time certain to answer the charges. The summons or citation shall contain a brief description of the offense charged, but need not set out all the provisions of the ordinance. Upon failure of any person to appear before the city court as commanded in a summons or citation lawfully served on him, the court may proceed with the cause ex parte and issue a binding judgment or may issue an arrest warrant. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-105; Ord. No. 2002-04, 1-28-2002)  
Sec. 2-152. - Subpoenas. 
The city court clerk or judge may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in response to a subpoena. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-106)  
Sec. 2-153. - Minors age 16 years and over. 
At the discretion of the city judge, minors age 16 years and over, shall be tried before the city court for traffic offenses committed within the city. The judge of the juvenile court for the county has, pursuant to T.C.A. § 37-1-103 waived jurisdiction over juvenile traffic offenders committing traffic offenses within the city. His court order is enclosed. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-107)  
Sec. 2-154. - Fines, penalties and costs. 
(a)  Court costs. Court costs assessed in city court shall be in a sum equal to that assessed by the general sessions court of the county pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-21-507 in the same amount and for the same item as set forth in the following schedule: 
(1)  An administrative fee, not to exceed court costs, will be assessed for each additional charge listed on the ticket, plus a $5.00 fuel surcharge per ticket. 
(2)  Multiple charges can be included on one ticket. The judge is hereby authorized to charge one court cost per citation and an administrative fee per any additional offense. 
(3)  Dismissal fee: $20.00. 
Schedule of Violations 	Fine 	Court Costs 	Total 
Speeding violations 			
	Speeding 11—19 mph over posted 	$ 5.00 	$141.00 	$146.00 
	Speeding 20—29 mph over posted 	 25.00 	 141.00 	 166.00 
	Speeding 30 + over posted 	 50.00 	 141.00 	 191.00 
	Exception: all I-40 speeders clocked at 91 + mph 	 50.00 	 141.00 	 191.00 
Other traffic violations 			
	Avoiding intersection 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Careless or negligent driving (city ordinance) 	 25.00 	 138.00 	 163.00 
	Child restraint 	 20.00 	  00.00 	  20.00 
	D/L violations (all) 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Failure to change D/L address 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Following too closely 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	HOV lane violation 	 50.00 	  10.00 	  60.00 
	Registration law 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Light law 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Muffler law 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Handicap parking 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
	Passing violations (all) 	 50.00 	 138.00 	 188.00 
	Open container 	 50.00 	 138.00 	 188.00 
	Reckless driving 	 50.00 	 189.00 	 239.00 
	Seat belt 	 20.00 	  00.00 	  20.00 
	Stop sign/traffic light 	  5.00 	 138.00 	 143.00 
Per ticket—fuel charge 	  5.00 		   5.00 
 
(b)  Fines and penalties. Under no circumstances shall any defendant found guilty in municipal court of violation of any ordinance be fined or penalized in an amount which exceeds that specified by the constitution and the legislature, except as otherwise provided in this section. Actions, or failure to act, as forbidden or required by ordinance shall be considered as separate offenses for each day that the act or failure to act persists. 
(c)  Court cost and remedial sanctions. Any defendant found guilty in the municipal court of the violation of any ordinance shall be required to pay the court cost associated with the cause, in addition to any other fine or remedial civil sanction. Whenever remedial civil sanctions are sought the city shall provide, prior to hearing, a detailed statement of costs and expenses sought to be recovered against the defendant as civil sanctions. 
(d)  Remedial civil sanctions. Any defendant found guilty in the municipal court of violating any municipal ordinance may be ordered to pay, in addition to the maximum penalty as set forth at subsection (a) of this section, an additional sum as determined by the court to be necessary to: 
(1)  Compensate the city for loss; 
(2)  Reimburse the city for expenses associated with the penalty (other than court costs); 
(3)  Disgorge ill-gotten gains from the defendant; 
(4)  Provide for restitution for harm caused the city by the ordinance violation; and 
(5)  Ensure compliance with an order or directive through a prospectively coercive fee. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-108; Ord. No. 2001-30, 10-8-2001; Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 2008-46, 8-11-2008; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 2-22-2010)  
Sec. 2-155. - Disturbance of proceedings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the proceedings of city court. In particular it shall be unlawful for any person to make loud or unusual noises or use indecorous or profane language. 
(Code 1997, § 1-5-109)  
Secs. 2-156—2-178. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WORKHOUSE 
 
Sec. 2-179. - County jail designated municipal workhouse. 
The county jail is hereby designated as the municipal workhouse subject to such contractual arrangement as may be worked out with the county. 
(Code 1997, § 1-6-101) 
State Law reference— County jails as workhouses, T.C.A. § 41-2-148.  
Sec. 2-180. - Tasks performed as may be lawfully prescribed. 
All persons committed to the jail, to the extent that their physical condition shall permit, shall be required to perform such tasks as may be lawfully prescribed for the county prisoners. 
(Code 1997, § 1-6-102)  
Sec. 2-181. - Compensation of inmates. 
Each jail inmate shall be allowed the amount which is required by law as credit towards the payment of fines assessed against him. 
(Code 1997, § 1-6-103)  
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Personnel ordinance on file in clerk's office. 
Due to the size of the personnel ordinance it is not codified as a part of this Code and shall remain a separate document kept and maintained by the clerk. 
(Code 1997, title 1, ch. 7)  
Sec. 2-202. - Eligible insured include surviving spouse and dependent children of any city employee killed in the line of duty. 
To the extent allowed by the city's health insurer, the term "eligible insured," for the city's health insurance, includes the surviving spouse and any dependent children of an employee killed in the line of duty, as follows: 
(1)  The surviving spouse and any dependent children of a city employee killed in the line of duty shall be eligible for health insurance on the same terms and conditions, except as provided herein, as fulltime city employees for a period of up to five years from the date of enrollment. The surviving spouse and any dependent children are eligible for such coverage regardless of whether they were covered by the city's health insurance at the time of the death, and shall have a period of two years after the death to opt-in for coverage. 
(2)  The city shall contribute towards the cost of health insurance for the spouse and dependent children in the same manner and in the same amounts as it does for regular fulltime city employees for as long as the surviving spouse is eligible for this benefit. 
(3)  This section is intended to make temporary health insurance available to a surviving spouse and any dependent children during a time of crisis and transition, when such coverage might otherwise not be available. Coverage by the city's health insurance plan shall not be available to a surviving spouse or dependent children covered by or eligible for coverage by an employer's health insurance plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, §§ 1—3, 3-8-2004)  
Secs. 2-203—2-227. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-228. - Position created. 
The position of public works director is hereby created. 
(Code 1997, § 1-11-101)  
Sec. 2-229. - Duties. 
The duties of the public works director shall be to organize and supervise daily work activities in the areas of street maintenance, city hall maintenance and upkeep, park recreation maintenance and upkeep, planning and zoning, stormwater, codes administration, building codes, and all other public works activities relative to the property the city assigned to him by the city manager. 
(Code 1997, § 1-11-102)  
Secs. 2-230—2-251. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TRAVEL AND EXPENSE POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-252. - Coverage. 
The mayor, city commissioners, members of boards and committees appointed by the mayor or board of commissioners, including municipal utility boards, and other city employees may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the conduct of official business. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1201)  
Sec. 2-253. - Travel and expense policy. 
The travel and expense policy adopted by the board of commissioner on November 2, 1993, and kept and maintained by the clerk, along with any amendments thereto, will govern the reimbursement of expenses incurred by these municipal officials and board and committee members. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1202)  
Sec. 2-254. - Vehicle use policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that certain positions require employee access to municipal vehicles, either during the work shift or on a 24-hour on-call basis. City vehicles are not personal vehicles and are not for personal use. City vehicles should be viewed as belonging to the citizens of the city and are assigned solely for the purposes consistent with providing services to citizens. 
(b)  The assignment of municipal vehicles during work time is based upon job description. Department heads who have municipal vehicles available for this purpose may assign such vehicles in a manner consistent with departmental workload and employee function. The assignment of vehicles may be rescinded at any time by the city manager. The city manager and department heads shall assign a vehicle to a specific employee on an ongoing basis only when the normal daily tasks of the employee requires him to travel by vehicle for official business on a daily basis. Employees who need to use a city vehicle for incidental tasks shall use a vehicle from an unassigned vehicle pool, which use shall be governed by the city policy for an unassigned vehicle pool which is to be established by the city manager. 
(c)  The provisions of this assigned vehicle use policy shall apply to all general government employees, excluding the city manager. Vehicle use by the city manager is controlled by the contract, if any, between the city and the city manager and is not regulated by this policy. 
(d)  Vehicles assigned for 24-hour use. 
(1)  The assignment of vehicles for 24-hour use will be made in writing by the city manager, and will only be considered for employees who require a vehicle for the ordinary and necessary discharge of their job functions. Criteria which will be used in the determination of eligibility for 24-hour vehicle use include the following: 
a.  Officially designated on-call status; 
b.  Requirement for frequent emergency availability; 
c.  Issuance of a pager or other communication device; 
d.  Emergency or other equipment contained in the vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicle use is limited to travel to and from the residence and place of work. The vehicle should be driven over the most direct route taking into account road and traffic conditions. The vehicle should not be utilized for travel outside a direct commuting route for personal reasons. Whenever a position becomes vacant, the authorization for 24-hour use shall be reevaluated. Employees assigned municipal vehicles on a 24-hour basis will be given a copy of this policy and will be required to sign a confirmation receipt. Employees authorized to commute in a city vehicle may be subject to imputed income tax regulations as set forth by the Internal Revenue Service, which considers a certain portion of the vehicle use (namely the commute) to be income for the purposes of income taxation. On December 1 of each year, the finance director shall be responsible for determining any tax liability and will be provided by department heads with the names of all employees authorized during that calendar year to use city vehicles for commuting purposes, and the normal, one-way commuting distance. 
(e)  Rules governing use. The following are rules governing vehicles assigned for 24-hour use: 
(1)  Municipal vehicles will not be used to transport passengers who are not related to municipal business. Passengers shall be limited to city employees and individuals who are directly associated with city work activity (committee members, consultants, contractors, etc.). Family members shall not be transported in city vehicles without the written prior approval of the department head and city manager on a case-by-case basis. Such transportation may only occur during the incidental use of the city vehicle, on the most direct route between the employee's home and work location or during funerals, parades, and similar ceremonial occasions. A liability waiver must be executed by any city employee's family member riding in a city vehicle prior to riding in that vehicle. In the event that the family member is a child, the liability waiver must be executed by such child's legal parent or guardian. All liability waivers must be delivered to the city manager at least one day prior to any family member riding in a city vehicle. 
(2)  In emergencies where the city employee has a reasonable belief, based on a totality of circumstances, that the life, safety, health, or physical welfare of a citizen would be immediately threatened without the security and/or transportation the city vehicle could provide him, a city employee may transport a citizen in a city vehicle. Examples of such emergencies include, but are not limited to, accidents involving personal injury, acute illness, and actual and potential victims of crime and violence. 
(3)  Vehicles should contain only those items for which the vehicle is designed. The city shall not be liable for the loss or damage of any personal property transported in the vehicle. 
(4)  Employees are expected to keep municipal vehicles clean, and to report any malfunction or damage to their supervisor immediately. 
(5)  Employees who are assigned vehicles for commuting purposes are expected to park such vehicles in safe locations. 
(6)  All vehicle occupants must wear seatbelts during operation of a vehicle. 
(7)  Employees may not operate municipal vehicles under the influence of alcohol, illegal drugs, or prescription drugs or medications which may interfere with effective and safe operation. 
(8)  Employees who operate municipal vehicles must have a valid motor vehicle license issued by the state and may be required to provide proof of valid motor vehicle license. 
(9)  Employees driving municipal vehicles shall obey all applicable traffic and parking regulations, ordinances, and laws: 
a.  Employees who incur parking or other fines in municipal vehicles will be personally responsible for payment of such fines. 
b.  Employees who are issued citations for any offense while using a municipal vehicle must notify their supervisor immediately when practicable, but in no case later than the next city work day. Failure to provide such notice may be grounds for disciplinary action. 
c.  An employee who is assigned a municipal vehicle and who is convicted of a motor vehicle offense for which the punishment imposed includes suspension or revocation of the motor vehicle license, whether in his personal vehicle or in a municipal vehicle, must notify his supervisor immediately when practicable, but in no case later than the next city work day. Conviction for such an offense may be grounds for loss of municipal vehicle privileges and/or further disciplinary action. 
(10)  No employee may use a municipal vehicle for out-of-state use without advance approval of the city manager. 
(11)  Failure to comply with any and all provisions of this policy may result in disciplinary action up to and including removal of city vehicle privileges, suspension, and/or termination of employment. 
(12)  All employees will be given a copy of this policy and will be required to sign a confirmation receipt. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1203; Ord. No. 2006-30, § 1, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2007-29, 7-23-2007)  
Sec. 2-255. - Cellular telephone policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to provide communication services and equipment to employees, as necessary to conduct the city's business in an efficient and professional manner. 
(b)  Employees who need to carry a cellular telephone due to the requirements of their employment or position with the city shall follow and adhere to the following policies and procedures: 
(1)  Policy on personal use. Cellular telephones are provided for conducting business related to one's position with the city. While personal use of a city provided telephone is not forbidden, it is discouraged. Any additional costs which are attributed to the personal use of a city provided cell phone shall be reimbursed to the city. Telephone usage and invoices are subject to inspection and audit by the city. 
(2)  Procedures to request cellular telephone service. 
a.  All requests for cellular telephone service must first be approved by the appropriate department head and then be submitted to the city finance department. 
b.  A copy of the request for cell phone service and agreement must be completed and signed by both the employee and the department head. 
c.  Any and all costs incurred due to personal use of a telephone shall be reimbursed to the city upon receipt of billing. 
(3)  Violation of policy and procedures. Failure to adhere to these policies and procedures may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. 
(4)  Determination of personal charges. If the cell phone plan: 
a.  Does not include any minutes of talk time, then all personal calls should be identified and reimbursed to the city. 
b.  Includes a set amount of minutes, and the limit is not exceeded, then any personal calls will not have increased the cost to the city and do not need to be reimbursed. 
c.  Includes a set amount of minutes, and the limit was exceeded, then all minutes for personal calls, up to the amount exceeding the limit, should be reimbursed to the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-1204; Ord. No. 2003-46, 10-13-2003)  
Secs. 2-256—2-273. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-274—2-294. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-295. - Established; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Mt. Juliet Beautiful Commission for the city. 
(b)  The commission shall be composed of nine members who shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of five years and who shall serve without compensation. The mayor shall appoint a chairperson from among the nine members, seven of whom must be residents of the city. 
(c)  The chief of police, the chairperson of the planning commission and the city manager shall serve as ex officio members. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-101)  
Sec. 2-296. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city beautiful commission shall be to advise the mayor and other commissioners and to recommend, coordinate and develop plans for improving beauty and cleanliness within the city. Such plans may include beautifying the streets, highways, roads, yards and other similar places within the city. It shall further advise the mayor and city commissioners concerning the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, lots and yards and other similar places; to encourage the placing, planting and preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in the city; and otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the appearance of the area of the city; provided that nothing herein shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of the other departments, boards and like agencies of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-102)  
Sec. 2-297. - Coordination with other agencies. 
In exercising its duties and powers the city beautiful commission shall advise with, recommend to, and coordinated with the city commissioners, city manager, and other agencies of the city government, the county, and the state, the programs which involved the cleanliness and appearance of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-103)  
Sec. 2-298. - Receipt of gifts. 
The city beautiful commission may receive gifts of money or property with the gifts so donated or appropriations made being handled by the city in its usual manner. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-104)  
Sec. 2-299. - Removal; filling of vacancies. 
The mayor may remove any member of the city beautiful commission at any time during the person's term by a letter addressed to the person at his last known address of his removal from the commission. Should the mayor deem it advisable to relieve one of the commissioners from the commission, then and in that event, the mayor shall have the power to appoint another person to fill the unexpired term of the person dismissed from the commission. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-105)  
Secs. 2-300—2-316. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL EVENTS COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-317. - Established; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established the special events committee for the city. 
(b)  The special events committee shall be composed of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor for staggered three-year terms and who shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The special events committee shall appoint a chairperson from among the seven members, five of whom must be residents of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-106; Ord. No. 2006-05, 2-6-2006)  
Sec. 2-318. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The powers of duties of the special events committee shall be to advise the mayor and other commissioners and to recommend, develop, coordinate, and carry out plans for special events in the city. 
(b)  The special events committee shall prepare a budget request each year and submit it to the city manager by April 15 of each year for inclusion in the budget submitted to the city commission. 
(c)  Within the limits of the amount appropriated by the city commission and any amount received as a gift, donation, or payment of fees, and in conformity to all other rules for purchasing and expenditures by the city, the special events committee shall be authorized to expend sums for special events which it is coordinating. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-107)  
Sec. 2-319. - Receipt of gifts by the committee. 
The special events committee may receive gifts, donations, payment of fees in connection with any special event or property in the name of the city. All funds shall be deposited immediately with the city finance director and shall be under his control. All property shall be inventoried and reported to the city finance director and records shall be maintained by the special events committee as to its location and disposition. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-108)  
Sec. 2-320. - Removal; filling of vacancies. 
The mayor may remove any member of the special events committee at any time during the person's term by a letter addressed to the person at his last known address, notifying the member of his removal from the commission. The mayor shall have the power to appoint another person to fill the unexpired term of the person removed from the commission. If any member of the committee resigns the mayor shall appoint another person to fill the unexpired term. 
(Code 1997, § 1-10-110; Ord. No. 2002-34, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-21, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 2006-05, 2-6-2006)  
Secs. 2-321—2-342. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CODE OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-343. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Censure means an expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Complaint means a valid complaint for consideration under this article. 
Employment interest means a situation in which an official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment or has applied for employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be regulated or supervised. 
Ethics commission means the city's ethics commission, as established herein. 
Gift means the transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without reasonable consideration given in exchange. The term "gift" may include a subscription, membership, loan, forgiveness of debt, advance or deposit of money or anything of value, whether conveyed or transferred. The term "gift" does not include political campaign contributions which are solicited or accepted in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
Official means the members of the board of commissioners, as well as members appointed thereby to city boards, commissions, committees, authorities or instrumentalities established by law or this article. The term "official" also includes the city judge. 
Personal interest means: 
(1)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statutes on conflicts of interests; 
(2)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a matter to be regulated or supervised; or 
(3)  Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the official's or the employee's: 
a.  Spouse; 
b.  Parents, including natural, step, or adoptive, as well as in-laws; 
c.  Grandparents; 
d.  Siblings, including natural, step, or adoptive; 
e.  Children, including natural, step or adoptive; 
f.  Grandchildren; 
g.  In-laws; and 
h.  Any other individual residing within the employee's household who is the legal dependent of the employee or official for income tax purposes. 
In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-102; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-102), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-102), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-102), 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, T.C.A. § 8-17-102.  
Sec. 2-344. - Violations. 
When a violation of this article by an employee also constitutes a violation of the city's personnel ordinance or personnel policy, rule, or regulation, the violation may be dealt with as a violation of the personnel ordinance. Any employee who violates any provision of this article is subject to disciplinary action including, but not limited to, termination. No employee is entitled to an appeal hearing except as may be set forth in the charter or personnel ordinance. An official who violates any provision of this article is subject to punishment as provided by the municipality's charter or other applicable law, and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this article. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-113; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-113), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-113), 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Ethics violations and penalties, T.C.A. § 8-17-106.  
Sec. 2-345. - Applicability. 
This article is the code of ethics for personnel of the city. It applies to fulltime and parttime elected or appointed officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-101; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-101), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-101), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-101), 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Adoption of ethical standards required, T.C.A. § 8-17-103.  
Sec. 2-346. - Abstentions by officials and disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. 
(a)  An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the measure. In addition, the official may recuse himself from voting on the measure. 
(b)  The city shall not be prohibited from doing business with an entity that employs an immediate relative of an official or employee, provided that such business relationship does not violate this article or any other law or ordinance and is disclosed fully in writing. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-103; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-103), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-103), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-103), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-347. - Disclosure of personal interest by employees. 
An employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the discretion, shall disclose before the exercise of the discretion when possible the interest on a form provided by and filed with the city recorder. Copies of such forms filed with the city recorder shall be provided to the city manager and filed in the employee's personnel file. In addition, the employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-104; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-104), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-104), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-104), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-348. - Acceptance of gratuities, consideration or favors. 
(a)  No official or employee may knowingly solicit, receive benefit from, accept or agree to accept any gratuity, gift, honoraria, loan, favor, promise, or anything of value, either directly or indirectly: 
(1)  For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the regular course of his duties; or 
(2)  That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, employees and officials may accept meals, gifts, promotional items or mementos that are unsolicited and of a de minimis value or are otherwise authorized by state law. For the purposes of this section, the term "de minimis value" means deemed to be a value, on a per occurrence or per event basis, of $25.00 or less. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-105; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-105), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-105), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-105), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-349. - Use of information. 
(a)  An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or disclose information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-106; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-106), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-106), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-106), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-350. - Use of municipal time, facilities, equipment or supplies. 
(a)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to any private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or lease that is determined by the board of commissioners or city manager to be in the best interests of the municipality. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-107; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-107), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-107), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-107), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-351. - Use of position or authority. 
(a)  An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the municipality. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use his position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the municipality. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prevent an official from making inquiry, or discussing with, an employee the applicable laws, codes, or policies affecting any matter before, within, or under consideration by, the city. 
(d)  No official or employee shall provide commercial or advertising endorsements in such a manner as to convey the city's approval of any private for-profit enterprise; provided, however, that an official or employee may respond to inquiries seeking information as to the city's experience with a vendor or other private enterprise. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-108; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-108), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-108), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-108), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-352. - Outside employment. 
An official or employee may not accept or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with any provision of the municipality's charter or any ordinance or policy. No official's outside employment shall be considered to unreasonably inhibit the performance of an affirmative duty if such official has the option or duty to refrain from voting on issues involving such employer. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-109; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-109), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-109), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-109), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-353. - Ethics officer. 
The city attorney is designated as the ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially affected by a provision of this article, the city attorney may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this article and other applicable law. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-110; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-110), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-110), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-110), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-354. - Ethics complaints. 
(a)  Any complaint alleging violation of any of the provisions of this article must be filed with the city attorney. If such complaint alleges violation by an employee other than the city manager, the city attorney shall forward a copy of such complaint to the city manager as soon as practicable. If such complaint alleges violation by an official, a copy of such complaint shall be forwarded by the city attorney as soon as practicable to the ethics commission and by registered mail or hand delivery to the official against whom the complaint was filed. 
(b)  Unless a complaint complies with the requirements of this article, such complaint is not valid for consideration, and no action may be taken to investigate or determine the disposition of such a complaint. 
(c)  Complaints alleging violation of any provisions of this article must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Complaints must: 
a.  Be filed in writing; 
b.  Be made under oath that all statements contained in the complaint are true; and 
c.  Bear the original signature, name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the complaint; 
(2)  Complaints must identify the person who committed the alleged violation, present facts which give rise to the complaint, and explain why those facts constitute a violation of this article. Complaints must be based on personal knowledge of the facts presented in the complaint, must affirmatively state that the complainant has personal knowledge of the facts presented in the complaint, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence in a court of law, and shall show affirmatively that the complainant is competent to testify as to the facts set forth. Any documents referred to in the complaint must be attached to the complaint; 
(3)  Complaints must be filed within 30 days of the date the alleged violation is said to have occurred, or in case of concealment or nondisclosure of personal interests by the employee or official who is the subject of the complaint, within six months of the date the alleged violation should have been discovered after due diligence by the complainant; and 
(4)  In the event that the city attorney makes an initial determination that a complaint filed is technically deficient or incomplete, the city attorney shall submit a copy of this article to the complainant and offer the complainant the opportunity to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the complaint within seven days prior to any review or investigation of the complaint. 
(d)  Any person who files a false complaint will be subject to the penalties of perjury, in accordance with T.C.A. § 39-16-702 et seq. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an employee charging any violation of this article, or may undertake an investigation on his own initiative to acquire information indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations to the city manager for action to end or seek remedies for any activity that, in the attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this article. 
(f)  The board of commissioners may hire another attorney, or the city attorney may ask that the city commission hire another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer or to provide general counsel to the ethics commission after an affirmative vote of the majority of the city commission. This action may occur after cause has been found to believe that a conflict may exist, or another section of this article may find the city attorney is not the proper person to conduct the investigation. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-111; Ord. No. 2006-41, § 1(13-1-111), 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-110), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-111), 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Ethics violations and penalties, T.C.A. § 8-17-106.  
Sec. 2-355. - Ethics commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created a five-member ethics commission to be approved by the board of commissioners. Each commissioner shall nominate a member for appointment to the ethics commission who is a resident of his district, and the mayor shall nominate a member for appointment to the ethics commission who is a resident of the city. Such appointments shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Members of the ethics commission shall each serve a term of three years or until their successors are appointed, whichever is later. Members of the ethics commission shall serve without compensation. Should any vacancies occur, the nominating member of the board of commissioners shall nominate a replacement, and the board of commissioners shall appoint a replacement member. 
(c)  A person is eligible to serve as a member of the ethics commission if the person has never been convicted of a felony, resides in the city while serving as specified in subsection (a) of this section and is a registered voter in the county, is not an employee of city government, does not hold any elected or appointed office in county government or in city government, does not hold any elected office in state government or the government of the United States, and is not a candidate for any elected office in county government, city government, state government, or the government of the United States. A person is not eligible to serve as a member of the ethics commission if that person has a personal interest as defined in this article. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may remove a member of the ethics commission on the grounds of neglect of duty, misconduct in office, a disability rendering the member unable to discharge the duties of the office as specified in this article, or engagement in political activity as defined in this article. Before initiating the removal of a member from the ethics commission, the board of commissioners shall give the member written notice of the reason for the intended action, and the member shall have an opportunity to reply within ten days of receipt of such notice. Thereafter, the board of commissioners shall afford such member, upon written request, an opportunity for a hearing. 
(e)  There shall be no regularly scheduled meetings of the ethics commission. By majority vote, or by call of the chairperson, the ethics commission may call a special meeting, if necessary. 
(f)  When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this article is lodged against an official, an ethics commission, properly constituted, shall convene to determine the disposition of such complaints. 
(g)  The conduct of all meetings of the ethics commission shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, tenth edition. 
(h)  No member of the ethics commission shall comment on, discuss, or engage in conversation about pending complaints and investigations, except during the commission's meetings. 
(i)  Officials shall not participate in the investigation of pending complaints, except as requested by the ethics commission or attorney charged with investigation of complaints. 
(j)  The ethics commission shall be governed by and subject to this article. Members of the ethics commission who have a personal interest as defined by this article must disqualify themselves under this ethics code. Members of the ethics commission shall not take part in any matter in which a judge, similarly situated, would have to recuse himself. 
(k)  A member of the ethics commission shall not take an active part in political management or in a political campaign for office in the county or the city during the period of their term of appointment to the ethics commission. Display of a campaign sign shall not be considered as taking an active part in a political campaign. 
(l)  The ethics commission shall receive and hear complaints of violations of this article by an official or the city manager. The ethics commission may make investigation as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated this ethics code upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the ethics commission to conduct such investigation. The ethics commission may receive and review ethics reports and may request and receive legal advice from the city attorney regarding any provision of this article. 
(m)  The ethics commission may authorize the city attorney to investigate a complaint which meets the requirements of this article or may hire another attorney to complete such investigation, or the city attorney may ask that the ethics commission hire another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer or to provide general counsel to the ethics commission. The ethics commission is authorized to incur expenses in connection with investigations in an amount not to exceed $10,000.00 annually. The ethics commission must request from the board of commissioners a budget amendment to appropriate additional monies to fund the expense of investigations exceeding this annual limit. 
(n)  Upon receipt of a complaint which satisfies the requirements of this article and alleges that an official has violated this article, the official against whom the complaint was filed may reply in writing to the complaint within 30 days, unless such time for reply is shortened or extended by the ethics commission. The official's response must be based on personal knowledge, must set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence in a court of law, and must show affirmatively that the official is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in the response should be attached to the response. However, in order to ensure the right to a fair trial and the right of the accused against self-incrimination, the ethics commission shall not schedule a hearing for the violation of this article while criminal investigation is in progress or while criminal charges are pending. 
(o)  Within 60 days of receipt of a complaint which satisfies the requirements of this article, the ethics commission shall conduct a formal public hearing, upon proper public notice of such hearing. 
(p)  After reviewing the complaint, conducting such investigation as properly authorized under this article, and conducting a public hearing, the ethics commission must determine, by majority vote whether no specific, substantiated evidence from a credible source exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this article. If the ethics commission so determines that such evidence does not exist, the ethics commission shall dismiss the complaint. If the ethics commission so determines that such evidence does exist, then the ethics commission shall render a written decision stating facts supporting that finding, conclusions of law, and censure as appropriate. Upon the affirmative finding by four of the five members of the ethics commission that a violation of this article has occurred, and upon the issuance of its written decision, the ethics commission may make referral for removal of an official found to have violated this article to the appointing authority, or for removal or ouster of a member of the board of commissioners pursuant to T.C.A. §§ 6-20-220 and/or 8-47-102 or for dismissal of the city manager to the board of commissioners. 
(q)  Any official against whom a decision of the ethics commission is rendered may obtain judicial review of the decision by writ of certiorari. The application for the writ must be filed within 30 days of the issuance of the written decision by the ethics commission. Judicial review shall be based upon the record before the ethics commission. No party shall be entitled to a de novo appeal. 
(r)  The ethics commission may make recommendations to the board of commissioners or city manager for the adoption of any revisions of amendments to this article. The board of commissioners may adopt revisions or amendments to the ordinance from which this article is derived without a recommendation by the ethics commission. 
(s)  The ethics commission shall render an advisory opinion when requested in writing by any member of the board of commissioners. Such advisory opinion shall be rendered pursuant only to a written request, fully setting forth the factual circumstances to be reviewed by the ethics commission. 
(t)  The proceedings of the ethics commission pursuant to this article shall be held in public, and all records of the ethics commission, excluding those protected by law, shall be a public record. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-112; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-112), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-112), 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-356. - Reporting; whistleblower protection; abuse of process; complicity. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to encourage employees and officials to report suspected ethical violations to the city attorney. 
(b)  No officer or employee shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to discourage, restrain, or interfere with any other person for the purpose of preventing such person from acting in good faith to report information relating to an ethics violation of investigation. 
(c)  No official or employee shall file a complaint with the city attorney absent a good faith basis for their allegations based on first hand knowledge. 
(d)  No official or employee shall falsely accuse another official or employee of failing to comply with this article. 
(e)  No official or employee may knowingly induce, encourage, or aid anyone to violate any provision of this article. 
(f)  Any violation of this subsection shall be subject to investigation and action in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1997, § 13-1-114; Ord. No. 2007-43, § 1(13-1-114), 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-21, § 1(13-1-114), 5-12-2008)  
Secs. 2-357—2-387. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - RETIREMENT GIFTS 
 
Sec. 2-388. - Retirement gifts for fulltime employees. 
Fulltime employees who retire from city employment after five years of service or more are eligible to receive a retirement gift from the city. The price of retirement gifts purchased by the city shall not exceed $25.00 per year of fulltime service to the city. In no event shall the city expend more than $500.00 to purchase a retirement gift regardless of the number of years of service of the retiring employee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 1-28-2008)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Intoxicating liquors, T.C.A. § 57-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - General prohibition. 
Except as authorized by applicable laws or ordinances, including section 4-3, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, or solicit orders for any intoxicating liquor within the city. The term "intoxicating liquor" is defined to include the terms "whiskey," "home brew," "moonshine," and all other beverages containing alcohol except beer or wine, where the latter two contain an alcoholic content as defined in T.C.A. § 57-5-101. 
(Code 1997, § 2-1-101; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1(2-1-101), 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-22, 3-27-2017) 
State Law reference— Local option elections, permitted activities, T.C.A. § 57-3-102.  
Sec. 4-2. - Brownbagging. 
No guest or customer shall be allowed to bring beer, wine or alcoholic beverages on the premises of any business holding a valid permit for on-premises consumption of beer. It shall be a violation of this Code by both the business and the customer or guest for a customer or guest to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of the business with a valid permit for on-premises consumption of beer that has not been sold by the business for on-premises consumption. 
(Code 1997, § 2-1-102; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1(2-1-102), 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2011-50, 9-12-2011) 
State Law reference— Local option elections, permitted activities, T.C.A. § 57-3-102.  
Sec. 4-3. - Sale of wine and alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Notwithstanding section 4-1, it shall be lawful to sell wine and alcoholic beverages (as defined in T.C.A. § 57-4-102) to be consumed on the premises of any establishment which is authorized to do so pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-4-101, provided that the owner of such establishment has obtained a permit to do so from the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Code 1997, § 2-1-103; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1(2-1-103), 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007)  
Sec. 4-4. - Privilege tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on every person who engages in the business of selling, at retail, alcoholic beverage for on-premises consumption within the city, an annual privilege tax in the amount allowed under T.C.A. § 57-4-301, and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the city recorder to ensure that the city receives its share of the 15 percent tax levied on the gross sales of wine and alcoholic beverages sold at retail for consumption on-premises and collected by the commissioner of revenue under T.C.A. § 57-4-301(c), and distributed to the state and its political subdivisions under T.C.A. § 57-4-306. 
(Code 1997, § 2-1-104; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1(2-1-104), 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 1(2-1-104), 3-13-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007)  
Sec. 4-5 - Retail food store wine certificate. 
(a)  Pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-806(a), as a condition precedent to the issuance of a license to sell wine in retail food stores, an applicant must obtain a certificate signed by the mayor. 
(b)  To obtain a certificate, the applicant must submit the following to the secretary of the alcoholic beverage board: 
(1)  Proof, by way of TBI background check conducted within 30 days of the date of application, that the applicant or applicants who are to be in charge of the business have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, and, if a corporation, that the executive officers or those in control have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(2)  Sufficient information for the zoning administrator to ascertain that the applicant or applicants have secured a location for the business which complies with all zoning laws adopted by the city as to the location of the business, specifically section 4-61(a) [of this Code], that any seller of wine shall not be located within 100 feet of a school, church, house of worship, library or municipal park. 
(c)  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by an application fee of $250.00 for use in offsetting the expense of investigating the applicant and processing the application. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the board of commissioners, by resolution shall either direct or prohibit the mayor from issuing and signing a certificate for the applicant or applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, 3-14-2016)  
Secs. 4-6—4-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2013, changed the title of Art. II from Beer Permit Board to Alcoholic Beverage Board. 
 
Sec. 4-27. - Established. 
An alcoholic beverage board is created and designated the city alcoholic beverage board. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-010; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013) 
State Law reference— Licenses and permits, T.C.A. § 57-5-103.  
Sec. 4-28. - Membership; terms. 
The city alcoholic beverage board shall consist of five members, to be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city commission. Members shall serve terms of five years each and must be residents of the city at all times they are members of the board. Any vacancy other than the expiration of a term shall be filled for the remainder of the term. The members presently constituting the city alcoholic beverage board shall continue to serve as the city alcoholic beverage board. Their terms shall expire in the order of their appointment to the board commencing April 1, 1997, with one position expiring each year. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-020; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(A), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 4-29. - Officers; term. 
The city alcoholic beverage board shall organize by the election of a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, who shall serve for a period of one year or until a successor is chosen. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-030; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 4-30. - Meetings; quorum required; minutes and transcript. 
(a)  The city alcoholic beverage board shall convene when called by the chairperson. All members and the local press shall receive at least 48 hours notice before a meeting. 
(b)  The attendance of at least a majority of the members of the board shall be required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. 
(c)  The board shall keep minutes in permanent form and the board shall keep a record of all of its actions with respect to every application for a permit. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant or revoke any permit. 
(d)  No transcript of the proceedings had before the board shall be in any form other than narrative, unless the board shall have been requested to provide for an exact copy of the testimony by an interested party at least 24 hours prior to a board meeting. The cost of an exact copy shall be borne by the person requesting the same. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-040; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(B), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 4-31. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city alcoholic beverage board shall have jurisdiction of licensing, regulation and control of transportation, storage, sale, distribution, possession, receipt and manufacture of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(b)  The city alcoholic beverage board may promulgate such bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with state law, the charter, or any ordinance, as it deems appropriate for the conduct of its business. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with this and all other laws. Copies of such rules and other documents shall be filed with the city recorder and shall be available to the public. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-050; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(C), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 4-32. - Inspectors; authority. 
The city police, city manager or his designee and alcoholic beverage board members are empowered to inspect the premises and operations of permittees. 
(Code 1997, § 2-2-060; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Secs. 4-33—4-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BEER AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AS DEFINED IN TCA 57-5-101[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-22, adopted March 27, 2017, changed the title of Art. III from "Beer and alcoholic beverages of less than five percent" to "Beer and alcoholic beverages as defined in TCA 57-5-101". 
State Law reference— Regulation of, T.C.A. § 57-5-101 et seq.; taxation, T.C.A. § 57-5-201 et seq.; prohibited acts, T.C.A. § 57-5-301 et seq.; transportation, T.C.A. § 57-5-401 et seq.; Tennessee Responsible Vendor Act of 2006, T.C.A. § 57-5-601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beer means any alcoholic beverage as defined in T.C.A. § 57-5-101. 
Alcoholic beverage board or board means that administrative body organized and empowered under the authority to T.C.A. § 57-5-108 and created by section 4-27. 
Church means a building or property where a congregation regularly meets at least one day per week for religious worship. 
Minor means, with respect to purchasing, consuming or possessing beer, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Park means a place or property either owned or maintained by the city or by a governmental entity where persons regularly gather for recreational purposes or as spectators. 
Permit means any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
Permittee means any person to whom any permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
Premises means the building and property that is subject to a permit to issue beer under this article and over which the owner and/or lessee has control. 
Resident means any person who at present is living within the city with the intent that his permanent home shall be within such city. 
Retailer means any person licensed by the city alcoholic beverage board who sells beer for consumption and not for resale. 
Retailer off-premises permit means a permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board to a retailer engaged in the sale of beer which is not to be consumed by the purchaser upon the premises of such permittee. 
Retailer on-premises permit means a permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board to a retailer engaged in the sale of beer which is to be consumed by the purchaser only upon the premises of such permittee. 
Retailer special events permit means an on-site beer permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board to a retailer engaged in the sale of beer in conjunction with activities which will last for a specified period of time, including, but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, and similar public or private social events. 
School means an institution, including kindergarten, where regular classes are conducted under the supervision of a teacher or instructor, including schools where specialized subjects are taught to students of all ages, but excluding colleges, universities, vocational or technical schools, or other institutions of higher education. 
Seating capacity means the number of persons who can be seated in a specific space which shall in no instance exceed the occupant load approved for the space. 
Sell means and includes taking or receiving an order for, keeping or exposing for sale, delivering for value, keeping for intent to sell and trafficking in beer. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-010; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(D), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 3-28-2011; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 2015-20, 4-27-2015; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-22, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 4-54. - Permit required. 
No person shall sell, store for resale, distribute, or manufacture beer within the city, without a valid annual permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-020; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017) 
State Law reference— Licenses and permits, T.C.A. § 57-5-103.  
Sec. 4-55. - Permits. 
No person shall sell, store for resale, distribute, or manufacture beer in the city, without a permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board. The following types of permits may be issued by the city alcoholic beverage board: 
(1)  Wholesaler's permits may be issued to distributors, manufacturers, [and] brewers selling directly to retailers. 
(2)  A retailer's off-premises permit may be issued to any person engaged in the sale of beer for consumption and not resale where the beer sold is not to be consumed by the purchaser upon or near the premises of the seller. The holder of the permit shall not permit the consumption of any beer and/or alcoholic beverages upon or near the premises. To the extent permitted by state law, this prohibition shall not apply to samples of beer. Off-premises retailers may permit any one individual to receive up to four two ounce samples of four distinct beers. No samples shall be given without verification that the sampler has reached the age of 21. No samples shall be given to any person who appears to be intoxicated, whether through drugs, alcohol, medication, or otherwise. No individual shall receive more than four two ounce samples in one calendar day. The holder of the permit is required to ensure that no individual receives more than four two ounce samples in one calendar day. The receipt of a sample shall not be conditioned upon the purchase of any items from the off premises retailer. 
(3)  A retailer's on-premises permit may be issued to any person engaged in the sale of beer where the beer is to be consumed by the purchaser or his guests upon the premises of the seller. A retailer's on-site sale permit may be issued to bona fide hotels, motels, clubs, golf courses and restaurants in which beer sales are subsidiary to the primary business conducted on the site. 
(4)  A retailer's combined permit may be issued to any person engaged in the sale of beer where the beer is to be consumed by the purchaser or his guests upon or off of the premises of the seller. Holders of a combined permit shall comply with all rules and applicable to on-site and off-site permittees. 
(5)  A retailer's special events permit may be issued to any person engaged in the sale of beer for consumption by the purchaser upon the premises of the seller for a specified period of time in conjunction with fairs, bazaars, golf tournaments and similar public or private social events provided adequate sanitation, security and crowd control is provided by the organizer. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-030; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(E), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-64, § 1, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 4-56. - Application—Requirements and conditions. 
(a)  The owner of any business desiring to sell, distribute or store beer within the city shall file in person with the city recorder a written application under oath. The application shall include a scale drawing of the premises showing all parking spaces and the lot dimensions and an interior drawing showing the seating. Drawings shall be done to scale in a professional manner. No permit shall be issued until the board has approved the written application and interviewed the applicant. The form of the application shall be prescribed by the board and approved by the city attorney. No beer permit license can be issued to a person whose spouse has had a beer permit revoked or suspended by the city, within the past ten years. 
(b)  To be eligible for a permit, the applicant shall establish, in addition to any other requirement of this chapter, the following: 
(1)  That no beer will be sold except at places where such sale will not cause congestion of traffic or inference with schools, churches, or other places of public gathering, or otherwise interfere with public health, safety and morals; 
(2)  That no sale shall be made to persons under 21 years of age; 
(3)  That no person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association having at least a five-percent ownership interest in the establishment or the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, has been charged and penalized, whether through settlement, fines, conviction or otherwise, of any state, city, county or federal law relating to beer and/or liquor, including, but not limited to DUI's, public intoxication, sales to minors, or possession, storage, or sale of liquor or beer within the past ten years. 
a.  The alcoholic beverage board may waive compliance with this provision in its discretion and upon good cause shown by the applicant. 
(4)  That no person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association having at least a five-percent ownership interest in the establishment or the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years; and 
(5)  That no sale shall be made for on-premises consumption unless the permit so states. 
(c)  An applicant shall disclose the following information in the application: 
(1)  Name of the applicant. 
(2)  Name of applicant's business and whether the applicant is a person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or association. 
(3)  Location of business by street address and map and parcel and telephone number at the location. 
(4)  If beer will be sold at two or more restaurants or other businesses as provided by T.C.A. § 57-5-103(a)(4), a description of all such businesses. 
(5)  Persons, firms, corporations, joint stock companies, syndicates, partnerships, limited liability companies or associations having at least a five percent ownership in the applicant, together with addresses and telephone numbers and social security numbers and tax ID numbers. 
(6)  The name, address, and social security number of any individual person who will act as the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer. 
(7)  Identity and address and telephone number of a representative to receive annual tax notices and other communication from the city. 
(8)  Whether any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association having at least a five-percent ownership interest in the applicant or any person employed in the distribution or sale of beer or the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, has been charged and penalized, whether through settlement, fines, conviction or otherwise, of any state, city, county or federal law relating to beer and/or liquor, including, but not limited to DUI's, public intoxication, sales to minors, or possession, storage, or sale of liquor or beer, in the past ten years. 
a.  The alcoholic beverage board may waive compliance with this provision in its discretion and upon good cause shown by the applicant. 
(9)  Whether any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association having at least a five-percent ownership interest in the applicant or any person employed in the distribution or sale of beer or the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(10)  Whether the applicant is seeking a permit which would allow the sale of beer for on-premises consumption of beer or for off-premises consumption or both types of consumption. 
(11)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property. 
(12)  The application shall authorize a police records check and shall waive any right the applicant may have to privacy concerning arrests reflecting on the moral character of the applicant. 
(d)  An applicant or permit holder shall amend or supplement the information provided in his application promptly if a change in circumstances affects the responses in the application. 
(e)  Any applicant making any false statement in an application shall forfeit his permit, and shall not be eligible to receive any permit for a period of ten years. 
(f)  Permits shall be issued to the owner of the business, whether a person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association. 
(g)  Every beer permit applicant, and any manager or operator of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, is required to provide a Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) background check dated no less than week prior to the date of the application. 
(h)  The applicant is subject to an ongoing duty of disclosure. If any information in the application changes, including, but not limited to, any potential violation of any state, city, county or federal law relating to beer and/or liquor, the applicant is required to submit a supplemental application within 60 days of the qualifying event. Failure to do so will be considered a violation of this chapter, punishable in the same fashion as any other violation. For the purpose of this subsection, a supplemental application only needs to include the information that has changed, as well as an explanation of the change. If another part of this chapter requires a new application based upon a change in information, including, but not limited to, a change of ownership, that portion of this chapter will control. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-040; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(F), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-57. - Same—Police record check. 
The city recorder shall submit all applications to the city police department for a records check prior to time of the alcoholic beverage board meeting at which the application will be considered. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-050; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 4-58. - Same—Fee; annual tax; change in management. 
(a)  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by an application fee of $250.00 for use in offsetting the expense of investigating the applicant and processing the applicant. No portion of the fee shall be refunded to the applicant even if the application is denied as provided in T.C.A. § 57-5-104. 
(b)  All beer permit holders shall pay an annual privilege tax and fee of $100.00 for the privilege of selling beer within the state, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-104(b)(1). 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association engaged in selling, distribution, storing or manufacturing beer shall remit the tax on each successive January 1 to the city alcoholic beverage board. 
(2)  The city alcoholic beverage board shall mail written notice to each permit holder of the payment date of the annual tax at least 30 days prior to January 1 of each year. Notice shall be mailed to the address specified by the permit holder on its permit application. If a permit holder does not pay the tax by January 31 or within 30 days after written notice of the tax was mailed, whichever is later, then the city alcoholic beverage board shall notify the permit holder by certified mail that the tax payment is past due. If a permit holder does not pay the tax within ten days after receiving notice of its delinquency by certified mail, then the permit may be suspended, revoked or the permit holder may be given a civil penalty subject to procedures set forth at T.C.A. § 57-5-108 and section 4-67. 
(3)  At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax payment date. 
(c)  All applications for the issuance of permit for the change in management of an establishment licensed by the city shall be accompanied by a change in management fee of $100.00. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-060; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(G), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-59. - Conditions of permits. 
Every person to whom a beer permit is issued shall agree to the following conditions: 
(1)  The premises are declared to be a public place for the purpose of inspection by the beer inspectors, by officers of the police department or by any other duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The permit holder shall keep invoices and all other memoranda fully descriptive relating in any way to storing, sale, distribution by sale or gift or manufacture of beer, and shall permit the recorder or his duly authorized agents to inspect, at any time during the business hours of the day, all such articles, containers, packages, invoices, books, papers and memoranda as deemed necessary by the recorder to audit tax payments. 
(3)  The permit holder shall display all permits in a conspicuous place together with all other permits and licenses required by law. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-070; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-60. - Permit to state location where sale is authorized. 
The specific address or description of the premises where beer is authorized to be sold shall be stated on the face of each permit issued by the city alcoholic beverage board. No permit shall be valid unless such address or description of the premises is stated on the face of the permit. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-080; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-61. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No beer permit for on-premises consumption shall be issued to an applicant whose location is less than 500 feet from a school, church, house of worship or municipal park. The minimum distance requirement for a beer permit for off-premises consumption shall be 100 feet from a school, church, house of worship or municipal park. Distance for on-premises and off-premises shall be measured from the center of the nearest permanent entrance of the school, church, house of worship or municipal park along a straight line to the center of the main entrance of the potential licensee. Municipal parks shall not include those parks created on land donated to the city on or after May 1, 2013. 
(b)  No beer permit shall be issued for a location which fails to comply with any health ordinances or statutes or any which would violate the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Where a beer permit is revoked, no new permit shall be issued to permit the sale of beer on the same premises by the same business enterprise or its employees operating the premises until after the expiration of one year from the date the revocation becomes final and effective. No permit shall be issued to a partner, employee, associate or relative of the holder of a revoked permit if the relationship existed at the time of the offense. Other totally unrelated persons shall be eligible to apply for a permit for that location but issuance shall be at the sole discretion of the alcoholic beverage board. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued to an applicant who had revoked, within ten years, a permit, issued by any state, city, county or federal government relating to beer and/or liquor, for the sale of beer and/or alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-090; Ord. No. 85-17, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2002-20, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 2003-12, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2013-46, 5-30-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-62. - On-premises consumption beer permit; issuance requirements. 
It is the intent of this article to only issue permits for on-premises consumption of beer to 1) restaurants for the sale of beer along with meals; and 2) hotels/motels for the purpose of serving their registered guests. All other establishments primarily selling beer for on-premises consumption and not food are prohibited from maintaining a permit for on-premises consumption. 
(1)  Retailer on-premises consumption beer permits shall not be issued except to establishments with seating capacities, and actual seating for 95 or more persons except for those holding a valid on-premises permit on or before June 17, 2002, shall be required to maintain a seating capacity of 75 or more persons. 
(2)  Such businesses shall have complete and sanitary kitchen facilities. Such businesses shall be equipped with adequate toilet facilities and hand washing facilities, including hot and cold running water, for use by customers. 
(3)  Required ratio of gross sales to wholesale beer purchases. 
a.  Beer permits for on-premises consumption shall maintain an annual ratio of $5.00 of gross sales, excluding all sales dollars of intoxicating liquor on or after the effective date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for each $1.00 of wholesale beer purchases, except for those holding a valid on-premises beer permit on or before June 17, 2002, shall be required to maintain $4.00 of gross sales, excluding all sales dollars of intoxicating liquor on or after the effective date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, for each $1.00 of wholesale beer purchases. 
b.  The calendar year, or the part thereof ending on December 31, shall be used for the calculation of sales ratios. 
c.  The calculation of the ratio shall be made using the permit holder's sales tax returns for the previous calendar year after subtracting the gross sales of intoxicating liquor as measured by the permit holder's liquor by the drink tax returns for the previous calendar year and comparing the difference to the permit holder's total dollar sales for the previous calendar year. 
d.  The calculation required in paragraph a. shall be made by the permit holder and provided to the ABB by January 31 of each calendar year. If the permit holder fails the test, the holder shall be subject to penalty as set forth in other sections of this article. Additionally, if the permit holder fails the test it shall be subject to an additional test, and such sales information as required must be submitted by April 30 of the calendar year of the failed test. Such test will encompass the sales information for the time period between April 1 of the previous year and March 30 of the new year. If the permit holder fails the test, the holder shall be subject to penalty as set forth in other sections of this article. Additionally, if the permit holder fails this second test then his permit shall be revoked and he shall not be allowed to apply for a new permit for a period of six months. 
e.  To the extent a permit holder has not had an on premises consumption permit for 12 months as of December 31 of the prior calendar year, subsection (b) is modified to read that, for the permit holders' first year in operation, the holder's sales will be measured from the date of issuance of the permit to 12 months from that date. The permit holder shall be responsible for preparing the information required under subsection (c) for the 12 month period in question. Subsection (d) is modified for the purpose of subsection (e) in that the documents required per subsection (c) are due by the last day of the month following the end of the 12 month period after the permit holder obtained a permit. Further, if the permit holder fails this test, the permit holder shall be required to submit its sales for its thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth months of operation. If the permit holder, for months four through 15, remains non-compliant, the permit shall be revoked and the holder shall not be allowed to apply for a new permit for a period of six months. Any person holding a permit as of January 1 of a new year shall be placed back onto the standard track as set forth in subsections (b) and (d). 
f.  To the extent a complaint is made to the alcoholic beverage board by any person, that an establishment is allegedly selling beer in violation of the ratio requirements, the Board may require any permit holder to provide the information required by subsection (c) for the most recent 12 month period, or the length of time the permit holder has been in business if less than 12 months. If the ratio is less than $2.50 in gross sales excluding liquor for every $1.00 in wholesale beer purchases, the board has discretion to suspend the permit for up to two months. A second violation of this provision in a 12 month period shall result in revocation of a permit. The holder shall be prohibited from requesting a new permit for a period of six months. 
(4)  All establishments selling beer for on-premises consumption shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer and have adequate sanitary restrooms and kitchen facilities. 
(5)  Hotels/motels. 
a.  Subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall not apply to hotels/motels. Hotels/motels will be eligible for beer permits so long as: a) the hotel/motel has at least 100 guest rooms intended to be used for overnight stays that contain both individual bedding and individual access to sanitary sewer; and b) the hotel/motel serves only hotel patrons and their guests. Subject to rules and regulations adopted by a hotel/motel license pursuant to this article, the premises where such beer may be consumed includes the entirety of the hotel/motel grounds. Beer sold pursuant to such a hotel/motel permit shall not be permitted to be consumed off of the hotel/motel's premises in any instance. In addition to other penalties set forth in article III, chapter 4 of this Code, a hotel/motel beer permit holder shall likewise be penalized for violations of this subsection (5). 
b.  The licensed permit holder for the hotel/motel shall be the general manager of the hotel/motel or person of equivalent position. Each new general manager or person of equivalent position must meet all criterion in this chapter for the holder of a beer permit. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-100; Ord. No. 2001-17, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 2002-20, 6-17-2002; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 2015-20, 4-27-2015; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-16, 4-23-2018)  
Sec. 4-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), adopted July 28, 2014, repealed § 4-63, which pertained to caterer's permit; issuance and notice requirements; location restrictions and derived from Code 1997, § 2-3-105; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(H), adopted Aug. 14, 2006; and Ord. No. 2007-51, adopted Mar. 26, 2007.  
Sec. 4-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), adopted July 28, 2014, repealed § 4-64, which pertained to expiration of permits and derived from Code 1997, § 2-3-110; Ord. No. 2007-51, adopted Mar. 26, 2007; and Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2013.  
Sec. 4-65. - Permit nontransferable. 
Permits issued by the city alcoholic beverage board shall not be transferred from one person to another. Where the holder of a permit desires to move his place of business from one location to another, he shall apply for a new permit for the new location and he shall surrender the permit for the location which he has abandoned. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-120; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), adopted July 28, 2014, repealed § 4-66, which pertained to renewal of permit and derived from Code 1997, § 2-3-130; Ord. No. 2001-17, adopted July 2, 2001; and Ord. No. 2007-51, adopted Mar. 26, 2007.  
Sec. 4-67. - Suspension and revocation of permit; authority. 
The city alcoholic beverage board shall have the power to revoke or suspend, and shall be charged with the duty of revoking or suspending, any permits issued by it, upon notice to the permittee and a hearing thereon, for any violation of any provision of state law regulating the sale, storage and transportation of alcoholic beverages or for any violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or when the permittee, including, but not limited to, any manager or operator of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer: 
(1)  Operates a disorderly place; 
(2)  Permits gambling on the premises; 
(3)  Permits boisterous or disorderly conduct on the premises; 
(4)  Has been convicted by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Permits minors to congregate about the premises; 
(6)  Sells or transfers the equipment or assets of the business authorized by his permit to another for the purpose of conducting the business on the same premises, unless he shall notify the board in writing immediately upon such sale or transfer, and shall surrender his license within 30 days after the sale or transfer; 
(7)  Has made a false statement of a material fact in any application or notice to the board; 
(8)  Sells or allows to be sold on the premises of the permittee any beer to any person under the age of 21 years; 
(9)  Sells or allows to be sold on the premises of the permittee beer to any person using food stamps issued pursuant to state or federal law for the purchase of such beer; or 
(10)  Holds an on-premises consumption beer permit and fails any $5.00 of food sales to $1.00 of beer sales test required by section 4-62. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-140; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-68. - Prohibited acts. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To bring, to cause, or to allow to be brought onto the premises of any permittee under the provisions of this article any prohibited drugs within the meaning of T.C.A. §§ 53-10-101 et seq. and 39-17-401 et seq., and any intoxicating beverage, the alcoholic content of which is defined in T.C.A. § 57-5-101 unless such permittee is the holder of a valid license issued under the authority of T.C.A. title 57, chapter 4 (T.C.A. § 57-4-101 et seq.); 
(2)  Being under the age of 21 years, to have in his possession beer for any purpose, except that any person 18 years of age or older may transport, possess, sell or dispense alcoholic beverages in the course of employment. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-150; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-22, 3-27-2017)  
Sec. 4-69. - Off-premises consumption sales of draft beer. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Draft beer means beer which is poured from a pressurized container or keg into a container approved by the state, which is then commercially sealed. The process of pouring the beer into the container and commercially sealing it shall take place on the premises of the retailer in an area separate from the area which the public may use. 
(b)  Draft beer may be sold for off-premises consumption only by the holder of an off-premises beer permit. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-160; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-70. - Prohibited acts by permit holders, agents or employees. 
It is unlawful for any beer permit holder or his agent or employee to: 
(1)  Employ any person as a manager operator of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business, if said person has been charged with and penalized, whether through settlement, fines, conviction, or otherwise, for any violation of any city, county, state, or federal law related to beer or liquor, including, but not limited to, DUI's, public intoxication, sales to minors, and possession, storage, or sale of liquor or beer, within the past ten years. 
(2)  Employ any person as the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer, who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(3)  Make or permit to be made any sale of beer to a person under 21 years of age or to allow such person to loiter or stay around the premises without their parent. The burden of ascertaining the age of minor persons shall be on the permit holder and his agent or employee; 
(4)  Sell, give away, or allow beer to be consumed on any premises granted a permit under this article from 2:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Sundays or between 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on other days; 
(5)  Make false statement of a material fact in the application for any beer permit; 
(6)  Allow any person under 18 years of age to loiter or congregate about the premises. The burden of ascertaining the age of minor persons shall be on the permit holder and his agent or employee. When a minor is seated at a table, there shall be no beer served at the table unless such minor is accompanied by one or both of his parents, but only if served in conjunction with food; 
(7)  Knowingly allow beer to be passed from a lawful purchaser or possessor to a minor for consumption on the premises of the permit holder. The burden of ascertaining the age of persons who may not lawfully possess beer shall be on the permit holder and his agent or employee; 
(8)  Permit gambling or gaming devices of any kind or description contrary to state law on the premises; 
(9)  Permit boisterous or disorderly conduct on the premises; 
(10)  Sell or transfer the equipment or assets of the business authorized by the permit to another for the purpose of continuing the business on the same premises, unless he shall notify the board in writing immediately upon such sale or transfer, and unless he shall give the name and address of the purchaser within the notice. A beer permit holder shall surrender his licensee to the board within 30 days after the sale or transfer is consummated; 
(11)  Make or allow any sale to any intoxicated person or to any mentally incapacitated person; 
(12)  Allow any intoxicated person to loiter on or about the premises; 
(13)  Store beer in any place other than the address listed on his permit (retailer or wholesaler); 
(14)  Sell or allow to be sold on the premises of the permittee beer to any person using food stamps issued pursuant to state and federal law for the purchase of such beer; 
(15)  Sell beer through any drive-through or delivery window or by curb service or to deliver beer off-premises to the consumer; 
(16)  Fail to post his beer license and a copy of the beer laws in a conspicuous location; 
(17)  Knowingly sell to a lawful purchaser who purchases beer for consumption by a minor. The burden of ascertaining the age of persons who may lawfully possess beer shall be on the permit holder and his agent or employee (retailer); or 
(18)  Knowingly permit an individual to engage in any criminal activity on the premises. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-170; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(I), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-71. - Permitted activities. 
It is lawful to transport, store, sell, distribute, possess, receive and manufacture beer within the city, subject to all regulations, limitations and restrictions provided in this article and the rules adopted by the city alcoholic beverage board. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-180; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-72. - Restrictions on sales by wholesalers. 
It is unlawful for any authorized wholesaler to sell beer to anyone other than a person, firm, corporation, syndicate or association having been authorized and licensed by any city or county as a retailer by a board duly created for the purpose of licensing retail establishments. Provided, however, if a retail business has posted a beer permit, which on its face appears to be valid, a wholesaler who sells beer to the retail business will not be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-190; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(J), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-73. - Limitation on purchases. 
No person, except an authorized wholesaler, may sell or store beer within the city area unless such beer has been purchased from an authorized wholesaler. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-200; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-74. - Retail sales and storage; permit location only. 
Retailers holding permits to sell beer are authorized to sell and store beer at only the location authorized by the alcoholic beverage board and specifically designated on their permit as the place for which the permit is issued. The sale or storage of beer by a retailer at any place other than the location authorized by the board and specifically named on the face of the permit is prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-210; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-75. - Beer delivery restrictions for retailers. 
(a)  Retailers holding permits from the alcoholic beverage board are only authorized to deliver beer on the premises for which the permit is issued. The delivery of beer by a retail permit holder to any place other than the premises for which his permit is issued is prohibited. No retail permit holder shall enter into any agreement or conspire with any person to cause beer to be delivered off of the premises for which the permit is issued or at any location other than the one authorized by the permit for the sale of beer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail beer permit to knowingly permit the purchase of beer at the place of business by anyone for resale and delivery to another. Holders of retail beer permits issued by the board are prohibited from selling beer to any person when the retail permit holder knows or should have reason to know that such beer is purchased for resale and delivery off of the premises for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-220; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-76. - Wholesale permit required. 
It is unlawful for any retailer holding a permit issued by the alcoholic beverage board to purchase, accept as a gift or loan, or to receive, swap or exchange beer for the purpose of resale, from any person who is not the holder of a valid wholesale permit issued by the board. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-230; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-77. - Revocation of permit for closed premises. 
A permit holder must return his permit to the board within 45 days of termination of the business, change in ownership, relocation of the business or change of the business's name; provided that, regardless of the failure to return a beer permit, a permit shall expire upon termination of the business, change in ownership, relocation of the business or change of the business's name. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-240; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(K), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-78. - Valid permit; limitations. 
A permit shall be valid: 
(1)  Only for a single location, except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, and cannot be transferred to another location. A permit shall be valid for all decks, patios and other outdoor serving areas that are contiguous to the exterior of the building in which the business is located and that are operated by the business. 
(2)  Only for a business operating under the name identified in the application. 
(3)  Only for the owner to whom the permit is issued and cannot be transferred to another owner. Should the ownership of a location change, the new owner shall apply for a new permit. If the owner is a corporation, a change in ownership shall occur when control of at least 50 percent of the stock of the corporation is transferred to a new owner. If the owner is a limited liability company, a change in ownership shall occur if there is a new general partner or a change in a limited partner having a 40 percent or greater interest in the partnership. 
(4)  A business can sell beer for both on-premises and off-premises consumption at the same location pursuant to one permit. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-245; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(L), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
Sec. 4-79. - Prohibited acts or conduct; enforcement authority. 
(a)  The alcoholic beverage board shall revoke or suspend the beer permit of any permit holder, upon notice and hearing, for violation of the provisions of T.C.A. § 57-4-204 or any other state statute or ordinance regulating alcoholic beverages or conduct at places selling alcoholic beverages. Revocation, suspension or imposition of a civil penalty may be made where it appears satisfactorily that the premises of any person holding a beer permit under this article are being operated in such manner as to be detrimental to public health, safety and morals. 
(b)  The board is vested with full power to investigate charges against any permit holder and to cite any permit holder to appear and show cause why his permit should not be suspended or revoked for violation of a law, rule or regulation. 
(c)  Complaints filed against any permit holder for the purpose of suspending or revoking the permit shall be made in writing and filed with the city recorder. 
(d)  The city police department shall serve notice of any complaint upon the permit holder by personal service. 
(e)  The action of the board in connection with the issuance of any order revoking or suspending a beer permit or imposition of a civil penalty may be reviewed by statutory writ of certiorari, with a trial de novo as a substitute for an appeal, the petition of certiorari to be addressed to the circuit or chancery court of the county. The procedures in T.C.A. § 57-5-108 are the sole method for review of decisions under this section, as they may be amended. 
(f)  Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-108 the board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit or license holder the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense. If a vendor is guilty of selling beer to a minor and the permit holder has failed to achieve responsible vendor status pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-606 then this civil penalty is increased to a maximum of $2,500.00, but remains a maximum of $1,000.00 for any other offense. If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn. The holder's payment of a civil penalty shall not affect the holder's ability to seek review of the civil penalty. 
(g)  The board shall suspend a permit for a minimum 90-day period when the permitee has violated any provision of this chapter on three or more occasions within a ten-year period. 
(h)  If the holder of an off-premises consumption permit violates any provision of this article, the alcoholic beverage board, in addition to suspension, revocation, or a civil penalty, retains the right to revoke or suspend the permit holder's ability to give away samples. 
(Code 1997, § 2-3-250; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1(M), 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2010-15, 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2013-69, 9-23-2013; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-64, § 2, 11-13-2017)  
Sec. 4-80. - Fees and taxes; applications. 
(a)  Fees and taxes. Fees and taxes on city beer permit are as follows: 
(1)  $250.00 nonrefundable fee, required when application is submitted (new applicant). 
(2)  $100.00 privilege tax, on a pro rata basis (T.C.A. § 57-5-104(5), new applicant). 
(3)  $100.00 privilege tax, (T.C.A. § 57-5-104(b)(1) to maintain the beer permit each January). If the annual privilege tax fee is not paid by January 31 of each new year, the beer permit shall lapse and, prior to selling beer for on-premises consumption, a new beer permit must be obtained. Current contact information is required with the yearly permit fee. 
(b)  City beer permit application. Application for city beer permit is as follows: 
Beer Permit Application City Of Mt. Juliet 
? On-premises consumption (seating/parking chart required) 	? Off-premises consumption 
? Joint off/on-premises consumption (seating/parking chart required) 	? Special events permit 
? Distributor's wholesale permit 	? Manufacturer's permit 
 
(c)  Applicant information. Information required for applicant of city beer permit is as follows: 
Applicant Information 
I hereby make application for a permit to sell, store, distribute beer or other beverages authorized to be sold, stored, manufactured or distributed under the provisions of T.C.A. § 57-5-101 et seq. and chapter 4 of the Mt. Juliet Code and base my application on the answers to the following questions: 
1. 	Applicant information. 
	(a) 	Full name of the applicant (please print) _____ 
	(b) 	Entity: ? Person ? Partnership ? LLC ? Corporation ? Association 
	(c) 	Under what name will the business operate? ___________ and telephone number: ________ 
	(d) 	Address of business _____ 
	(e) 	Previous business addresses for the last ten years: _____ 
	(f) 	Name of previous business: _____ 
	(g) 	Identity and address of the person to receive annual privilege tax notices? _____ 
	(h) 	Will applicant permit dancing or any other entertainment? ? Yes ? No 
	(i) 	Has any license belonging to an owner, manager or the applicant for sale of alcoholic beverages been revoked within the last ten years? ? Yes ? No 
	(j) 	Will applicant serve food? ? Yes ? No 
	(k) 	What is the relationship of the applicant or its owners to the operator of prior businesses operating at the same address? _____ 
	(l) 	Does applicant hold any other beer permits? ? Yes ? No. 
If yes, where? _____ 
	(m) 	What is the property zoned? _____ 
2. 	Owner/operator information. 
	If the applicant is not an individual person, list all persons or legal entities having five percent or more interest in the applicant, together with the following information about them: _____
_____
_____ 
	(a) 	What is your present home address? _____ 
	(b) 	What previous addresses have you occupied within the last ten years? _____ 
	(c) 	Date of Birth _______ Social Security Number ________ 
	(d) 	Have you or any owner been convicted of any violation of a criminal law regarding alcoholic beverages within the last ten years? ? Yes ? No 
		Other criminal law? ? Yes ? No 
3. 	Designate and list the person(s) who will be the designated operator or manager of the business, meaning the person on site overseeing the business of selling beer. Include said person(s) address, date of birth, and social security number. 
_____ 
	(a) 	Has the designated manager/on site operator been convicted of any violation of a criminal law regarding alcoholic beverages within the last ten years? ? Yes ? No 
4. 	Are you and each of the persons named in section 3 of this form familiar with chapter 4 of the Mt. Juliet Code and title 57 of the Tennessee Code? _____ 
5. 	Do you lease or own the premises? ? Lease ? Own 
	Provide a copy of the lease or deed evidencing your interest in the property. 
I have read the City of Mt. Juliet rules and regulations governing the issuance of a beer permit and agree to comply with all laws, ordinance and regulations governing my beer permit. I further state that the information contained in this application is true and correct and acknowledge that in the event I have provided false information my permit may be immediately revoked. I authorize the City of Mt. Juliet to check my record for criminal and civil violations. I waive my right to privacy and authorize a complete check of my background for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the information provided in this application. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _______ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Signature of Applicant 

Notary Public 
Commission Expires: 
Alcoholic beverage board meetings are held on the 2nd Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. 
This application will be considered ___________. 
 
(Code 1997, title 2, ch. 3; Ord. No. 2007-51, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2014-56, § 1(Att.), 7-28-2014; Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-9-2017)  
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL LIQUOR STORES 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter, and the singular includes the plural. 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, high alcohol content beer, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, and high alcohol content beer and capable of being consumed by a human being, except for beer as defined in T.C.A. § 57-5-101(b) and patent medicine. 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners for the City of Mt. Juliet. 
Days means calendar days except where otherwise indicated. Where a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday the deadline will be the next business day. 
Indirectly means any kind of interest in another place of business by way of stock, ownership, loan, partner's interest or otherwise. 
Retailer means a person, partnership, corporation or any other entity licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at a retail liquor store pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. 
Retail liquor store means a store licensed to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. 
School means an institution, including kindergarten, where regular classes are conducted under the supervision of a teacher or instructor, including schools where specialized subjects are taught to students of all ages, but excluding colleges, universities, vocational or technical schools, or other institutions of higher education. 
TABC means the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
T.C.A. means Tennessee Code Annotated. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells at wholesale any beverage for the sale of which a license is required under the provisions of T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-82. - Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, store, transport, distribute, purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the limits of the City of Mt. Juliet except as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 57, Chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Definitions, T.C.A. § 57-3-101(a).  
Sec. 4-83. - Application for certificate of compliance. 
A certificate of compliance signed by the board of commissioners is required before any person can submit an application to the TABC pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-208. The certificate of compliance must be renewed every other year, as required by T.C.A. § 57-3-213. Before a certificate of compliance is signed by the board of commissioners, an application shall be filed with the city recorder on a form to be provided by the city. This application for the certificate of compliance may be amended at the discretion of the City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board. The information in the application shall be verified by oath of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the application shall be verified by oath of each partner, or by the corporation's authorized officer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-84. - Application procedure. 
(a)  After the adoption of this article by the board of commissioners, and in any case where a license becomes available in the future (i.e., revocation or cancellation, but not suspension) citizens shall have ten days to submit an application for a certificate of compliance. Every application for the certificate of compliance shall be dated and time stamped upon receipt by the City of Mt. Juliet. The application shall be submitted to the city recorder. As soon as the city recorder receives an application, the city recorder shall make copies of the application and shall forward such copies to the city attorney and the planning director. 
(b)  The board of commissioners, upon recommendation of The City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board, will issue, by resolution, the available number of certificates of compliance to the applicants that best meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant or applicants have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application and, if a corporation, that the executive officers or those in control have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; and further, that in the board of commissioners' opinion the applicant will not violate any of the provisions of T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq.; 
(2)  The applicant or applicants have secured a location for the business that complies with all restrictions of any local law, ordinance, or resolution duly adopted by the City of Mt. Juliet, as to the location of the business; 
(3)  The applicant or applicants have complied with any local law, ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the City of Mt. Juliet regulating the number of retail licenses to be issued within the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(b).  
Sec. 4-85. - Preliminary screening. 
The city attorney will review the applications to determine compliance with section 4-83 and the planning director or his/her designees will review the applications to ensure compliance with all Mt. Juliet zoning regulations and the restrictions on location of retail liquor stores as prescribed herein. The city attorney and the planning director will submit their findings to the City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board within ten days of receiving such applications. The city attorney will conduct a criminal background check of all persons submitting applications or applicant addendums. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-86. - Action on application. 
(a)  All applicants shall be required to appear before the City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board. The City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board will review such applications pursuant to sections 4-83 and 4-84 and make recommendations to the board of commissioners on the issuance of a certificate of compliance. The City of Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board will review such applications at its next scheduled meeting and shall report its recommendation and findings to the board of commissioners within five days of said meeting. The board of commissioners shall issue a certificate of compliance for those applicants that best fit the requirements listed in section 4-84. The number of certificates of compliance issued shall not exceed the maximum number of licenses available pursuant to section 4-97. Once the BOC has issued the maximum number of licenses available pursuant to section 4-97 the board shall deny all other applications on the ground that the maximum number of licenses have been issued by the city, pending TABC review. 
(b)  A letter will be sent to each applicant informing it whether it will be issued a certificate of compliance. All other applications will be held until the TABC grants the maximum amount of licenses allowed by the City of Mt. Juliet. Once the TABC grants the maximum amount of licenses allowed by this chapter all pending applications will be deemed void and will be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-87. - Failure to act. 
If the board of commissioners does not render a decision on the application for a certificate of compliance within 60 days of the city recorder receiving the written application, this failure will be deemed a granting of the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(e).  
Sec. 4-88. - Judicial review. 
An applicant may seek review of the denial of a certificate of compliance by instituting an action in the chancery court having jurisdiction over the City of Mt. Juliet within 60 days of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(d).  
Sec. 4-89. - Application fee. 
Each applicant shall submit a non-refundable fee of $500.00 with its application. Said fee shall be in addition to any costs incurred in conducting a criminal background check pursuant to section 4-85. The costs incurred in conducting a criminal background check must be paid by the applicant to the city recorder before the applicant appears before the Mt. Juliet Alcoholic Beverage Board. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-90. - Bi-annual renewal. 
Each approved applicant that is licensed by the TABC must seek a new certificate of compliance every two years from the date the certificate of compliance is first issued. The person holding the retail liquor license must submit a new application as required by section 4-83 of this article. A non-refundable $500.00 fee must be submitted with each renewal request. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Expiration of licenses; renewal, T.C.A. § 57-3-213(d).  
Sec. 4-91. - Public notice. 
Each new applicant for a retail liquor license shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area proposed to be served concerning the applicant's intent to seek a license from the TABC. The notice shall contain such information as prescribed below and shall appear for at least three consecutive issues immediately preceding the date that the applicant appears before the board of commissioners for a certificate of compliance. The title of the notice shall be in all capital letters and at least ten point size. The text of the notice shall be at least eight point size type, and the size of the entire notice shall not be less than two columns by two inches of newspaper space. Such newspaper notice shall be published prior to the issuance of the certificate of compliance. 
RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE NOTICE 
Take notice that (applicant name), (applicant's home address), has applied to the City of Mt. Juliet for a "Certificate of Compliance", and will apply or has applied to the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission (ABC) in Nashville, Tennessee for a Retail Liquor License for (name of liquor store), (address of store), Mt. Juliet, Tennessee (zip code). 
All persons wishing to be heard on the "Certificate of Compliance" may personally or through counsel appear or submit their views in writing to: The Mt. Juliet Board of Commissioners on (date of Commission meeting) at (time of Commission meeting) in the (place of Commission meeting). 
The ABC will consider the application at a date to be set by the ABC in Nashville, Tennessee. Interested person(s) may personally or through counsel submit their views in writing by the hearing date to be scheduled by the ABC. Anyone with questions concerning this application or the laws relating to it may call or write the Alcoholic Beverage Commission which is located at 226 Capitol Boulevard Building, Suite 300, Nashville, TN 37243, or call 615-741-1602. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.09  
Sec. 4-92. - Inspection fee. 
The City of Mt. Juliet hereby imposes an inspection fee in the maximum amount allowed by T.C.A., § 57-3-501, currently five percent, on all licensed retailers of alcoholic beverages located within the City of Mt. Juliet. The City of Mt. Juliet shall inform the wholesaler that this inspection fee has been imposed by ordinance upon retailers located in the City of Mt. Juliet. The wholesaler shall collect the inspection fee at the time of sale or at the time the retailer makes payment for the delivery of alcoholic beverages. Each wholesaler making sales to retailers located within the City of Mt. Juliet shall furnish the city a monthly report that shall contain: 1) a list of all alcoholic beverages sold to retailers located within the city; 2) the wholesale price of the beverage sold to the retailer; and 3) the amount of tax due. The monthly report must be filed by the twentieth day of the month following the month of the sale. The inspection fee collected by the wholesaler shall be paid to the municipality at the time the monthly report is made. Wholesalers are entitled to keep five percent of the inspection fee, which shall also be indicated on the monthly report. 
The city has the authority to audit such wholesalers in order to determine the accuracy of such reports. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Municipal inspection fees, T.C.A. §§ 57-3-501, 502, 503.  
Sec. 4-93. - Residency requirement. 
The applicant (majority owner) for a certificate of compliance shall have been a bona fide resident of the City of Mt. Juliet for the previous two years or a citizen of Wilson County for the previous five years. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation each of the partners or stockholders must meet these residency requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(c).  
Sec. 4-94. - Where retail liquor stores may be located. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any retail liquor store for the sale, storage or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the City of Mt. Juliet, unless said retail liquor store is permitted by the Mt. Juliet Land Development Code. 
(b)  Retail liquor stores shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a school, church, house of worship, library or municipal park. 
(c)  Retail liquor stores cannot be located any closer than three miles from each other. Distance will be measured along the shortest drivable route from the center of the main entrance of one location to the center of the main entrance of the other location. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(c).  
Sec. 4-95. - Retail liquor stores square footage and location requirements, entrances, store name. 
(a)  No retail liquor store shall be located in a space of less than 3,000 square feet. Retail liquor stores must be located on the ground floor. Retail liquor stores shall face a public street and shall have only one public entrance. Such entrance shall face the public street. If the retail liquor store is located on a street corner and faces two public roads, the establishment may have a public entrance facing each public road. To the extent practicable, each side of the retail liquor store facing a public road shall have a free and unobstructed vision to the interior of the liquor store from the street or public highway by way of large windows. Retail liquor stores shall not use any type of LED signage. 
(b)  In addition, all retail liquor stores shall be a permanent type of construction and business. No retail liquor stores shall be located in a manufactured or other moveable or prefabricated type building. All retail liquor stores shall be subject to applicable zoning, land use, building and life safety regulations, adopted by the city, unless specifically provided otherwise. 
(c)  A retail liquor store shall include in its name, and on signs used to advertise the business "Wine and Spirit." 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Transportation in quantities in excess of five gallons Bond Bill of lading off-premises consumption, T.C.A. § 57-3-404(f).  
Sec. 4-96. - Televisions, amusement devices and seating facilities prohibited in retail establishments. 
No television sets, pinball machines, slot machines or other devices that tend to cause persons to congregate in such place shall be permitted in any retail establishment. No seating facilities shall be provided for persons other than employees. No lottery tickets shall be sold or games of chance operated in any retail liquor store. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-97. - Limitation on number of retailers. 
One retail liquor license will be issued for each 8,000 in population, provided that no more than three licenses shall be issued pursuant to this article. Population can be based on any certified census completed by the U.S. Census Bureau or the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013) 
State Law reference— Certificate required; contents; exceptions, T.C.A. § 57-3-208(c).  
Sec. 4-98. - Security. 
The retail liquor store shall have a security system in place, which shall include a video recording system that monitors the parking lot, the cashier's machine and all shopping and storage areas as well as a burglary alarm system that notifies the City of Mt. Juliet Police Department of trespass. Security lights shall illuminate the parking light from dusk until dawn. The retail liquor store shall keep such surveillance footage for a minimum of two weeks. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-99. - Violations. 
Any violation of sections 4-92 through 4-99 of this article shall constitute a civil offense and shall, upon conviction, be punishable under the general penalty provision of this Code. Upon conviction of any person under this chapter it shall be mandatory for the city judge to immediately certify the conviction regardless of an appeal to the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from exercising any criminal or civil remedies that it may have with respect to violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Sec. 4-100. - Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission rules. 
All licensed retailers must abide by T.C.A. § 57-3-101 et seq. and the rules and regulations promulgated by the TABC. Failure to do so will result in a notification being sent to the commissioner of the TABC and may result in criminal penalties. The following is a non-exhaustive list of T.C.A. statutes and rules and regulations promulgated by the TABC. This non-exhaustive list is subject to change at the TABC's discretion and is provided for the benefit of the citizens of the City of Mt. Juliet in order to promote awareness in regards to the retail sale of liquor. 
(1)  Sales for consumption on premises. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption, or shall be consumed, on the premises of the retail seller. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-404(h)(1). 
(2)  Only one establishment to be operated by retailer. No person shall have any interest, either directly or indirectly, in more than one retail liquor store in the State of Tennessee. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-406. 
(3)  Felonies or violation of the liquor laws of any state. No retail liquor license will be issued to a person who, within the ten years preceding his application, has been convicted of any felony or has been convicted of violating the liquor laws of this state or any state. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-201(d). 
(4)  Public official. No public employee shall have any interest in a retail liquor license. This rule does not apply to uncompensated appointees to municipal boards and commissions where the boards or commissions on which such appointees serve have no duty to vote for, overlook, or in any manner superintend the sale of alcoholic beverages. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-210(b). 
(5)  Sales of items other than alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall sell or offer to sell on the licensed premises any article or commodity whatsoever except alcoholic beverages. However, this does not prevent the licensee from cashing a check or other negotiable instrument for a fee of less than three percent; provided that the person cashing the check is over the age of 21 and a liquor purchase is not required to utilize the check cashing service. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-404(e). 
(6)  Hours of sale. No retailer shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverage between 11:00 p.m. on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on Monday of each week. No retail store shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. The store may not be open to the general public except during regular business hours. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-406(e). 
(7)  Advertising. No retailer shall send unsolicited electronic mail to a consumer nor shall any retailer send unsolicited direct mail to the place of residence of a person or business. Authorization to solicit must be in writing or via email. A retailer may advertise via the radio or television. Advertisements shall not contain statements that are: 1) false or misleading; 2) disparaging of a competitor's products; 3) obscene or indecent; or 4) capable of being construed as relating to the armed forces of the United States, or of the American flag, any state flag, or of any emblem, seal, insignia or decoration associated with any such flag or the armed forces of the United States. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03.01, .02, .03. 
(8)  Exterior signs. All signs must conform with the sign regulations in the Mt. Juliet Land Development Code and the sign specific regulations in the Mt. Juliet Retail Liquor ordinance. No sign shall contain any statement prohibited by subsections one through four of subsection 4-100(7). If the sign refers to any particular brand, trademark, trade name, trade slogan, or image of a product, that sign shall not also contain the name of or advertise in any way a licensed retail liquor store. A retailer shall not accept, directly or indirectly, a sign from a wholesaler, importer, or manufacturer that bears the name of the retailer or refers to the retailer's services in any manner. A retailer may not receive reimbursement, directly or indirectly, for allowing any manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler to advertise on the property of the retail licensee. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.05. 
(9)  Interior advertising. All advertising inside of the retail liquor store must comply with subsections one through four of subsection 4-100(7). Retailers may only receive advertising materials from Tennessee licensed wholesalers. A Tennessee licensed wholesaler may give, rent, loan or sell to licensed retailers signs, posters, placards, decorations, devices, statuettes, or geographic displays-printed, painted, or electronic-for point-of-sale brand advertising. The wholesaler cannot pay the retailer to display such material referenced above. Retailers may not give, rent, loan or sell such material referenced above to a consumer. All such material must have the primary value to the retailer of brand adverting only. The material may contain specific prices and statements of pecuniary appeal. Additionally, no retailer shall offer by sign or otherwise perform any service whatsoever for consumers, except the sale of alcoholic beverages and check cashing. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.06 and 0100-03-.15. 
(10)  Transferability. No license issued by the City of Mt. Juliet shall be transferrable to another owner(s), An owner can transfer his license to another location upon approval by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission and so long as the new location complies with municipal ordinances regulating retail liquor establishments. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100.03-.18(g). 
(11)  Change in ownership. If the licensee does not own the building for which the liquor license is issued and the ownership of the building changes after the license is issued the licensee shall notify in writing the alcoholic beverage commission and the Mt. Juliet Board of Commissioners within ten days of becoming aware of such change in ownership. This notification shall include the name and address of the new owner. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-204(a). 
(12)  Discontinuation of business. If the licensee discontinues his retail liquor business he shall immediately notify the Mt. Juliet Board of Commissioners and the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverages Commission. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03.09(5). 
(13)  Record keeping. All licensees shall keep, for three years, all purchase orders, invoices and other records of all purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages made by such licensee. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13(2). 
(14)  Management of licensed premises. Every retail liquor store shall be managed by the holder of the license issued by TABC. If the licensee is a corporation or partnership the retail business must be managed by a partner or corporate officer. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13(3). 
(15)  Holiday hours. No retailer shall sell or give away any alcoholic beverages on the following holidays: Christmas, Thanksgiving, Labor Day, New Year's Day and the Fourth of July. State law reference: T.C.A. § 57-3-406(h). 
(16)  Storage. A wholesaler may not store alcoholic beverages for a retail dealer without written permission from the TABC and no retailer, under any circumstances, shall store alcoholic beverages for another retailer. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13(6). 
(17)  Contests prohibited. No licensed retailer may: a) sponsor or conduct a contest in which alcoholic beverages are offered as prizes, premiums or rewards; b) offer as a prize, premium or reward any alcoholic beverages; or c) directly or indirectly aid or assist in the promotion of a contest involving alcoholic beverages that is conducted or sponsored by a person who does not hold a retail liquor license. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13. 
(18)  Gift certificates. A licensed retailer may sell gift certificates. However, no gift certificate shall be honored when presented by a person under the age of 21 or who is visibly intoxicated. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13(10). 
(19)  Licensee responsible for law and order on licensed premises. Each licensee shall maintain his establishment at all times in a decent, orderly and respectable manner in full compliance with all laws of Tennessee and the ordinances and laws of the City of Mt. Juliet. Licensees are at all times responsible for the conduct of their employees. Any unlawful, unauthorized, or prohibited act on the part of an agent or employee of the licensee will be construed as the act of the employer. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.13(13) and 0100-03-.17. 
(20)  Business between retailers. No licensed retailer shall be permitted to purchase merchandise in the name of any one retailer and subsequently distribute such merchandise to another retailer, nor shall any retailer be permitted to transfer goods to another retailer. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.15. 
(21)  Conduct of business. Only the licensee, if an individual, or designated manager, if a partnership or corporation, may engage in any of the following activities: a) selecting, ordering, or pricing inventory; b) employing or discharging the employees of the retail establishment; and employing or discharging the employees of the retail establishment; and c) approving advertising or marketing programs of the licensee. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.15. 
(22)  Finances. The TABC may refuse to grant a retail liquor license to any applicant who fails to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, the financial ability and responsibility to reasonably conduct business. State law reference: Tenn. Rules and Regs 0100-03-.09. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 2-11-2013)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals and animal husbandry, T.C.A. § 44-1-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs and cats, T.C.A. § 44-17-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-19. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the control of all dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-1), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-20. - Animal control officer. 
The city may designate animal control officers whose primary responsibilities include the enforcement and implementation of this article and regulations promulgated hereunder. The animal control officer shall coordinate and administer the activities involving the animal control program in accordance with the goals, policies and procedures established the city police department until otherwise designated. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-2), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-21. - Use of firearms. 
Animal control officers are prohibited from carrying or using firearms in connection with their responsibilities relating to animal control. The animal control officer is hereby authorized to request the assistance of a police officer, and the police officer is hereby authorized to employ the use of firearms in the apprehension or destruction of any animal that, in his assessment, has an injury that warrants immediate euthanasia or that constitutes a threat to human beings or animals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-3), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-22. - Issuance of subpoenas or citations. 
The animal control officer is hereby authorized to issue a subpoena or citation to any individual who is in violation of the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-4), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-23. - Ownership. 
Owners of dogs or cats in the city shall be liable for any violations of this article caused by their animal. The presence of any dog or cat on a premises for a period of three days or more and a demonstration that the occupant or owner of the premises has provided food, water and shelter to the animal during that time period, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such dog or cat belongs to the occupant or owner of such premises. Upon a prima facie showing by the city of the factors described in this section, the burden shifts to the owner or occupant to disprove ownership of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-5), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-24. - Animal care. 
Every owner shall provide his animals with good, wholesome food, water, proper shelter, protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and provide humane care and treatment. 
(1)  Food. Dogs and cats must be provided with food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or the maintenance of body weight. Feed standards shall be those recommended by the National Research Council. 
(2)  Water. Dogs and cats must be provided with clean, potable water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the animal's needs or supplied by free choice. Snow or ice is not an adequate water source. 
(3)  Enclosures and shelter. The following are enclosure and shelter requirements: 
(3)  Enclosures and shelter. 
a.  Enclosures. Enclosures shall: 
1.  Have an area of no less than 50 square feet for the first dog and shall have 30 additional square feet for each additional dog. 
2.  Have their least linear dimension no less than five feet. 
3.  Be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The enclosure shall not be kept in a manner that creates a nuisance for or to neighbors or neighborhood: including but not limited to exposure to garbage, unclean water, noxious odors, dangerous objects that could cause injury or death to the dog upon contact, or other circumstances that could cause harm to the dog's health. 
4.  Be structured in such a way as to not deny an animal access to food and water. 
b.  Proper shelter. Proper shelter includes protection from the weather and elements at all times. The shelter for a dog shall have a weatherproof roof (defined as having no gaps), enclosed sides, a doorway, and a solid floor. No interior surfaces shall be metal, except for roof. The shelter shall have an entryway that the dog can easily enter and be sufficient in size for a dog to stand, turn around, lie down and exit in a natural manner. The shelter shall have adequate ventilation and protection from temperature extremes at all times. 
(4)  Tether. 
1.  Pet tethering. For purposes of this subsection, "tether" means a cable, cord, or similar device used to attach an animal to a stationary device, but does not include chains. 
2.  No person shall allow any animal to remain confined in such a manner as to unreasonably restrict the animal's ability to move. 
3.  No person shall allow any dog to remain tethered unless all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The tether is not unreasonably heavy in proportion to the weight of the animal. 
b.  A swivel is located at both ends of the tether and the tether is free of tangles. 
c.  The collar on the animal to which the swivel is attached is properly fitted and is a collar that is commonly recognized as a pet collar (choke and pinch collars are not permitted). 
d.  The tether is not less than 15 feet in length. 
e.  Chains shall be prohibited for use as a tethering device. 
f.  The animal is not outside during a period of extreme weather, including without limitation a heat index of 95 degrees Fahrenheit or above as determined by the National Weather Service, freezing temperatures at 31 degrees or below, thunderstorms, or tornadoes. 
g.  The animal has access to water, shelter, and dry grounds at all times, and has access to adequate food. 
h.  The animal is at least six months of age and has a current rabies vaccination. 
i.  The animal is not sick, injured, or in heat (estrus). 
j.  Pulley, running line, or trolley systems are at least 15 feet in length and are not less than six feet above ground. 
k.  If there are multiple animals, each animal must be tethered separately. 
l.  The tethering device shall allow the tethered dog to lie down comfortably at all positions of tether. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-6), 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-68, § 1, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 6-25. - Animal left in vehicle. 
(a)  A person shall not leave a cat or dog unattended in a standing or parked motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the health or safety of the cat or dog. 
(b)  A person may use reasonable force, including, but not limited to, breaking a vehicle's window to remove from a motor vehicle a cat or dog left in the vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section if the person: 
(1)  Is a law enforcement officer; 
(2)  Is a public safety employee; 
(3)  Is an animal control officer; 
(4)  Is a volunteer or professional of a fire and rescue service; or 
(5)  Reasonably believes that the animal is in imminent threat of death. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-7), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-26. - Emergency care. 
Minimal emergency medical care may be given to any sick or injured animal found at large within the city. Such animal may be taken to any veterinarian for minimal emergency care or euthanasia. If the owner/custodian of such animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall attempt to notify the owner immediately or as soon as practical thereafter. In any case, such owner/custodian shall be liable for any expense incurred with respect to such animal. If the owner of such animal cannot be identified within 24 hours, the animal shall become the property of the city. If, during the initial 24-hour period, it is recommended, in writing, by a veterinarian that the animal is in such pain and has no reasonable hope of recovery, the animal may be humanely euthanized as authorized, in writing, by a designated agent of the city. The reasonable and necessary expense of such emergency medical care or euthanasia shall be paid by the owner of the animal. The city shall not be liable for any expense with respect to such animal at any time unless expressly authorized by the city. If after minimal emergency care such animal can be safely impounded, the animal control officer and or police officer may impound such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-8), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-27. - Keeping in such a manner as becoming a nuisance prohibited. 
(a)  No animal shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a nuisance either by noise, odor, contagious disease, or other reason. 
(b)  Animals which, by loud and frequent barking, whining, or howling, annoys or disturbs the peace and quiet of any business or neighborhood shall be considered a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-9), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-28. - Dogs running at large. 
(a)  Prohibited. Dog owners or handlers shall not knowingly or negligently allow the animal to run at large. 
(b)  Walking a dog on a leash. Any person walking a dog on public property, including sidewalks must keep the dog on a leash and under physical control at all times. 
(c)  Methods of restraint. 
(1)  Dog restrained by traditional or electronic fencing. Fencing must be in good condition, of recognized construction methods, and prevent the dog from escaping. 
(2)  Dogs restrained by tie-outs or overhead cable runs. As an alternative to traditional fencing, dogs may be restrained with suitably sized tie-outs or overhead cable runs. These restraints must be sufficient in length but never less than ten feet to allow the animal freedom of motion, and to move about at will within a protected area on the property of the owner or handler without becoming tangled in obstacles. These types of restraints shall be located in the yard area so as to prevent the dog from traversing upon another person's property, public sidewalks or public property, and from charging and harassing persons and pedestrians utilizing these properties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-10), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-29. - Impoundment; notice of violation. 
(a)  Unrestrained dogs. Unrestrained dogs shall be taken by the animal control or police officers and impounded in a humane manner. If the owner is known, he shall be given notice in person, by telephone, or certified mail addressed to his last known mailing address. 
(b)  Untagged dogs. Untagged impounded dogs shall be retained for not less than three working days. The city shall not be liable for any costs associated with the retention or disposition of such animal in accordance with this article. If not reclaimed by the owner within three working days, the animal control director may continue to retain the dog for a reasonable period of time and allow it to be adopted or may humanely euthanize the dog. 
(c)  Tagged dogs. Tagged impounded dogs shall be kept for not less than five working days. The city shall not be liable for any costs associated with the retention or disposition of such animal in accordance with this article. If not reclaimed by the owner within five working days, the animal control director may continue to retain the dog for a reasonable period of time and allow it to be adopted or may humanely euthanize the dog. In the event an animal's owner refuses to pay the designated fees/cost associated with the recovery of the animal, the animal will become the property of the city as defined in section 6-30. 
(d)  Impoundment redemption and repossession requirements. The requirements for redemption or repossession of impounded animals are as follows: 
(1)  First impoundment. Any dog found running at large shall be apprehended and incarcerated in the city animal shelter. The owner may redeem or repossess the same upon payment: 
a.  For or presentation of a current rabies vaccination certificate; 
b.  Of $25.00, plus $10.00 for each day of confinement to defray the cost of the capture of such animal and the protection of the public; and 
c.  Of any and all outstanding adjudicated fines owed to the city. 
(2)  Second impoundment. Should a dog belonging to the same owner be picked up for a second time within two years of the date of the first offense, the owner may redeem and repossess the dog upon payment: 
a.  For or presentation of a current rabies vaccination certificate; 
b.  Of $50.00, plus $10.00 for each day of confinement to defray the cost of the capture of such animal and the protection of the public; and 
c.  Of any and all outstanding adjudicated fines owed to the city. 
(3)  Third impoundment. Should a dog belonging to the same owner be picked up for a third time within three years of the date of the first offense, the owner may redeem or repossess the dog upon payment: 
a.  For or presentation of a current rabies vaccination certificate; 
b.  Of $75.00, plus $10.00 for each day to defray the cost of capture of said animal and protection of the public; and 
c.  Of any and all outstanding adjudicated fines owed to the city. 
For purposes of this subsection the term "adjudicated" means all fines, costs and fees that have been previously adjudicated against the owner in court for previous violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-11), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-30. - Adoption of dogs and cats. 
Once a dog or cat becomes the property of the city animal shelter either by gift, donation, abandonment or any other voluntary conveyance or as a result of pickup by the animal shelter or any other person or entity after the animal has been found running at large in violation of this article, a dog or cat may be adopted in accordance with the terms of the adoption contract, supplied by the shelter, and upon payment of fees/cost for any service supplied by the city animal shelter in connection with such dog or cat. Each unaltered dog and/or cat shall be sterilized by the contract or approved veterinarian prior to the adopter taking possession of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-12), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-31. - Dangerous/vicious dog or animal. 
(a)  When an animal attacks, bites, or demonstrates other dangerously aggressive behavior towards a human being or another animal, the animal may be confiscated by the city as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Upon confiscation, the animal control director shall determine whether the animal shall be classified as dangerous/vicious based upon the circumstances of the incident. 
(1)  If the animal is determined to not be dangerous/vicious, then the animal may be released to the custody of the owner upon payment of outstanding adjudicated fines and costs associated with the retention and completion of such other requirements as set forth in section 6-29. 
(2)  If the animal is determined to be dangerous/vicious, then the animal control director may: 
a.  Euthanize the animal; or 
b.  Release the animal to the owner upon payment of outstanding adjudicated fines and costs associated with the retention and completion of such other requirements as set forth in section 6-29 and upon a demonstration that the animal will be confined as follows: 
1.  If kept outdoors, the animal shall be securely confined in an enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as provided in subsection (b)(2)b.3 of this section, and the premises shall have a clearly visible warning sign at all entry points that reads: "Warning Dangerous/Vicious Dog on Premises"; 
2.  If kept indoors, the animal shall be securely confined to part of a house or structure that would not allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition and shall not be kept on a porch or patio;" or 
3.  If taken outdoors and not confined as described in subsection (b)(2)b.1 of this section, the animal must be outfitted with a leash and muzzle. 
(c)  If an owner, or a person who is injured or whose animal is injured by an animal attack, disagrees with the animal control director's decision pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, then that person may appeal the animal control director's decision to the city judge. 
(d)  If an animal attack causes injury to, or death of, any human being, the owner of the animal may be cited for failing to properly control the animal and/or be criminally prosecuted. 
(e)  This article does not apply to dogs or animals used by law enforcement officials for law enforcement work or purposes. 
(f)  An animal shall not be classified as dangerous/vicious if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person, who at the time was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner or handler. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-13), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-32. - Rabies—Immunization. 
All dogs three months of age or older or cats six months of age or older shall be immunized against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The owner of a dog or cat must have readily available a current vaccination certificate subject to the inspection of the animal control officer, or designated agent of the city. All dogs shall have a current rabies tag attached to their collar. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-14), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-33. - Same—Examination. 
(a)  If any dog or cat is suspected of being infected with rabies or has bitten any person so as to break the skin, the animal control officer shall use reasonable efforts to cause such animal to be apprehended and quarantined in the shelter, veterinary clinic, or otherwise securely penned and separated from other animals for ten days in order to ascertain whether or not the animal is infected with rabies. Pet owners who are bitten by their own dog or cat may be allowed to quarantine their animal at a veterinary clinic or at home. The animal control director will have final authority with regard to animal bite quarantines. 
(b)  If, after sufficient quarantine, the animal is not infected, in the opinion of the animal control director or the designated animal control officers, it shall be returned to the owner, upon payment of appropriate impound and rabies inoculation fees/cost. If not redeemed by the owner at the end of the quarantine period, the animal shall become the property of the animal shelter. If, in the opinion of the animal control director or designated animal control officers, a lab diagnosis is justified, the animal may be authorized and proper examination made by the state department of health. In determining the necessity of the microscopic examination, the action of the animal control director shall be final. 
(c)  Any animal desired for observation by the state department of health or animal control under provisions of this section shall be delivered to the city animal control personnel upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-1-15), 9-14-2009)  
Secs. 6-34—6-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND EQUINE 
 
Sec. 6-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animals means and includes, but is not limited to cows, swine, sheep, horses, mules, goats, or any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl, cattle, or livestock. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-101; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-1), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-56. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the control of all animals, excluding domestic dogs and cats. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-101; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-1), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-57. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in charge of any animal to knowingly or negligently permit such animal to run at large within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-102; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-2), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-58. - Pen or enclosure to be kept clean. 
When animals are kept within the corporate limits, the buildings, structure, corral, pen or enclosure in which they are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-103; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-3), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-59. - Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided. 
No animal shall be kept or confined in any place where the food, water, shelter, and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of its health, safe condition, and wholesomeness for food if so intended. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-104; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-4), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-60. - Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited. 
No animal shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a nuisance either because of noise, odor, contagious disease, or other reason. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-105; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-5), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-61. - Cruel treatment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person unnecessarily to beat or otherwise abuse or injure any animal. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-106; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-6), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 6-62. - Seizure and disposition of animals. 
(a)  Any animal found running at large or otherwise being kept in violation of this article may be seized by any animal control officer and confined in a shelter. If the owner is known, he shall be given notice in person, by telephone, or certified mail addressed to his last known mailing address. The notice shall state that the impounded animal must be claimed within five days from the date of the notice by paying outstanding adjudicated fines and shelter costs as provided in section 6-29 or the same will be humanely destroyed or sold. If not claimed by the owner, the animal or fowl may be sold or humanely destroyed. 
(b)  The animal shelter shall be entitled to collect from each person claiming an impounded animal a reasonable fees/cost to cover the costs of impoundment and maintenance. 
(Code 1997, § 3-1-107; Ord. No. 2007-37, 8-13-2007; Ord. No. 2009-48, § 1(3-2-7), 9-14-2009)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-49, adopted Sept. 12, 2011, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 8-19—8-21, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1997, §§ 4-1-101—4-1-103; Ord. No. 2006-29, adopted June 26, 2006; and Ord. No. 2008-52, § 1(4-1-101—4-1-103), adopted Sept. 8, 2008. 
 
Sec. 8-19. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
The International Building Code, 2018 Edition and other adopted codes, one copy is in the office of the building official in the building and codes department of the City of Mt. Juliet, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the official building code of the City of Mt. Juliet for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property buildings and structures; by providing the standard for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolitions of such structures in the City of Mt. Juliet; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Building Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in the Ordinance with the additions prescribed in section 8-20. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49, § 1, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2018-33, § 3, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 8-20. - Additional codes adopted. 
The following additional cods are hereby adopted: 
2018 Edition of International Residential Code; plus Appendices A, B, C, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, M, N, O, P and Q; and amended as follows; 
(1)  Section R101.1, Insert "City of Mt. Juliet Tennessee" in "Name of Jurisdiction", 
(2)  Table R301.2(1) adding the following Snow Load "10#", wind speed "90", Seismic "B", weathering "severe", Frost Line Depth, 6", Termite "Moderate to Heavy", Winter design temperature "14°F", Ice Barrier Required, "No", Flood Hazards, "As shown on FEMA FIRM Panel, Dated, Air Freezing Index "1500 or less", and Mean Annual Temperature "57°F". 
(3)  Section 303.4 Add the following language to the end of the code section to read, "...or approved air exchanger on the HVAC System which will make up the required ventilation." 
(4)  Section R313.2 Remove and replace the words, "one-and two-family dwellings" with "all residential dwellings except, Single-Family Dwellings". 
(5)  Section P2503.5.1 Remove the words, "Other than plastic". 
2018 Edition of International Building Code; plus appendices A, B, C, E, F, G H, I, J, K, L, and N and amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 1015.8, change "36" inches to "24" inches. 
2018 Edition of International Mechanical Code plus Appendix A. 
2018 Edition of International Plumbing Code plus Appendices B, C, D, and E. 
2018 Edition of International Existing Building Code plus Appendix A, B and Resource A. 
2018 Edition of International Fuel Gas Code plus Appendices A, B, C and D. 
2018 Edition of International Property Maintenance Code. 
2018 Edition of International Fire Code plus Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and K. 
2018 Edition of International Energy Conservation Code as amended as follows: 
(1)  Replace Table C402.2 with Table 502.2(1) & (2) from the 2009 Edition of the IECC. 
(2)  Replace Table R402.1.1 with table 402.1 from the 2009 Edition of the IECC. 
2018 Edition of Life Safety Code plus Annexes A, B and C. 
2017 ICC ANSI A117.1 and the 2010 Edition of the Americans with Disabilities Act for Accessibility Code. 
2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
2014 ICC-500 Construction of Storm Shelter. 
2017 ICC-40 Construction of Log Homes. 
2017 ICC-300 Construction of Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating, and Grandstands. 
Article 90 through Chapter 9 inclusive are adopted and incorporated into this chapter as the technical section of the electrical code of the City of Mt. Juliet, by reference as fully as though copied into this chapter. 
The City of Mt. Juliet's adoption of the 2017 NEC is hereby amended by the following: 
Amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
A.  Section 100.1 of the 2017 Edition of the National Electrical code is amended by deleting the definition of Authority Having Jurisdiction and substituting the following: 
Authority having jurisdiction - The Chief Building Official of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49, § 1, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2017-38, § 1, 6-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-33, § 3, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 8-21. - Penalty. 
It shall be illegal for any person to violate any provision of a code adopted by the City of Mt. Juliet. Violations shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49, § 1, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 2018-33, § 3, 9-10-2018)  
Secs. 8-22—8-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 8-46. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code official means building inspector, code officer, building official, enforcement officer, or any officer designated by the city manager to enforce the municipal codes and standards. 
Parts. Whenever the term "dwelling unit," "dwelling," premises," "buildings," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "story" is used in this Code, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the term "or any part thereof." 
(b)  Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in one municipal code, but are defined in other municipal codes, such terms shall have the same meaning ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by the codes, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-101; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-47. - Board of adjustments and appeals—Established; members. 
There is hereby created the city board of adjustments and appeals for new construction and property maintenance hereafter known as the "board." 
(1)  Members. The mayor of the city shall appoint a minimum of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to new construction and property maintenance and who are not employees of the city. The code official shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. 
(2)  Chairperson. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(3)  Conflict of interest. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. 
(4)  Secretary. The city manager shall designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the city manager. 
(5)  Removal of board members. The mayor may remove any member for failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for failure to attend a majority of meetings in a 12-month period, or for cause. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-102; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-48. - Same—Appeals. 
(a)  Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under the city building codes and property maintenance codes shall have the right to appeal to the board, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days (five days for weeds and grass) after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the code provisions or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply, the requirements of the code are adequately satisfied by other means, or than the strict application of any requirement of the code would cause an undue hardship. 
(b)  Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson or at stated periodic meetings but, in no event, later than 20 days following notice of an appeal. 
(c)  Hearing. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the board's membership. 
(d)  Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public, through the secretary, procedures governing the conduct of a hearing. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(e)  Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of board members present. 
(f)  Records and copies. The decision of the board shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official. 
(g)  Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
(h)  Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders of the code official to the board (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. 
(i)  Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari from the decision of the board. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-103; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-49. - Same—Authority. 
(a)  The board is hereby designated as the board of adjustments and appeals for the following codes: 
(1)  International Residential Code. 
(2)  International Building Code and appendixes. 
(3)  International Existing Building Code. 
(4)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(5)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(6)  International Mechanical Code. 
(7)  International Fire Code. 
(8)  Life Safety National Fire Protection Association 101 Code. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool Code. 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code. 
(11)  International Plumbing Code. 
(12)  International Residential Plumbing Code. 
(13)  1999 NC Accessibility Code. 
(14)  Chapter 22, pertaining to stormwater. 
(b)  The following provisions from the codes listed in subsection (a) of this section, adopted by reference pursuant to the ordinance from which this article is derived are amended as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code. Delete section B101, appendix B, board of appeals. 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code. Delete section 111 means of appeal. 
(3)  International Residential Code. Delete section R112, board of appeals. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. Delete section 109, means of appeal. 
(5)  International Fuel Gas Code. Delete section 109, (IFGC) means of appeal. 
(6)  International Fire Code. Delete section 108, board of appeals. 
(7)  International Existing Building Code. Delete section 112, board of appeals. 
(8)  International Mechanical Code. Delete section 109, means of appeal. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-104; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-50. - Code amendments not adopted. 
Code amendments recommended by the respective code associations shall not be incorporated by reference as provided in the codes. The building official may adopt administrative regulations that incorporate by reference such subsequent changes and amendments thereof, properly identified as to date and source, as may be adopted by the agency or association that promulgated the code. Such amendment shall become effective upon the expiration of 90 calendar days following the publication of the regulations. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-105; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-51. - Prosecution for violations. 
The city manager may direct the city attorney or other legal counsel to prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices and orders as provided for in various building and property maintenance codes adopted by the city. The city manager may direct that the attorney appear at hearings to assist the code official. At the direction of the city manager, the attorney shall bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments, or costs incurred by the city in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished a structure in accordance with this article as directed by the city manager. At the direction of the city manager, the attorney shall take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of the building and property maintenance codes. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-106; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-52. - Procedure and notification. 
(a)  The following procedure shall be used for notifications of violations, notices, and orders of the building official or code official: 
(1)  Grass, weeds, trash, brush. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order by the code official to cut weeds and grass within five days when it has reached a height of over ten inches. 
a.  Notice to owner or person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation or has grounds to believe a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person responsible therefor in the manner prescribed herein. 
b.  Failure to comply. If the property owner of record fails or refuses to mow the grass or weeds as directed within ten days after receiving the notice, the code officer shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the property. An administrative charge will be added to cover administrative expenses. Upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds in the county, the costs shall be a lien on the property in favor of the city, second only to liens of the state, county, and municipality for taxes, any lien of the city for special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such cleanup lien. These costs shall also be placed on the tax rolls of the municipality as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. 
c.  Form of notice. Such notice shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  In writing. 
2.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
3.  Include a statement of the violation and why the notice is being issued. 
4.  Include a correction order allowing ten days time to cut or mow the property to municipal standards. 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(2)  Junked vehicles on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order by the code official to remove junked and disabled vehicles within 20 days from the date the notice is received. 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (a)(2), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (a)(2)a, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk vehicle means a vehicle of any age that is damaged or defective in one or any combination of the following ways that either makes the vehicle immediately inoperable, or would prohibit the vehicle from being operated in a reasonably safe manner upon the public streets and highways under its own power if self-propelled, or while being towed or pushed, if not self-propelled: 
1.  Flat tires, missing tires, missing wheels or missing or partially or totally disassembled tires and wheels. 
2.  Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential parts of the vehicle's drive train, including, but not limited to, engine, transmission, transaxle, drive shaft, differential, or axle. 
3.  Extensive exterior body damage or missing or partially or totally disassembled essential body parts, including, but not limited to, fenders, doors, engine hood, bumpers, windshield, or windows. 
4.  Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential interior parts, including, but not limited to, driver's seat, steering wheel, instrument panel, clutch, brake, or gear shift lever. 
5.  Missing or partially or totally disassembled parts essential to the starting or running of the vehicle under its own power, including, but not limited to, the starter, generator or alternator, battery, distributor, gas tank, carburetor or fuel injection system, spark plugs, or radiator. 
6.  The interior is a container for metal, glass, paper, rags or other cloth, wood, auto parts, machinery, waste or discarded materials in such quantity, quality and arrangement that a driver cannot be properly seated in the vehicle. 
7.  Lying on the ground upside down, on its side, or at other extreme angle, sitting on block or suspended in the air by any other method. 
8.  General environment in which the vehicle sits, including, but not limited to the vegetation that has grown up around, in or through the vehicle, the collection of pools of water in the vehicle, and the accumulation of other garbage or debris around the vehicle. 
Vehicle means any machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, self-laying tracks, runners, slides or skids, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, go-carts, campers, tractors, trailers, tractor-trailers, buggies, wagons, and earth-moving equipment, and any part of the same. 
b.  Notice to owner or person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been or has grounds to believe a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or person responsible therefor in the manner prescribed herein. 
c.  Failure to comply. If the property owner of record or person responsible fails or refuses to remove the junked or disabled vehicles within the time stated in the notice, the code officer shall issue a citation for the accused violator to appear in city court to answer the charges. 
d.  Form of notice. Such notice shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  In writing. 
2.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
3.  Include a statement of the violation and why the notice is being issued. 
4.  Include a correction order allowing 20 days time to remove the junked or disabled vehicle. 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(3)  Building maintenance and structures. Whenever a petition is filed with the code official, by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the code officer that a structure is unfit for human occupation or use, the code officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the code officer at a place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the service of the complaint; and the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his finding of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, not exceeding 50 percent of the reasonable value, requiring the owner, during the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to render it fit for human occupancy or use or, to vacate and close the structure for human occupancy or use; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, not to exceed 50 percent of the value of the premises, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. 
(b)  When the estimated cost of repair exceeds 50 percent in the judgment of the code officer, and the owner insists on making repairs and improvements instead of demolition, he shall submit plans and specifications by a licensed architect or engineer for review and approval of the building official. The building official may issue a permit and allow the repairs in compliance with city standards. If the owner fails to repair, alter, improve or to vacate and close the structure, the code official may cause such structure to be vacated and closed; and the code official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building for human occupancy or use is prohibited and unlawful." The public officer may issue a citation for the owner to appear before the city court to answer the complaint. If the owner fails to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish the structure, the code official may cause such structure to be removed and demolished. The code official shall immediately file a lien for the recovery of costs or the city attorney may be directed by the city manager to initiate legal proceedings for the recovery of cost. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-108; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006; Ord. No. 2009-20, 4-13-2009)  
Sec. 8-53. - Lien for expenses. 
The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition of structures by the code official shall, upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county, be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be placed upon the tax rolls of the city as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-109; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-54. - Method of service. 
(a)  Notices shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(b)  Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of the codes, notice shall, in addition to the procedure outlined in subsection (a) of this section, also be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person responsible for the structure or equipment. 
(c)  If the whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the code official shall sign an affidavit to that effect. Then the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the register's office of the county, and such shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-110; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-55. - Clean up or abatement at property owner's expense. 
If the property owner of record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within ten days after receiving the notice, or 20 days if the owner is a carrier engaged in the transportation of property or is a utility transmitting communications, electricity, gas, liquids, steam, sewage, or other materials, the code official shall immediately cause the condition to be remedied or removed at a cost in conformity with reasonable standards, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the owner of the property. An administrative charge may be added to cover administrative expenses. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-111; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-56. - Abatement cost recovery. 
Whenever abatement is performed at the expense of the city, a statement shall be mailed to the registered owners outlining the cost of remediation and such cost shall be due and payable within 30 days. The city may, at its discretion, cause a lien to be placed upon the property at the same time of billing. A copy of the statement shall be provided to the city recorder and such shall be recorded as an account receivable on the books of the city. All payments shall be directed to the city recorder for proper entry. The city manager may direct the city attorney to take legal action to recover costs. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-112; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-57. - Lien for expenses. 
The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition of structures by the code official shall, upon the filing of the notice with the office of the register of deeds of the county, be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be placed upon the tax rolls of the city as a lien and shall be added to property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. If the structure is removed or demolished by the public officer and the materials in his judgment have any significant market value, he shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the chancery court of the county by the code official, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. The city recorder shall maintain a record of liens that indicate the date and nature of the lien, the amount of the lien, and the date the lien is released. The code official shall assist the recorder in maintaining the record. The building official shall be responsible for notifying the recorder of all liens filed. It is critical that satisfied liens are promptly and properly released. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-113; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-58. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Code 1997, § 4-2-114; Ord. No. 2006-37, 8-27-2006)  
Sec. 8-59. - Building permit fees; plan review and inspection fees. 
(a)  A graduated building permit schedule for all nonresidential buildings is adopted as follows: 
Building Size in Square Footage 
(in square feet) 	Permit Fee 
(per square foot) 
10,000 or less 	$0.30 
10,001—30,000 	 0.20 
30,001—50,000 	 0.15 
50,001—100,000 	 0.10 
100,001—200,000 	 0.06 
200,001—400,000 	 0.04 
400,001 or greater 	 0.03 
 
(b)  A plan review and inspection fee for all nonresidential buildings is adopted as follows: 
Building Size 
(in square feet) 	Plan Inspection Fee 
(per square foot) 
100,000 or less 	$0.05 
100,001 or greater 	$0.05, maximum of $20,000.00 
 
(c)  The plan review and inspection fee shall be payable at the time that construction plans are submitted, but shall be exclusive of the building permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, §§ 1—3, 4-11-2005)  
Secs. 8-60—8-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-77. - Exterior walls of metal buildings. 
(a)  All metal buildings erected within any commercial district shall be built with brick, stone, stucco or wood design exterior walls. 
(b)  Metal exteriors will continue to be permitted within agricultural, residential and industrial zoned districts only. 
(c)  Specifically excluded from subsections (a) and (b) of this section are ATM machines, metal roofing materials, metal accent trim, mansards, and metal canopies. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, §§ 1—3, 2-25-2002)  
Sec. 8-78. - Fire resistant materials for exterior walls and roofs of residential structures. 
(a)  Exterior walls facing the lot line and the roof, other than openings such as windows, doors, and vents, of all residential structures constructed within 20 feet of the property line upon which the structure is located in the city shall be composed of materials having a minimum one-hour fire resistant rating, as tested by UL, or other similarly recognized independent testing agency. All roofs shall conform to a class A, or better, if applicable, fire retardant roofing in accordance with UBC standard No. 32-7, section 32.701. 
(b)  This section shall apply to all new construction and modular homes and as well to renovation, remodeling or additions to existing structures, which includes replacement or addition of materials within 20 feet of the side lot line of the property on which such structure is located. 
(c)  All builders, contractors and other persons acting in such capacity, shall produce evidence of compliance with the requirements of this section satisfactory to the city manager or his designee as a condition of approval of said construction and issuance of permits for use and occupancy. 
(d)  All manufactured homes located in mobile home parks shall be exempt from this section. This section shall not apply to setbacks from lot lines directly adjacent to paved streets. 
(e)  Exterior walls facing the lot line, which are fully constructed of brick, will be exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-11, §§ 1—5, 2-10-2003)  
Sec. 8-79. - Supplemental residential requirements for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
(a)  Exterior walls on vinyl sided dwellings. 
(1)  All vinyl siding shall have a minimum thickness specification of 0.042 inches. 
(2)  All vinyl siding installed as wall material less than or equal to 20 feet from a property line, shall comply with the requirements of Ordinance 2003-11 (section 8-78 above). Vinyl siding installed on walls greater than 20 feet from a property line shall have a solid backing of 7/16 inch OSB material or other suitable material approved by the Building Official. 
(3)  All vinyl materials used for siding and trim shall be certified as mold and mildew resistant. 
(4)  Installers of vinyl siding shall be certified by the Vinyl Siding Institute. 
(b)  Foundations. 
(1)  Unfinished foundation work or materials, such as CMU block, shall not be exposed. Vented and unvented foundations may utilize brick, hard coat stucco, or other treatments deemed acceptable by the City of Mt. Juliet, Regional Planning Commission below the finished floor elevation. 
(2)  If "conditioned" crawl spaces are installed they shall be constructed per the International Residential Code as adopted. 
(c)  Heating and cooling systems. No wall or window mounted air conditioning or heating units may be installed or placed in a front or street facing facade (excluding alleys). Such units may be located in a side or rear facade not adjacent to a street. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 1, 4-11-2011)  
Secs. 8-80—8-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 8-100. - Permanent masonry foundations required. 
(a)  All new manufactured homes placed on any property located in the city hereinafter shall be placed on permanent masonry footings and foundations of concrete block, brick, rock or other similar materials approved by the public works department and in conformity with the requirements of the 1999 SBCCI code. 
(b)  Any manufactured home replacing existing manufactured homes on any property in the city hereinafter shall be placed on permanent masonry footing and foundation of concrete block, brick, rock or other similar materials approved by the public works department and in conformity with the requirements of the 1999 SBCCI code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-48, §§ 1, 2, 12-23-2002)  
Sec. 8-101. - Adequately skirted. 
All manufactured homes located in mobile home parks shall be adequately skirted, so as to minimize to the extent possible the impact of wind on any such structure. 
(Ord. No. 2002-48, § 3, 12-23-2002)  
Sec. 8-102. - Treated as mobile home when located in mobile home park. 
Manufactured homes located in mobile home parks shall be treated as mobile homes and shall be exempt from the mandatory requirements of this article, except as provided in section 8-101. 
(Ord. No. 2002-48, § 4, 12-23-2002)  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business licensing, T.C.A. § 67-4-708. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable means and includes the terms "patriotic," "philanthropic," "social service," "health," "welfare," "benevolent," "educational," "civic" "cultural" or "fraternal," either actual or purported. 
Chief means the chief of police. 
Contributions means and includes the terms "alms," "money," "subscription," "property" or any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property. 
Department means the police department. 
Peddler means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale. The term "peddler" includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this article. 
Peddling includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated in the definition of "peddler" in this section. 
Solicitation includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated in the definition of the term "solicitor" in this section. 
Solicitor means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. The term "solicitor" includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private property, to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sells goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-101)  
Sec. 10-20. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(b)  In addition to criminal enforcement, the city or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-119)  
Sec. 10-21. - Bond. 
All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (COD) or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services, or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the department a bond in the amount of $500.00. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-106)  
Sec. 10-22. - Entry upon signed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a peddler or solicitor, to enter upon any residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of similar import. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-113)  
Sec. 10-23. - Hours of solicitation. 
No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-114)  
Secs. 10-24—10-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-50. - Requirements and exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining a permit issued by the chief of police; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made; 
(2)  Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such solicitation; 
(3)  Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable person; or 
(4)  Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the named beneficiary. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-102)  
Sec. 10-51. - Sponsoring juvenile peddlers. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to engage in peddling except on behalf of his school, church or a charitable organization. No permit or license shall be required for minors engaging in such permitted solicitation so long as they are supervised by an adult. 
(b)  A permit shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct of any peddling or solicitation activities involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one or more persons under 18 years of age. 
(c)  The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons, including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's permit. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-103)  
Sec. 10-52. - Application. 
Every person subject to the provisions of this article shall file with the city an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's driver's license, articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of identification; 
(2)  A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted; 
(3)  The hours and location for which the right to peddle or solicit is desired; 
(4)  If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be; 
(5)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent details thereof; 
(6)  Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this article; and 
(7)  A copy of the driver's license of the applicant. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-104)  
Sec. 10-53. - Fees. 
At the time the application is filed with the department, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. The permit fee shall be $50.00 for each solicitor or peddler for each 14-day period of solicitation. See T.C.A. §§ 67-4-709 and 67-4-719. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-105)  
Sec. 10-54. - Review and permit issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the city shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  If the city finds the application to be satisfactory, it shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required permit to the applicant. 
(c)  The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the permit shall be in effect. The permit shall also show the permit number and identifying description of any vehicle to be used in carrying on the business for which the permit is issued. 
(d)  A record of all permits issued shall be maintained by the city for a period of two years. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-107)  
Sec. 10-55. - Denial. 
(a)  Upon the review of the application, the city may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers or their customers; 
(2)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property, such conviction being entered within the five years preceding the date of application; 
(4)  The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(5)  There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent to the principal; or 
(6)  The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the city that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
(b)  The city's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known address. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-108)  
Sec. 10-56. - Expiration. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-109)  
Sec. 10-57. - Exhibited upon request. 
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer or department employee. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-111)  
Sec. 10-58. - Transferability. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use any permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-112)  
Sec. 10-59. - Revocation. 
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities; 
(3)  Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit; 
(4)  Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-115)  
Sec. 10-60. - Notice and hearing. 
Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application or at the last known address of the permittee. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-116)  
Sec. 10-61. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the chief of police to deny, suspend or revoke a permit applied for under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city manager within 15 days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the permit application form, or to his last known address. 
(b)  An appeal shall be taken by filing with the chief a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The chief shall transmit the written statement to the city manager within ten days of its receipt and the city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. 
(d)  A hearing shall be set not later than 20 days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written statement. 
(e)  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of action or decision. 
(f)  The decision of the city manager on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-117)  
Sec. 10-62. - Claims of exemption. 
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this article, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the chief of police the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the chief proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(Code 1997, § 5-2-118)  
Secs. 10-63—10-82. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions pertaining to aggressive solicitation appear in article V of chapter 16 of this Code. 
 
Secs. 10-83—10-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SECONDHAND JEWELRY, ETC. 
 
Sec. 10-116. - Records required. 
It shall be the duty of all persons dealing in the purchase, sale, or exchange of secondhand or antique jewelry, gold coins, watches, diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, old gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals, or any other secondhand manufactured articles, composed wholly or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals, to keep a book in which every article received by them in the course of their business shall be registered, and in which shall be given as minute a description of every article as possible, including the maker's name and number of every article so received by them. The name, age, sex color, residence, driver's license number, and general description of every individual selling or exchanging such articles shall be taken and entered in the register. The register shall at all times be kept at the place of business of every person engaging in the business. Members of the city police department shall be allowed free access to the register and the person shall give to such officers all information in his possession concerning such articles and all persons selling or exchanging the same. 
(Code 1997, § 5-4-101; Ord. No. 81-3, § 1, 1-19-1981)  
Sec. 10-117. - Retention of articles. 
All persons engaging in the business as described herein shall retain any article received in the same state or condition in which it was received, and shall not commingle it with other articles separately received, and shall make it available for examination by members of the police department, for a period of 15 days before a resale or exchange, unless written permission is obtained from the chief of police to dispose of the articles. 
(Code 1997, § 5-4-102; Ord. No. 81-3, § 1, 1-19-1981)  
Sec. 10-118. - Daily reports; transient businesses. 
All persons engaging in business as described herein shall furnish to the chief of police daily reports at his office, showing fully the name, age, sex, color, residence, driver's license number, and general description of each person who shall have sold or exchanged any article during the preceding day, together with a full description of the articles sold or exchanged by such person, including the number of each article bearing a number, and the day and hour of the transaction. Every person engaging in such business shall keep duplicates of such reports in a well-bound book or register, which book or register shall at all times be subject to the inspection of the members of the police department. Any person intending to engage in the business as described herein who will not operate that business at an established and permanent location shall give the chief of police at least 72 hours' prior notice of the location and date and hours of the operation of such business. 
(Code 1997, § 5-4-103; Ord. No. 81-3, § 3, 1-19-1981)  
Secs. 10-119—10-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CABLE TELEVISION 
 
Sec. 10-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic cable service means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, or as may be further defined by the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 541 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended or replaced. 
Cable system means the collection of fiber optic strands, coaxial cables, copper wire or other physical links placed on the public rights-of-way to carry electromagnetic or optical signals and the devices connected to them. 
Cable television service means operation of a cable system distributing video signals and communication services related to the video signals to the general public. 
Cable television system means a facility utilized to distribute video signals over a cable system for sale to the general public and all related facilities utilized to provide communication services related to the video signals. Excluded from the definition are components of the cable system utilized to provide communication services not related to the video signals sold to the general public. 
Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic or optical frequency spectrum used to carry one broadcast signal. 
City commission means the commission of the City of Mt. Juliet, State of Tennessee. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Franchise means the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this article and a franchise agreement to utilize the public rights-of-way to place, utilize and maintain a cable system within the city. A franchise shall not include any general license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws. 
Franchise agreement means a contract entered into between the city and a grantee authorizing the grantee to utilize the public right-of-way. 
Grantee means a legal entity to whom the city commission grants a franchise under this article and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the grantee. 
Gross revenues means all revenue received by the grantee and its subsidiaries or parents, from the operation of the cable system in the city. The term "gross revenues" includes both television revenues and nontelevision revenues. The term "gross revenues" includes all sources of income or earnings that directly depend on the cable system. The term "gross revenues" includes all income received by related business for utilization of the cable system or for signals transmitted over the cable system. The term "gross receipts" includes charges for use of the cable system to transmit data for a fee. 
Nontelevision revenues means all revenues received by the grantee and its subsidiaries or parents, from the operation of the cable system in the city for other communication services to the extent not prohibited by state or federal law. 
Other communication services means any use of the cable system for purposes not related to cable television service. 
Public way means streets, easements, paths and rights-of-way of any kind over which the city has the right of passage with a cable. 
Residential subscriber means a subscriber who receives cable television service in a single-family home or in an individual dwelling unit of a multiple dwelling. 
Service area means the geographical area within the city and within which the grantee is authorized to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any publicly owned or maintained property or right-of-way, street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, now or hereafter existing within the city. 
Subscriber means any person or entity lawfully receiving any portion of the cable television service of a grantee pursuant to this article. 
Television revenues means all income from the sale of video signals to the general public including basic service, premium channels, pay-per-view, advertising sales, receipts for use of commercial and home shopping channels, installation and reconnection fees, and converter and other equipment rentals and income from the sale of television time, television products or television services are included. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-102)  
Sec. 10-151. - CATV committee. 
(a)  The city commission hereby establishes a CATV committee composed of five members appointed by the mayor and approved by the commissioners. 
(b)  Each member of the CATV committee shall serve a term of five years. Members shall be appointed for initial terms to stagger the expiration of their terms so that one term expires annually. 
(c)  The CATV committee shall regulate access to PEG channels and advise the city commission concerning cable TV and telecommunications. 
(d)  All meetings of the CATV committee shall be open to the public. Meetings shall be televised on a PEG channel when possible. If a meeting is televised then no advance public notice shall be required, but advance public notice is suggested when possible. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-103)  
Sec. 10-152. - Franchise. 
(a)  Required. No person shall construct, operate or maintain a cable television system in the city without a franchise agreement issued by the city. 
(b)  Service area. The service area for each franchise shall be the entire city or such lesser portion of the city as is designated in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Telephones. Cable companies are urged to provide telephone service over the cable television system as soon as it is both legal and practical. Grantees shall make no anticompetitive arrangements with telephone companies. Grantees shall allow other utilities to use its poles under the same conditions which those utilities impose on the grantee. 
(d)  Franchise agreement. 
(1)  Required. No entity, except the city, may utilize public rights-of-way to construct, operate or maintain a cable system without a franchise agreement from the city or a certificate of authority from the state public service commission. All franchises shall contain substantially similar terms. 
(2)  Effective date. No franchise agreement shall become effective until approved by the city commission by ordinance and executed by the mayor and by the grantee. Within 30 working days after final passage of the ordinance authorizing execution of the franchise agreement the grantee shall execute the franchise agreement and file with the city recorder an insurance certificate. Each franchisee shall agree to comply with the provisions of this article and other applicable law. 
(3)  Franchise term. The duration of a new franchise agreement shall not exceed 15 years. The duration of a renewed franchise shall not exceed ten years. 
(4)  Franchise revocation. 
a.  Grounds for revocation. Subject to the provisions of this section, the city reserves the right to revoke, at any time, any franchise and rescind all rights and privileges if the grantee: 
1.  Has not substantially complied with a material provision of this article, the franchise agreement, or of any supplemental written agreement entered into by and between the city and the grantee; 
2.  Has made a material false statement in the application for the franchise, knowing it to be false, or the grantee commits a fraud in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city; 
3.  Becomes insolvent, enters into receivership or liquidation, files for bankruptcy or assignment for benefit of creditors, or is unable to pay its debts as they mature, unless the grantee is in due process of contesting such debts; 
4.  Knowingly fails to substantially comply with a material provision of any state or federal law or regulation; 
5.  Exhibits a pattern of failing to substantially comply with service standards of the FCC; 
6.  Fails to comply with any final federal or state judgment arising directly from the exercise of the grantee's rights under its franchise; or 
7.  Assigns, sells or transfers its title or interest in its franchise without the consent of the city commission. 
b.  Revocation procedure. If the city makes a preliminary decision to revoke a franchise, it shall give the grantee a minimum of 60 days' written notice of its intention to terminate and state the cause. The city shall schedule a public hearing at the end of the period. If during the period, the grantee cures the default the city shall declare the notice null and void. Before the city terminates a franchise it must provide the grantee an opportunity to be heard. The city commission shall hear the proof of the grantee in a public hearing concerning why the city should not revoke the charter. This meeting shall be televised. After the public hearing, if the city commission, by majority vote, determines that the franchise should be terminated, it shall issue a written decision containing its findings of fact and stating the specific grounds for termination. The decision to terminate a franchise shall be subject to judicial review. 
c.  Limitations on revocation. A grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case where the city commission determines that the action justifying such sanction is without the grantee's knowledge or authorization or outside its control. 
(5)  Franchise authority. A grantee is authorized to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system, and to engage in the business of providing cable service in the city. The grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and maintain such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable system. Before cutting any street or erecting any pole within 15 feet of the pavement the grantee shall furnish plans and obtain permission from the public works director of the city. 
(6)  Fees. 
a.  Application. Each applicant for a new franchise shall pay an application fee to the city of $2,500.00 which sum shall become due and payable to the city upon submission to the city of an application for a franchise or as soon thereafter as demanded by the city manager of the city. The application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
b.  Annual franchise. For use of public rights-of-way and administration of the franchise each grantee shall pay franchise fees as follows: 
1.  For television revenues. The maximum franchise fee allowed by state and federal law which at the current time is five percent of gross revenue. 
2.  For nontelevision revenues. From all nontelevision revenue the grantee shall pay a franchise fee equal to the same percentage rate as the franchise fee on television revenues unless the following conditions exist: 
(i)  The income stream is derived from an endeavor in which the grantee is in direct competition with another company providing similar services and the competing company does not pay a similar franchise fee; or 
(ii)  The rates of the grantee on the nontelevision revenue are set by the state public service commission. 
Upon request the grantee shall disclose all nontelevision revenue and explain why no franchise fee is due. 
3.  Time of payment. Each grantee shall pay the franchise fee quarterly not later than 60 days after the last day of each calendar quarter. 
4.  Franchise fees. The fee shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or may be required hereafter to be paid pursuant to any federal, state, or local law. The franchise fee shall not be in lieu of any other general tax, fee or assessment. Any federal, state or local taxes, fees or imposed charges collected by the grantee shall not be considered part of the revenue upon which franchise fees are based. 
c.  Financial reports. Grantees shall annually furnish to the city recorder a financial statement showing the gross receipts of the cable system. The statement shall break the gross into categories for each tier of channels, advertising, equipment rental, bandwidth or cable rental and such other categories as may be required to assess the accuracy of the statement. The grantee shall furnish the statement not later than four months after the end of its fiscal year. The statement shall be signed under oath by the chief executive officer, the chief financial officer and the manager of the system. The oath shall state: 
"The undersigned individuals certify that this statement accurately reflects the gross earnings of the franchise located in Mt. Juliet. The gross earnings includes all money received by any parent or subsidiary for use of the cable system in any manner, including advertising sales and fees for cable rental or data transmission. No source of revenue for any related entity has been excluded. We realize that we have been duly sworn and make this representation under penalties of perjury. We realize that perjury is a Class A misdemeanor and that aggravated perjury is a Class D felony." 
The city may require that the financial statement be audited. 
d.  Audit. The grantee shall authorize the city to inspect the grantee's contracts and records dealing with gross revenue and to have the books and records audited. If any audit discloses an error of more than five percent the franchisee shall pay the expense of the audit and shall not pass the expense through to city customers. If the audit discloses no error or an error of less than five percent the city shall pay the cost of the audit. 
(7)  Liability and indemnification. All franchise agreements shall require the grantee to indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, committees, commissions, and employees against any and all actions, liability, judgments, claims or demands arising out of the installation or operation or maintenance of the cable television system, including all costs of defense. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-104)  
Sec. 10-153. - Transfer of system. 
(a)  Approval required. No transfer of control of the cable television system shall occur without prior approval by the city commission, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Conditions. No transfer may occur without full compliance with the material terms of the franchise and this article. The transferee shall agree in writing to comply with all provisions of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Commission approval. If the city commission does not disapprove a proposed transfer of control within 90 days from the date the notice is received by the city recorder the parties to the transfer shall assume the transfer is approved. 
(d)  Control. The term "control" is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttal presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of affiliated persons of 25 percent of the voting shares of the grantee. 
(e)  Mortgage of system. The grantee shall not be required to notify the city of a mortgage or hypothecation of the cable system to secure a commercial loan to an independent licensed financial institution, but any documents granting a security interest in the cable system shall include as exhibits this article and the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Foreclosure. No secured creditor shall foreclose or sell any part of the cable system without prior notice to the city. If the grantee or any secured creditor desires to sell the franchise assets they shall notify the city of the price of any proposed transfer. The city may purchase the assets for the same price and on the same terms at any time within 30 days of the notice and neither the grantee nor the representative of a creditor may transfer the franchise or its assets to others for less than the notice price. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-105)  
Sec. 10-154. - Streets and easements. 
(a)  Relocation of wires. Upon notice by the city, the grantee shall, at its expense, temporarily remove or relocate its cables and equipment from limited areas of public ways to facilitate public works or inconsistent use of the area by others. In emergencies or to speed public works the city may move wires at the expense of the grantee. If wires over a street are 16 feet or more in height and are removed or relocated at the request of another citizen, that person shall pay the cost. 
(b)  Underground conduits. Prior to building underground conduits the grantee shall furnish to the city plans and projected costs. The city may require the grantee to increase the size or number of conduits, at the city's expense, to carry other utilities or cables. The portion of such conduits financed with city funds shall belong to the city. 
(c)  Repair of streets. If the grantee disturbs any street or other property it shall repair the damage to the satisfaction of the public works director. The grantee shall contract, maintain and operate the cable television system so as to cause minimum inconvenience to the general public. All excavations shall be properly guarded, marked and protected. All excavations shall be filled and the surface restored promptly after completion of the work. The grantee shall at all times comply with all excavation ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Use of the public ways. 
(1)  The city may install and maintain free of charge upon the poles or in the conduits of a grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for municipal networks such as police, fire, public works and utilities, on the condition that such installations and maintenance shall not interfere with the operations of the grantee. 
(2)  The grantee shall minimize its use of the public ways to accomplish its tasks with the minimum impact on others who desire to use the public ways. 
(3)  The grantee shall place its wires on poles in such a manner as to maximize the use of the same poles by others. 
(4)  All grantees shall to the maximum extent possible share poles, conduits and other devices on the public ways to minimize the number of structures on the public ways. 
(5)  The grantee shall remove all of its structures, wires and devices from the public ways within 12 months of the termination or abandonment of its franchise unless the city at that time permits it to abandon the devices in place. The city may charge a grantee for the cost of removal of wires and devices from the public ways. 
(e)  Underground wiring. Trunk and distribution lines, including service drops to subscribers, shall be made underground in areas where both telephone and power lines are underground. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-106)  
Sec. 10-155. - Public, educational and governmental (PEG) usage. 
(a)  Service to government buildings. The grantee shall provide without charge one service outlet to all public education institutions and governmental buildings within the service area. The institution shall receive the grantee's basic cable service, all news channels and all public, educational and governmental channels. The recipient shall bear the cost of all internal wiring. The grantee shall install and maintain at city hall, Mt. Juliet High School, and the proposed community center a two-way feed to provide the capability of receiving and originating programming to the PEG channels. The grantee shall provide and maintain the modulators, processors, recorders and equipment to accomplish the insertion and retransmission of programming on the PEG channels. 
(b)  Emergency broadcast system. The grantee shall provide, without charge and subject to the rules and regulations of the FCC, public emergency broadcast capabilities whereby the city can interrupt service and/or insert announcements on all channels in order to make such public emergency communications as it deems necessary. 
(c)  PEG channels. When the cable system has a 52-channel capacity, the grantee shall reserve a minimum of two channels for public, educational governmental access use. Systems with a smaller capacity shall provide one such channel. Such channels shall be subject to the exclusive control of the city; however, with prior approval of the city, such channels may be used by the grantee for other purposes when not required by PEG users. The grantee shall make available to users, subject to advance scheduling and during the grantee's normal business hours, its equipment at no charge. The city or its designee shall regulate and schedule the use of PEG channels. PEG channels shall not be used to advertise the sale of services or products or events for commercial or for-profit entities. PEG channels may be used to advertise events held by nonprofit entities and for sale of services or products by governmental or charitable organizations. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-107)  
Sec. 10-156. - Quality standards. 
(a)  Construction. 
(1)  The grantee shall maintain the cable system in a manner consistent with all laws, construction standards and governmental requirements including those set out in 47 CFR 76.601 et seq., the FCC standards. 
(2)  Grantees shall install hardware so as to cause minimum interference with other users of streets, utility poles and public property. Underground street crossings shall normally be done by tunneling or boring. Ditches and other street cuts shall be restored to a condition satisfactory to the public works director. 
(3)  Grantees shall have an electric generator at the head end to avoid power outages which cause an interruption in service. The grantee shall test the system monthly. 
(4)  Grantees shall furnish to the city public works director maps and plans of its entire system. The plans and maps shall be of the best quality of the maps and plans in the possession of the grantee. 
(b)  Operation. 
(1)  Complaint and maintenance log. Subject to the privacy provisions of section 631 of the Cable Act, the grantee shall keep a maintenance service log indicating the nature of each service complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of the complaint and the date and time of the disposition. The log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the city manger or his designee. The grantee shall provide monthly maintenance summaries to the city manager on demand. 
(2)  Inspection. The city may inspect the grantee's system to ensure compliance with the terms of the ordinance. At the city's own expense, the city or its designees may perform measurements upon and randomly inspect any portion of a grantee's system to ensure compliance with minimum technical standards under which the grantee is required to operate. If the tests disclose a violation of the required technical standards the grantee shall pay the cost of the tests and shall eliminate the defects. 
(3)  Filings with regulatory agencies. The grantee shall furnish copies of all petitions, applications and forms, relative to the franchise transmitted by the grantee to the FCC. 
(c)  Emergencies. The grantee shall assist the city manager or chief of police to use the grantee's system, at no cost, to broadcast emergency messages. 
(d)  Channels. Within three years after the effective date of a franchise agreement or renewal, the cable television system shall have a capacity which permits at least 54 channels. Within 12 months all customers shall receive similar service to all other customers within the system. 
(e)  Right to maintain antenna. The grantee shall not condition service to a subscriber by removing or disconnecting an antenna. The grantee may not disconnect an antenna without permission of the owner. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-108)  
Sec. 10-157. - Rates and charges. 
The grantee shall file with the city schedules which shall describe all services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. The city commission reserves the right and authority to regulate the grantee's rates and charges to the extent allowed by law. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-109)  
Sec. 10-158. - Amendments. 
This article may be amended from time to time. The provisions of any amendment shall be deemed to be a part of any franchise agreement from and after the legal date of the amendment. The city shall give all franchisees advance notice of any amendment and an opportunity to be heard. The city shall hold a public hearing prior to the final reading of any amendment. 
(Code 1997, § 5-5-110)  
Secs. 10-159—10-184. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2012, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 10-185—10-194, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1997, §§ 5-6-101—5-6-110; Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted June 10, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-26, §§ 5-6-101—5-6-110, adopted Aug. 26, 2002. 
 
Sec. 10-185. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved means acceptable to the code official or authority having jurisdiction. 
DOT Class C common fireworks means all articles of fireworks as are now or hereafter classified as DOT Class C common fireworks in the regulations of the United States Department of Transportation. 
Permit means the written authority of the city codes director issued under the authority of this article. 
Retailer means any person engaged in the business of making retail sales of fireworks. 
Sale means an exchange of articles of fireworks for money and also includes barter, exchange, gift, or offer thereof and each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, salesperson, agent, association, co partnership, or one or more individuals. 
State fire marshal permit means the appropriate fireworks permit issued by the state fire marshal under the authority of T.C.A. § 68-104-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-186. - Penalty for violations. 
All individuals that violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.00 plus costs. Each rule violation or transaction shall be considered a separate violation. Employers of fireworks vendors and permit holders shall also be guilty for violations by persons in their employment and persons under their supervision. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-187. - Permits; fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, ship, or cause to be shipped, into the city any item of fireworks without first having secured a state fire marshal permit, and a permit issued by the city, which permit shall not issue without the applicants first providing satisfactory proof of obtaining a sales tax number for each location at which fireworks sales will be had and they will provide proof that annual sales tax returns have been filed for each location located inside the city within 15 days of filing sales tax returns. 
(b)  Permits are not transferable. 
(c)  A permit shall be valid only from June 20 through July 5 or December 10 through January 2, unless you have a permanent building that meets zoning regulations for retail sales, and then an annual permit may be used for both the above dates. 
(d)  The city shall charge a fee of $1.00 per square foot, minimum of $1,200.00 for any temporary tent or structure for the issuance of each semiannual permit provided for in this section. 
(e)  Application for a permit to sell fireworks in the city shall be submitted to the codes director no later than five working days prior to the date on which the applicant desires to begin making sales. 
(f)  An application must be filed for each location and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant. The applicant must be the natural person who will be responsible for sales. The applicant's name or company name shall also be the same as the name on the state fire marshal permit. Names of all partners or persons sharing more than ten percent of the profit shall be disclosed on the application. The applicant shall be liable for all violations of this article by persons under their supervision. 
(2)  A copy of the state fire marshal permit. 
(3)  Evidence that general liability insurance has been obtained by applicant naming the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee as additional insured for at least $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence, whether in respect to bodily injury liability or property damage liability or bodily injury and property damage liability combined. 
(4)  The location where the applicant will conduct the business of selling fireworks. 
(5)  Cleanup deposits of $500.00 per location shall be paid by applicant, which shall be refunded after the fireworks season inspection, or used by the city to clean up the retail fireworks site, if needed. 
(6)  A copy of the tent flame retardant letter on all tents must be provided. 
(7)  Evidence of working fire extinguishers, which must be easily accessible and in plain view. Tents exceeding 30 feet by 40 feet (1,200 square feet) must have a minimum of two extinguishers on site. 
(8)  Site plan including: 
a.  Dimension of the lot; 
b.  Dimension and location of tent; 
c.  Location of adjacent structures; 
d.  Location of parking and number of spaces provided. 
(9)  Assurance of a 20-foot setback from extreme outer edge of the lane of travel to the tent or signage. To be measured from the edge of the tent side or overhang of the top, not to include ropes, tie-downs or other appendages used to secure tents. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-188. - Permit revocation. 
The code official shall be authorized to revoke any permit upon failure to correct any of the following conditions within 24 hours after notification: 
(1)  In the event that the permittee or the permittee's operator violates any lawful rule, regulation, or order of the codes director of the city. 
(2)  In the event that the permittee's application contains any false or untrue statements. 
(3)  In the event the permittee fails to timely file and/or pay any report, tax, fee, fine or charge. 
(4)  In the event the permittee or the permittee's operator violates this article or statute. 
(5)  In the event the permittee or the permittee's operator incurs multiple city or state offenses, the city may not grant approval for said company to operate at any location within the corporate city limits and possibly withhold approval not to exceed two years from fireworks' season in which violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-189. - Permissible fireworks. 
It is unlawful for any individual to possess, sell, or use within the city, or ship into the city, except as provided in this article, any pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks other than the following permissible items: 
(1)  Those items now or hereafter classified as DOT Class C common fireworks; or 
(2)  Those items that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and permitted for use by the general public under its regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-190. - Sale of fireworks. 
Fireworks and related legal accessories may be sold within the city only from June 20 through July 5 and December 10 through January 2. All signs must comply with Article 11, Sign Regulations, of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-191. - Unlawful sale and use of fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to children under the age of 18 years. 
Advisory signs shall be posted in plain view regarding minimum age to purchase fireworks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to any intoxicated or seemingly irresponsible person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks within 600 feet of any church, hospital, funeral home, public or private school, or within 200 feet of where fireworks are stored, sold, or offered for sale. No person shall ignite or discharge any permissible articles of fireworks within or throw the same from a motor vehicle while within, nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle, or at or near any person or group of persons. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a user of fireworks to ignite fireworks on another person's private property unless permission is obtained from the owner or occupant of the property. Fireworks shall not be launched or fired onto the property of persons who have not given permission. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for fireworks to be used at times, places, or in any manner, which adversely affect other persons. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-192. - Storing, locating, and structures. 
No person shall smoke within 50 feet of an area where fireworks are sold. No person selling fireworks shall permit the presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes, or pipes within 50 feet of where fireworks are offered for sale. At all places where fireworks are stored or sold, there must be posted signs with the words "Fireworks—No Smoking" in letters not less than four inches high. A workable fire extinguisher must be present at each retail fireworks site. Fireworks sold at retail shall only be sold from an approved structure only selling fireworks and accessories for use of fireworks, and shall be no closer than 40 feet to any other structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-193. - Limitations on structures. 
Approved permanent structures or tents may be used for the retail sale of fireworks. As a minimum, two unobstructed exits, consistent with local Fire Codes, shall be provided and maintained at all times during operations. Fireworks may not be stored in a permanent building unless the building is constructed of nonflammable materials such as metal or concrete block. Tents shall be separated by 50 feet. Tents may not exceed 1,600 maximum square feet in size east of South Greenhill Road on Lebanon Road and throughout the city where fireworks are sold. Tents sizes up to 4,000 square feet may be erected west of South Greenhill Road to the county line on Lebanon Road. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Sec. 10-194. - Parking for retail fireworks sales site. 
The site for a temporary fireworks retailer shall be improved to provide off-street customer parking as follows: one customer parking space per 100 square feet of tent area, with a minimum of 12 spaces, in addition to employee parking. In addition, the retail fireworks site must provide for an on-site turnaround area so that backing of vehicles onto the street will not be necessary. The site for a permanent fireworks retail sales facility shall conform to the Mt. Juliet Zoning Ordinance pertaining to all parking regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 1-23-2012)  
Secs. 10-195—10-211. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, films, videocassettes, magazines, computer software, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means an establishment which features as a principal use of its business, entertainers and/or bartenders who expose to the public view of the patrons within said establishment, at any time, the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by opaque material or completely covered by translucent material, including swimsuits, lingerie, or latex covering. The term "adult cabaret" shall include commercial establishments which feature entertainment of an erotic nature including exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
Adult entertainment means any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance, any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities of exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal service offered customers. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material having as a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. 
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment on a fulltime, parttime, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Entertainer means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an employee, escort or an independent contractor. 
Escort means a person who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, salary or tip, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with, accompanies, or offers to date, socialize, visit, consort or accompany to social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters of a place of public resort. The following are types of escorts: 
(1)  The term "service-oriented escort" means an escort which: 
a.  Operates from an open office; 
b.  Does not employ or use an escort runner; 
c.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
d.  Does not offer or provide sexual conduct. 
(2)  The term "sexually-oriented escort" means an escort which: 
a.  Employs as an employee, agent, or independent contractor an escort bureau runner; 
b.  Works for, as an agent, employee, contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually-oriented escort bureau; 
c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for, as an employee, agent or independent contractor or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; 
d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau; 
e.  Works as an escort without having a current valid permit issued under this article, in his possession at all times while working as an escort; or 
f.  Accepts a fee from a patron who has not first been delivered a contract. 
Escort service means a person as that term is defined in this section, who, for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. The following are types of escort services: 
(1)  The term "service-oriented escort bureau" means an escort bureau which: 
a.  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; 
b.  Employs or provides only escorts which possess valid permits issued under this article; 
c.  Does not use an escort bureau runner; and 
d.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron. 
(2)  The term "sexually-oriented escort bureau" means an escort bureau which: 
a.  Does not maintain an open office; 
b.  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, uses an escort bureau runner; 
c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron; 
d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; 
e.  Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts who do not possess valid permits issued under this article; 
f.  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or 
g.  Employs, contracts with a sexually-oriented escort or refers or provides to a patron, a sexually-oriented escort. 
Massage parlor means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing massage or tanning services where one or more of the employees exposes to public view of the patrons within said establishment, at any time, the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by opaque material or completely covered by translucent material. 
Open office means an office at the escort service from which the escort business is transacted and which is open to patrons or prospective patrons during all hours during which escorts are working, which is managed or operated by an employee, officer, director or owner of the escort service having authority to bind the service to escort and patron contacts and adjust patron and consumer complaints. 
Operator means any person, partnership, or corporation operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment. 
Rap parlor means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar service for adults. 
Sauna means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing: 
(1)  A steam bath; or 
(2)  Massage services. 
Sexual conduct means the engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttock or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Physical contact between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons exposes to view of the persons within said establishment, at any time, the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially covered by opaque material or completely covered by translucent material. 
Sexual gratification means sexual conduct as that term is defined in this section. 
Sexual stimulation means to excite or arouse the prurient interest or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct as that term is defined in this section. 
Sexually-oriented businesses includes, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult minimotion picture establishments, adult cabarets, escort agencies, sexual encounter centers, massage parlors, rap parlors, saunas, and further means any premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. The term "sexually-oriented establishment" further includes, without being limited to, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, model studio, escort service, escort or any other term of like import. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals; 
b.  Pubic region; 
c.  Buttocks; 
d.  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal acts means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, indecent exposure, distribution of obscenity, distribution of obscenity or harmful material to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations. 
Specified services means massage services, private dances, private modeling, acting as an escort as that term is defined in this section, and any other live adult entertainment as that term is defined in this section. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-102)  
Sec. 10-213. - Violations. 
(a)  In order to effectuate the provisions of this article, the board of commissioners, its authorized representative or police department is empowered to conduct investigations of persons engaged in the operation of any sexually-oriented establishment and inspect the business license of the operators and establishment for compliance. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall commit an offense against the city, and upon conviction shall be fined under appropriate state law, or shall be fined for a conviction within the city court, with a fine of up to $500.00 for each violation for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application; 
(2)  The operator or entertainer, or any employee of the operator, violates any provision of this article; 
(3)  Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid; 
(4)  Any intoxicating liquor or malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the sexually-oriented business; 
(5)  Any operator, employee or entertainer sells, furnishes, gives or displays, or causes to be sold, furnished, given or displayed to any minor any adult-oriented entertainment or adult-oriented material while on the premises of the sexually-oriented business; 
(6)  Any operator, employee or entertainer denies access of law enforcement personnel to any portion of the licensed premises wherein sexually-oriented entertainment is permitted or to any portion of the licensed premises wherein sexually-oriented material is displayed or sold; 
(7)  Any operator fails to maintain the premises of the sexually-oriented business in a clean, sanitary and safe condition; 
(8)  Any operator, employee or entertainer is convicted of a specified criminal act, as defined in section 10-212; provided that such violation occurred on the premises of the sexually-oriented business; 
(9)  An operator employs an employee who has not filed an annual report, or provides space on the premises, whether by lease or otherwise, to an independent contractor who performs or works as an entertainer and has not filed an annual report. 
(c)  Upon a second or subsequent violation of any part of this article, any real property found to be in violation of the requirements stated in this article shall be deemed a nuisance and will also be subject to an order of closure, and/or cease and desist, by chancery court action seeking injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this law, provided, that such second or subsequent violation occurs after a conviction has been obtained for the previous such violation. 
(d)  Each violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-110)  
Sec. 10-214. - Sexual activity. 
No person who maintains, owns or operates a sexually-oriented business shall permit specified sexual activities to occur on the premises. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-103)  
Sec. 10-215. - Zoning. 
No sexually-oriented business may begin to operate except within the confines of a heavy industrial (I-2) zoning district as defined under the zoning laws of the city. This zoning has been chosen because it is devoid of homes and children and would provide minimum conflict between such uses and the general public. No such business shall operate within 400 feet of a school even in a heavy industrial zone. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-104)  
Sec. 10-216. - Open booth regulations. 
(a)  Prohibited. The following structures for high-risk sexual activity are prohibited: 
(1)  No sexually-oriented business shall be operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of a residentially zoned district, the property line of a lot devoted to residential use, a church, a state-licensed day care facility, public library, or private/public education facility which serves persons ages 17 years or younger, an elementary school, a high school, funeral parlor/home, a public park, or another sexually-oriented business as defined herein. To determine the distance requirements under this section, said distance limitation shall be measured in a straight line from and to the nearest lot lines of the premises for the sexually-oriented business and the lot lines of the areas set forth in this subsection. 
(2)  No building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any sexually-oriented business shall contain any other kind of sexually-oriented business. 
(3)  No commercial building, structure, premises or subdivision, partition, portion or part thereof or facilities therein shall be so constructed, used, or operated for the purpose of sexual activities, in which facilities high-risk sexual conduct takes place. No commercial building, structure, premises or subdivision, partition, or portion shall be designed for or used to promote high-risk sexual conduct. 
(b)  Minimum standards. No person shall occupy any commercial building, structure, premises, or portion or part thereof which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  For the prevention of the spread of sexually transmitted disease, no partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or premises may have an aperture which is designed or otherwise constructed to encourage sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition. 
(2)  No booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms, used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms used shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment. 
(c)  Construction. No commercial building, structure or premises shall be so constructed that private rooms or accommodations can be offered to patrons of that business operated therein if: 
(1)  The building, structure or premises is in violation of subsection (b) of this section; and 
(2)  The building structure or premises is not a validly operating hotel, motel, apartment complex or condominium. 
(d)  Booths, rooms or cubicles. Any sexually-oriented business having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the sexually-oriented business, and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2)  Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
d.  The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(e)  Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(f)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(g)  The operator shall maintain at least ten footcandles of light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles; provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-105)  
Sec. 10-217. - Records. 
(a)  Any person operating or desiring to operate a sexually-oriented business shall file a report with the city treasurer no later than November 1 of each year. The report shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city treasurer. A copy of the report shall be distributed promptly by the city treasurer to the city police department and to the operator. The report shall be upon a form provided by the city treasurer. An operator shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1)  Name and address, including all aliases; 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(3)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
(4)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(5)  The sexually-oriented business or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other county, city or state under license, has had any business or sexually-oriented business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subject to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(6)  All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or city ordinance violations, for which conviction, forfeiture of bond or pleadings of nolo contendere have occurred, except minor traffic violations; 
(7)  The address of the sexually-oriented business to be operated by the applicant; 
(8)  If the premises are leased or being purchased under contract, a copy of such lease or contract shall accompany the report; 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name, address, and telephone number of the corporation, the date and the state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process of the corporation, and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation, and the names and addresses of any persons holding 50 percent or more of the stock of the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, the application shall specify the name and address of the partnership, the name and address of all general partners of the partnership; if the partnership is a limited partnership, the application shall specify the name and address of all general partners who have a controlling interest in the partnership; 
(10)  A statement by the operator that the applicant is familiar with the provisions of this legislation and is in compliance with them; 
(11)  If the applicant is an individual, he shall be at least 18 years of age; 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under subsection (a)(9) of this section shall be at least 18 years of age; 
(13)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest, all persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(b)  Any person desiring to be an entertainer, employee, or escort in a sexually-oriented business shall file a report with the city treasurer no later than November 1 each year. The report shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city treasurer. A copy of the report shall be distributed promptly by the city treasurer to the city police department and to the operator. The report shall be upon a form provided by the city treasurer. An applicant shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1)  Name and address, including all aliases; 
(2)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(3)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
(4)  The adult-oriented establishment or similar business history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or other city or state under permit, has had such any sexually-oriented business permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subject to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(5)  All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or city ordinance violation for which a conviction, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere have occurred, except minor traffic violations; 
(6)  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches of the applicant; 
(7)  A statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with the provisions of this article and is in compliance with them; 
(8)  The applicant shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  No person shall be an entertainer, employee or escort in a sexually-oriented business without first filing an annual report to the city treasurer as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee, escort or operator to knowingly work in or about or to knowingly perform any service directly related to or at the request of the operation of any sexually-oriented business or escort service that has not filed an annual report as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  All existing sexually-oriented businesses at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived must submit an annual report within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Any further delay will be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-106)  
Sec. 10-218. - Prohibited hours of operation; hours open for inspection. 
(a)  No sexually-oriented business shall be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  All sexually-oriented businesses shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by the city police department or such other persons as the city may designate. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-107)  
Sec. 10-219. - Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers and employees. 
(a)  The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name, the aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date, sex, weight, color of hair and eye, telephone number, social security number, driver's license number, date of employment and termination, and duties of each employee. The information required by this subsection of each employee shall be maintained in the register of the premises for a period of three years following termination. 
(b)  The operator shall make the register of the employees available immediately for inspection by the city commission, its authorized representative and/or the police department upon demand at all reasonable times. 
(c)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(d)  An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the premises of the sexually-oriented business and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator. 
(e)  There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common areas of each sexually-oriented business a list of any and all entertainment provided on the premises. Viewing adult-oriented motion pictures shall be considered as entertainment. The operator shall make the list available immediately upon demand of the city commission, its authorized representative and/or the police department at all reasonable times. 
(f)  No employee of a sexually-oriented business shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent a sexually-oriented business or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment as herein defined. 
(g)  No operator, entertainer or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall demand or collect all or any portion of a fee for entertainment before its completion. 
(h)  A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of the premises, and shall read as follows: 
"This sexually-oriented business is regulated by the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, entertainers are: 
(1)  Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct; 
(2)  Not permitted to expose their sex organs; 
(3)  Not permitted to demand or collect all or any portion of a fee for entertainment before its completion; 
(4)  Not permitted to appear in a state of full nudity." 
(i)  Sexually-oriented businesses that provide specified services for customers or patrons shall: 
(1)  Provide patrons with written contracts and receipts that show: 
a.  Specified service provided; 
b.  Cost of specified service; 
c.  Date and time of service provided; 
d.  Signature of customer or patron and signature or initials of permit holder providing the specified service; and 
e.  Method of payment for service. 
(2)  Keep copies of all published advertisements. 
(j)  All persons operating a sexually-oriented business within the city limits shall obey and follow all state statutes, including, but not limited to, all statutes concerning nudity and shall also comply with any licensing requirements which may be required under state, county or city law. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-108)  
Sec. 10-220. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(b)  No operator, entertainer or employee of a sexually-oriented business shall permit to be performed, offer to perform, perform or allow, patrons to perform sexual intercourse or oral or anal copulation or other contact stimulation of the genitalia. 
(c)  No operator, entertainer or employee of a sexually-oriented business shall encourage or permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(d)  No entertainer, employee, or customer shall be permitted to have any physical contact with any other on the premises during any performance and all performances shall only occur upon a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the nearest entertainer, employee, and/or customer. 
(e)  No employee or entertainer while on the premises of the sexually-oriented business may mingle with any customer or spectator for any purpose. 
(f)  No employee or entertainer, while on the premises of a sexually-oriented business, may: 
(1)  Engage in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engage in deviant sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appear in a state of nudity; 
(4)  Fondle the genitals of himself or another person. 
(g)  If the business license holder operates an escort bureau, such bureau shall not be operated as a sexually-oriented escort bureau as defined in this article. 
(h)  No employee of an escort bureau shall conduct himself as a sexually-oriented escort as defined in this article. 
(i)  No business license holder shall advertise that he offers sexual stimulation or sexual gratification as defined in this article. 
(j)  Prohibition of distribution of sexual devices: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any owner, operator, entertainer, or employee, while on the premises of the sexually-oriented business, to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
(2)  Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include, but are not limited to: phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements, excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry, or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. 
(Code 1997, § 5-7-109)  
Secs. 10-221—10-248. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-249. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna support structure means any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 
Applicant means any person that applies for a tower development permit. 
Application means the process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. The term "application" includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
Engineer means any engineer licensed by the state. 
Owner means any person with fee title or a longterm (exceeding ten years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the city who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. 
Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 
Stealth means any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power poles, and trees. The term "stealth" does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs. 
Telecommunications facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include: 
(1)  Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or 
(2)  Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term "tower" does not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-103; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-250. - Findings. 
(a)  The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: 
(1)  The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities; and 
(2)  The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. 
(b)  The city's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-101; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-251. - Purposes. 
(a)  The general purpose of this article is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. 
(b)  Specifically, the purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, sitting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5)  Promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities; 
(6)  Avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and 
(7)  Ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-102; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-252. - Development of towers. 
(a)  A tower shall be a use permitted as a matter of right within any commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(b)  A tower shall be a use permitted with supplemental provisions within any residential zoning district. 
(c)  No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within any zoning district unless a development permit shall have been issued by the zoning administrator of the city. Application shall be made to the zoning administrator in the manner provided in this article. 
(d)  Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150 feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of 150 feet in accordance with section 10-263, pertaining to criteria for site plan development modifications. 
(e)  No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the tower is capable of supporting another person's operating telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant on the tower. 
(f)  An application to develop a tower shall include: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. 
(2)  The legal description, folio number, and address of the parcel of land upon which tower is situated. 
(3)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable antenna support structures within a one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property. 
(4)  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. The applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent technological design, including microcell design, as part of the design plan. The applicant must demonstrate the need for towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's telecommunications services. 
(5)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on city-owned towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(6)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers of usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(7)  Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(8)  A written statement from an engineer that the construction and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties. 
(9)  Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in section 10-261, pertaining to structural requirements. 
(10)  Written, technical evidence from qualified engineers acceptable to the building official that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
(11)  In order to assist city staff in evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. 
(12)  The act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and does not allow the city to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications facility (whether mounted on towers or antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards. In order to provide information to its citizens, the city shall make available upon request copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission standards for telecommunications facilities transmitting from towers or antenna support structures. Applicants shall be required to submit information on the proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards. 
(g)  The development review committee may require an applicant to supplement any information that the committee considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed to supply the committee may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the city in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-104; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-253. - Setbacks 
(a)  All towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance that is equal to or greater than: 
(1)  For guyed tower, 20 percent of the height. 
(2)  For self-supporting tower, 50 percent of height. 
(3)  Guy wire anchors, if used, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines, and a minimum of 20 feet from any property line abutting a residentially zoned lot. 
(b)  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
(c)  Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in section 10-263(b), when placement of a tower in location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished. For example, adjacent to trees which may visually may hide the tower. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-105; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-254. - Separation or buffer requirements. 
For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdiction boundaries as follows: 
(1)  Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of 200 feet or 200 percent of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers which have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to this article: 
a.  Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of 750 feet. 
b.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet. 
c.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of 750 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-106; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-255. - Method of determining tower height. 
Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend more than 20 feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured from adjacent grade. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-107; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-256. - Illumination. 
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which is 300 percent of the height of the tower from the tower and when required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-108; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-257. - Exterior finish. 
(a)  Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located. The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in this Code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-109; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-258. - Access. 
A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at least one paved vehicular parking space on site. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-110; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-259. - Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. 
Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be permitted on any antenna support structure at least 50 feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all other structures. The owner of such structure shall, by written certification to the zoning administrator, establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building permit: 
(1)  That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure by more than 20 feet. 
(2)  That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are set back one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in height above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the city. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more than 18 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-111; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-260. - Modification of towers. 
(a)  A tower existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which was in compliance with the city's zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may be modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of this article, except for section 10-254, pertaining to separation or buffer requirements, section 10-261, pertaining to certification and inspections, and section 10-262, pertaining to maintenance, provided: 
(1)  The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating, within six months of the completion of the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to the discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person currently installed on the tower. 
(2)  An application for a development is made to the zoning administrator who shall have the authority to issue a development permit without further approval. The grant of a development permit pursuant to this section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming. 
(3)  The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height allowed under this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than 180 days. This article shall not be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted which structure or use is in violation of this Code prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-112; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-261. - Certifications and inspections. 
(a)  All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the standards set forth by this Code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 10-252 and every five years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certifications shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and then every five years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 10-252 and every two years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and then every two years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the city to submit more frequent certifications should here be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized. 
(b)  The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between the inspection and certification required in subsection (a) of this section, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the building code and all other construction standards provided by this Code and federal and state law. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the tower owner. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-113; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-262. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures an accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
(c)  All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. 
(d)  All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC. 
(e)  In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-114; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-263. - Criteria for site plan development modifications. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this article, a modification to the requirements may be approved by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a tower application for modification shall include the following: 
a.  A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a result of approving the modification. 
b.  A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the modification. 
c.  A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the applicant upon which the request for modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties. 
d.  For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for collocation, and the result of such attempts. 
e.  The zoning administrator may require the application to be reviewed by an independent engineer under contract to the city to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested. The cost of review by the city's engineer shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall consider the application for modification based on the following criteria: 
a.  That the tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding properties. 
b.  Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification. 
c.  In addition, the administrator may include conditions on the site where the tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the modification. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, in the following cases, the applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following: 
(1)  In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement, section 10-253, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the person is to locate the tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land. 
(2)  In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other towers of section 10-254, pertaining to separation or buffer requirements, that the proposed site is zoned I-R or I-G and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in section 10-254. 
(3)  In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially zoned land of section 10-254, if the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower a telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system and if the person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially zoned property. 
(4)  In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for towers and telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height requirements for antenna support structures, that the modification is necessary to: 
a.  Facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower; or 
b.  To meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communication system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from an engineer that demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be approved. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-115; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 10-264. - Abandonment. 
(a)  If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days, the board of commissioners shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site has been abandoned. The owner shall have 30 days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the board of commissioners shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the owner shall, within 75 days, dismantle and remove the tower. 
(b)  To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant and/or owner shall post a bond in the amount of $10,000.00. Such amount shall be determined by the board of commissioners based on the anticipated cost of removal of the tower. 
(Code 1997, § 5-8-116; Ord. No. 98-30, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Monitored fire alarms required. 
All clubhouses/common buildings being built in subdivisions and communities inside the City of Mt. Juliet will be required to install a monitored fire alarm for the safety of the property and residents. All clubhouses/common buildings with an occupancy load limit above 100 will be required to have a monitored fire alarm system. The system hardware will consist of a minimum of one to two pull stations, one to four strategically placed smoke detectors, one to three horn/strobe appliances, and a strobe light alert in each restroom. 
It is required that the system be monitored by an approved National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 72 Chapter 3 Off-Site Alarm Monitored/Transmitted Company. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 1, 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 12-2. - Monitored fire alarms required in new commercial construction and when existing commercial structures are renovated. 
For all commercial structures located inside the City of Mt. Juliet shall be required to have a monitored fire alarm systems. All existing commercial structures when renovated will be required to have a monitored fire alarm system. These requirements are in addition to the other fire prevention/protection currently being required. 
It is required that the system be monitored by an approved National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 72 Chapter 3 Off-Site Alarm Monitored/Transmitted Company. 
(Ord. No. 2017-42, § 1, 7-10-2017)  
Secs. 12-3—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-58, § 10, adopted Sept. 24, 2012, repealed § 12-21, which pertained to fire protection and derived from Code 1997, § 7-1-101.  
Sec. 12-22. - [Fire department reestablished.] 
There is hereby reestablished a Mt. Juliet Fire Department to be supported and equipped from appropriations by the board of commissioners and from other contributions. All apparatus, equipment, and supplies of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall be purchased with the approval of the fire chief in accordance with municipal purchasing requirements and shall be and remain the property of the City of Mt. Juliet. Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall be composed of a chief appointed by the city manager, and subordinate officers and firefighters. In addition to the fire chief, the Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall consist of career (paid) and volunteer firefighters and fire officers and such paid firefighters shall be provided for in the annual operating budget of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-58, § 1, 9-24-2012)  
Sec. 12-23. - [Fire department budget.] 
The board of commissioners of the City of Mt. Juliet shall provide for the operations of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department in its annual budget. Any funds raised by any individual or group may be accepted by the board of commissioners of the City of Mt. Juliet and may be used for purposes designated by the respective contributors. All equipment, materials, supplies, etc. purchased with contributed funds shall become the property of the City of Mt. Juliet. The board of commissioners may reject any gift or contribution it deems not to be in the best interest of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(Ord. No. 2012-58, § 2, 9-24-2012)  
Sec. 12-24. - [Objectives.] 
The Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall have as its objectives: 
(1)  To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting. 
(2)  To prevent the loss of life because of fires. 
(3)  To prevent the loss of property because of fires. 
(4)  To confine fires to their places of origin. 
(5)  To extinguish uncontrolled fires. 
(6)  To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training of its personnel makes practicable. 
(7)  To provide first response emergency medical care at the highest level that the equipment and training of the personnel makes practicable. 
(8)  To protect the health and safety of the citizens from the transportation, storage, or manufacture of hazardous materials to the extent possible that the level of equipment and training will allow. 
(9)  To work with the local water utility to insure that adequate water supplies for fire protection are available. 
(10)  To provide public fire education materials and information to the citizens in order that they may protect themselves from harm. 
(Ord. No. 2012-58, § 3, 9-24-2012)  
Sec. 12-25. - [Duties of fire chief.] 
(a)  The chief of the City of Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall, under the direction of the city manager, set up the organization of the department, make work assignments to individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department. 
(b)  The chief of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall prepare the annual departmental budget to be approved by the city manager, keep adequate records of all fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel, and work of the department. He shall submit such written reports to the city manager as the city manager requires. The city manager shall submit such written reports to the board of commissioners as the board of commissioners requires. 
(c)  The chief of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall be fully responsible for the training of the firefighters and for maintenance of all property and equipment of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department, under the direction and subject to the requirements of the city manager. Paid and volunteer firefighters shall be trained in accordance with the standards of the Tennessee Commission on Firefighter Standards and Education. 
(d)  Pursuant to requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the fire chief is designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of commerce and insurance and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 68, chapter 102, and shall be subject to the directions of the commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-58, §§ 4—7, 9-24-2012)  
Sec. 12-26. - [Use of personnel and/or equipment outside of city limits.] 
Personnel and/or equipment of the City of Mt. Juliet Fire Department may be used for fighting any fire outside the city limits if: 
(1)  In the opinion of the fire chief, the fire is in such hazardous proximity to property owned or located within the city as to endanger the city property; 
(2)  The board of commissioners has developed policies for providing emergency services outside of the city limits or entered into a contract, mutual aid or automatic aid agreement pursuant to the authority of (1) The Local Government Emergency Assistance Act of 1987, as amended, codified in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 58-2-601 et seq., (2) Tennessee Code Annotated, § 12-9-101 et seq. or (3) Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-601. 
(Ord. No. 2012-58, § 8, 9-24-2012)  
Sec. 12-27. - [Mitigation rates.] 
(a)  The Mt. Juliet Fire Department shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of emergency and non-emergency services by the fire department for personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of emergency incidents as listed in [the mitigation rates found on file with the city]. The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the services and that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in [the mitigation rates found on file with the city], which may include any services, personnel, supplies, and equipment and with baselines established by addendum to this document. 
(b)  A claim shall be filed to the responsible party(s) through their insurance carrier. 
(c)  The fire department's city commission may make rules or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke, or add rules and regulations, not consistent with this section, as they may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these mitigation rates or the collection thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-46, §§ 1—3, 8-28-2017)  
Sec. 12-28. - Adequate emergency services fee. 
The City of Mt. Juliet Fire Chief is authorized to establish an "adequate emergency service permit fee" for all new construction (single-family dwellings are exempt) based on square footage as shown in section 26-161, Fee Schedule Number 2. 
(Ord. No. 2018-27, § 1, 7-9-2018)  
Secs. 12-29—12-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADDRESS NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 12-31. - Address numbers. 
All structures in the city containing a telephone or mailbox shall have the street number prominently displayed on the mailbox in numbers which are a minimum of three inches in height. If the address has no mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed on the building or post near the street and shall be clearly legible from the road. The street number shall be the same number designated as the address by the 911 telephone system. 
(Code 1997, § 7-2-101)  
Secs. 12-32—12-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.) adopted Mar. 26, 2012, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 12-45—12-53, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1997, §§ 7-3-101—7-3-108; and Ord. No. 98-3, adopted Feb. 9, 1998. 
 
Sec. 12-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Activate means to set off an alarm system indicating in any manner an incidence of burglary, robbery, fire, etc. 
Alarm system means any device which is designed to be used for the detection of fire or unauthorized entry into a building or property. The term "alarm system" means any device for alerting others of fire or of the commission of an unauthorized entry except systems installed in motor vehicles, self-contained smoke detectors and medical alert alarms. The term "alarm system" includes direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and monitored alarms. 
Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over by telephone a message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system that results in contact to the Mt. Juliet Police Department and is not caused by: 
(1)  Criminal activity or unauthorized entry; 
(2)  Severe weather conditions; 
(3)  Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises, which is demonstrated in writing from the fire department within 15 days of the occurrence; 
(4)  Telephone line malfunction, which is demonstrated in writing from the service provider within 15 days of the occurrence. 
Fire officer means the director of the county emergency management authority (WEMA). 
Hearing officer means an employee of the City of Mt. Juliet designated by the chief of police to act as an impartial arbitrator at hearings related to the enforcement of the herein chapter. 
Law enforcement officer means the chief of police of the city. 
Responsible party means the person designated as the "responsible party" in the alarm registration filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-46. - Enforcement, violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person may cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to have a functioning alarm system in the city without having obtained a permit as required by this Code. 
(c)  It shall be a violation to lease or sell an alarm system in the city without ensuring compliance with this Code. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this Code to set off a false alarm to test a system. 
(e)  Service charges for false alarms or other violations shall be $25.00 each. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-47. - Notification required; permit fees. 
(a)  Every person who shall own, operate or lease any alarm system within the city, shall, prior to use of the alarm system, give notice to the law enforcement officer, on forms to be provided and obtain a permit. 
(b)  The information on the forms shall include: 
(1)  The type, make and model of each alarm device and, if the alarm system is monitored, by whom; 
(2)  Whether installed in a residential or commercial premises; 
(3)  The name, address, business and home telephone number of the owner of lessee of the alarm system; 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the responsible party. 
(5)  Within ten days following any change of circumstances which renders obsolete any of the information submitted, the alarm user shall file an amendment to his information setting forth the currently accurate information. No additional fee shall be required unless the change has terminated the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-48. - Registration fee. 
Each responsible party shall pay an annual registration fee, only once per calendar year, of $10.00 for each alarm system on residential property and $25.00 for each alarm system on commercial property. Registration fees shall be due on March 31 for alarms beginning with the letter A—G, June 30 for alarms beginning with the letter H—M, September 30 for alarms beginning with the letter N—S, December 31 for alarms beginning with the letter T—Z of each year. Permit fees shall be placed in the city general fund. Fees for direct monitoring by the city, when not prohibited by T.C.A § 62-32-321(a)(2)(A), shall be $120.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012; Ord. No. 2016-12, 3-28-2016)  
Sec. 12-49. - Employee training. 
Each owner, operator, or lessee shall be responsible for training employees, servants or agents in the proper operation of his alarm system. Training shall include the numbers to call after a false alarm and how to shut the system off after activation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-50. - Address identification. 
Each person renting or owning property shall comply with section 12-48, pertaining to address numbers, and shall post the alarm registration sticker near the front door so as to be clearly visible from the front of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-51. - Audible alarms. 
All audible alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff to function within 20 minutes of the alarm sounding. This section shall not apply to fire alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-52. - Automatic dialing devices. 
Automatic dialing devices shall: 
(1)  Not call the 911 emergency line. Such devices shall be restricted to dialing the nonemergency police communications phone numbers. No automatic dialer shall dial any fire communications phone number. (See T.C.A § 7-86-118). 
(2)  Have a clearly understandable recording. 
(3)  Be programmed to repeat its message a minimum of two times. 
(4)  Automatically reset itself so as to not continuously call police communications phone numbers. 
(5)  Be programmed to give the owner's or resident's name and the exact street number and name. 
(6)  Be programmed to state that it is an alarm. The device shall not say a burglary or robbery is in progress. 
(7)  State the hours the property is occupied if the alarm is used as a robbery or panic alarm as well as burglar alarm. 
(8)  State whether the device has notified a third party and the identity of the third party. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-53. - False alarms. 
Required reports of corrective action and disconnection. 
(1)  The responsible party shall bear responsibility for false alarms. 
(2)  A response to an alarm shall result when fire or police department personnel discover or are notified of an activation of an alarm system. If the user or user's agent calls the dispatcher within five minutes of activation it shall not be considered a false alarm unless an officer has already arrived on the scene or a fire truck has moved in response to the alarm. 
(3)  For all false alarms in excess of three in a permit year, the responsible party shall be billed a $25.00 service charge per false alarm for allowing a false alarm to be conveyed to the police department. 
(4)  Activations caused by violent acts of nature shall not be considered false alarms provided the owner of the alarm notifies the hearing officer of the violent act of nature within 15 days of the event. No act of nature shall be deemed to be a violent act of nature unless some physical damage is done to the property of the alarm system. (See T.C.A. § 62-32-321). 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-54. - Appeals. 
(a)  A hearing officer shall be appointed by the chief of police to hear appeals from alarm users on the issue of whether the alarm system in question activated a false alarm. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any false alarm bill from the city, the responsible party shall have ten days to make a written request for a hearing before the hearing officer. 
(c)  At the hearing, which must be scheduled and conclude within 15 days from receipt of the request the responsible party shall have the right to present evidence. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall make written findings available to the alarm user and the chief of police within ten days from the date the hearing is concluded. 
(e)  A decision by the chief of police to accept or reject the hearing officer's findings shall be made within ten days from the receipt of the above findings by the chief of police. 
(f)  Until all of the steps set forth in this section have been completed, the false alarm in question will be considered to have been genuine and will not be considered the basis for the prima facie presumption that the involved alarm system is malfunctioning. 
(g)  Upon receipt of the chief of police's finding, the alarm user may appeal, in writing, to the Mt. Juliet city court within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-55. - Service charge assessments. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that all false alarms constitute a public nuisance. The responsible party shall be billed a $25.00 service charge per false alarm occurrence after the third such false alarm in any year. Each service charge incurred shall be billed and payment shall be made within 30 days. Failure to make payment within 30 days may result in the responsible party's permit being revoked and collection action to be taken. 
(b)  Any permit revoked shall not be reinstated until all outstanding false alarm service charges are paid in full together with a $25.00 reinstatement fee. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Sec. 12-56. - Notices. 
(a)  Notice or billing from the city to any responsible party shall be deemed to have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is deposited in the U.S. Mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at the address shown in the city's permit records. A certificate signed by the person who mailed the notice shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with respect to such notice. 
(b)  Notice to the city of payment shall be effective when received at the appropriate city office. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 2(Att.), 3-26-2012)  
Secs. 12-57—12-81. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BURNING 
 
Sec. 12-82. - Noxious or toxic fumes prohibited. 
No person shall burn matter in a manner which causes a health hazard or generates noxious or toxic fumes. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-101; Ord. No. 95-13, 8-14-1995)  
Sec. 12-83. - Ash. 
No person shall burn materials in such a manner which will deposit ash on adjoining property. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-102)  
Sec. 12-84. - Burning plastics. 
No person shall burn plastics, shingles, tires or insulation. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-103)  
Sec. 12-85. - Structures. 
No person shall burn matter in the open (outside a container) within 50 feet of any structure. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-104)  
Sec. 12-86. - Supervision. 
An adult shall attend any fire from the time it is set until it is extinguished. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-105)  
Sec. 12-87. - State and federal laws. 
No person shall burn matter in a manner which violates state or federal law. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-106)  
Sec. 12-88. - Importing materials. 
No person shall burn, in the city, materials obtained from clearing land or trash collection or demolition operations which occur outside of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 7-4-107)  
Chapter 14 - HEALTH AND SANITATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Health officer. 
The health officer shall be such municipal, county, or state officer as the public works director designated to administer and enforce health and sanitation regulations within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-101; Ord. No. 75-4, § 24, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-2. - House trailers. 
No person shall park, locate, or occupy any house trailer or portable building unless it complies with all plumbing, electrical, sanitary, and building provisions applicable to stationary structures and the proposed location conforms to the zoning provisions of the city and unless the city has issued a permit for the use and occupancy of the structure. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-102; Ord. No. 75-4, § 27, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-3. - Smoke, soot, cinders, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the health, comfort and safety of the public or so as to be likely to cause injury or damage to property or businesses. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-103; Ord. No. 75-4, § 28, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-4. - Stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his property without treating it so as to effectively prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-104; Ord. No. 75-4, § 29, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-5. - Weeds. 
Every owner or tenant of property shall periodically cut the grass and other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds on his property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order within ten days from the city manager, building official or code enforcement officer to cut the vegetation when it has reached a height of ten inches. Notice given shall not continue in perpetuity, but shall expire upon owner or tenant of the property complying with such an order. This section may be enforced by a citation and/or by a notice of violation after the ten-day period, which may be appealed to the board of adjustment for new construction and property maintenance. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-105; Ord. No. 2006-39, § 1, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2011-32, § 1, 6-27-2011)  
Sec. 14-6. - Dead animals. 
Any person owning or having possession of any dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the animal or notify the health officer and dispose of the animal in such manner as the health officer shall direct. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-106; Ord. No. 75-4, § 31, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-7. - Occasional sales. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means provisions for off-street parking of vehicles on the property where the sale is being conducted, during the time the sale is being conducted equal to the off-street parking required for an allowed permanent retail business in the zoning district. 
Occasional sales means any outdoor sales or display of merchandise or tangible personal property for sale, including, but not limited to, garage sales, patio sales, occasional sales, bazaars or other onsite sales held in nonresidential areas of the city on a lot or location not licensed for permanent retail sales or on a lot or location licensed for permanent retail sales but not open for business and not offering the displayed merchandise for sale as part of the permanent business retail sales. Activities identified by article III temporary uses, section 3-105(A-3), (A-4) and (A-5) of the city zoning ordinance, are exempted from the definition of occasional sales for the purposes of this section. The sale of farm and or garden produce shall be exempt from this section, provided adequate parking is provided and permission of the property owner is obtained. 
Sanitary facilities means provisions for sanitary disposal of trash and provisions for maintenance of a site free of health and or safety hazards. 
(b)  Permitted temporary occasional sales. The following are permitted temporary occasional sales: 
(1)  Occasional sales, as defined in this section, are permitted only in areas of the city where retail sales would be permitted as a permanent activity and shall be treated as a temporary use activity pursuant to the provisions of article III, section 3-106 of the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Occasional sales require a permit be issued by the city zoning administrator stating that the activity complies with the provisions of this section. The application for a permit shall be in the form of a site plan which shall show ingress and egress, sanitary facilities parking facilities, sign locations, provisions for removal of signs at the conclusion of the sale, and written permission for use of the real property by the owner if applicant is not the owner. 
(3)  Occasional sales are permitted provided proof of adequate parking and provisions for sanitary disposal of trash and provisions for maintenance of a site free of health and or safety hazards. 
(4)  Permits obtained for occasional sales shall require a fee of $10.00 and shall be openly displayed at the site of the sale. Any permit issued may be revoked by the zoning administrator for failure or refusal to comply with the provision of this section. 
(5)  Occasional sales shall be permitted only eight times per calendar year and only between 6:00 a.m. on Saturday through 9:00 p.m. on Sunday and on legal holidays. Legal holidays are those recognized as legal holidays by the United States Government. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-107; Ord. No. 00-08, 5-1-2000)  
Sec. 14-8. - Open burning. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Air curtain destructor means a device employing an air blower with a pit incinerator approved by the fire marshal or his/her designee. 
Approved means approved by the fire marshal or his/her designee. 
Fire marshal means the chief fire code official for the Mt. Juliet Fire Department. 
Open burning means the burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of portable outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
Recreational fire means an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
(b)  Open burning prohibited. Open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Wildland fires. A permit shall be obtained from the fire marshal prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
(d)  Authorization. The rules and regulations herein shall conform to the 2012 International Fire Code as adopted by the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(e)  Extinguishment authority. When open burning creates or adds to a hazardous situation, or a required permit for open burning has not been obtained, the fire marshal or ranking member of the Mt. Juliet Fire Department on duty is authorized to order the extinguishment of the open burning operation. 
(f)  Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet from a structure. 
(2)  The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet where the pile size is three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height. 
(g)  Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(h)  Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(i)  Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
(j)  Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(k)  Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
(3)  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than two and one-half pounds [nominal one pound LP-gas capacity]. 
(l)  Location near combustibles. Open flames such as from candles, lanterns, kerosene heaters and gas-fired heaters shall not be located on or near decorative material or similar combustible materials. 
(m)  Religious ceremonies. When, in the opinion of the fire code official, adequate safeguards have been taken, participants in religious ceremonies are allowed to carry hand-held candles. Hand-held candles shall not be passed from one person to another while lighted. 
(n)  Aisles and exits. Candles shall be prohibited in areas where occupants stand, or in an aisle or exit. 
(o)  Open burning during development of property. The use of an air curtain destructor shall be used for all disposal by burning of material that have grown on the tract of land being cleared for the development of same, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Burning is done using an air curtain destructor or other approved device, at suitable sites as approved by the fire marshal, when such devices are operated in a manner satisfactory to the fire marshal, and with a valid, current permit issued by the fire marshal. 
(2)  The burning will take place on days and hours designated by the fire marshal. Days and hours will be tentative, and will be regulated according to weather conditions and the absence of safety or health hazards. 
(3)  The fire marshal or ranking fire department official on duty shall have the absolute discretion to revoke the permit and/or extinguish the fire due to the existence of any violation, or safety or health hazard. 
(4)  The applicant for an air curtain destructor permit shall pay a fee of $5.00 for a permit. The permit will not be issued for more than 30 days at a time, and may be renewed at the discretion of the fire marshal for an additional permit fee. 
(p)  Permits required. Permits shall be obtained from the fire marshals office in accordance with Section 105.6 of the 2012 International Fire Code prior to engaging in the following activities involving open flame, fire and burning: 
(1)  A permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to. 
(2)  Use of a torch or flame-producing device to remove paint from a structure. 
(3)  Use of open flame, fire or burning in connection with Group A or E occupancies. 
(4)  Use or operation of torches and other devices, machines or processes liable to start or cause fire in or upon wildfire risk areas. 
(q)  Open-flame decorative devices. Open-flame decorative devices shall comply with all of the following restrictions: 
(1)  Class I and Class II liquids and LP-gas shall not be used. 
(2)  Liquid- or solid-fueled lighting devices containing more than eight ounces of fuel must self-extinguish and not leak fuel at a rate of more than 0.25 teaspoon per minute if tipped over. 
(3)  The device or holder shall be constructed to prevent the spillage of liquid fuel or wax at the rate of more than 0.25 teaspoon per minute when the device or holder is not in an upright position. 
(4)  The device or holder shall be designed so that it will return to the upright position after being tilted to an angle of 45 degrees from vertical. 
Exception: Devices that self-extinguish if tipped over and do not spill fuel or wax at the rate of more than 0.25 teaspoon per minute if tipped over. 
(5)  The flame shall be enclosed except where openings on the side are not more than 0.375-inch diameter or where openings are on the top and the distance to the top is such that a piece of tissue paper placed on the top will not ignite in ten seconds. 
(6)  Chimneys shall be made of noncombustible materials and securely attached to the open-flame device. 
Exception: A chimney is not required to be attached to any open-flame device that will self-extinguish if the device is tipped over. 
(7)  Fuel canisters shall be safely sealed for storage. 
(8)  Storage and handling of combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Chapter 57 of the 2012 International Fire Code. 
(9)  Shades, where used, shall be made of noncombustible materials and securely attached to the open-flame device holder or chimney. 
(10)  Candelabras with flame-lighted candles shall be securely fastened in place to prevent overturning, and shall be located away from occupants using the area and away from possible contact with drapes, curtains or other combustibles. 
(r)  Time of burning. Burning shall take place only during approved hours. 
(s)  Penalties. Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $50.00 plus court cost, with each day of violation considered a separate violation. 
(Code 1997, § 8-1-108; Ord. No. 2007-50, 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2014-36, §§ 2—20, 5-12-2014)  
Secs. 14-9—14-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE 
 
Sec. 14-35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, leaves, brush, and trash. The term "refuse" does not include dirt, bricks, concrete, ashes and other materials which do not decompose and may be used for fill. 
(Code 1997, § 8-2-101; Ord. No. 75-4, § 1, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-36. - Premises to be kept clean. 
All persons within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of refuse except when stored for the purpose of collection. 
(Code 1997, § 8-2-102; Ord. No. 75-4, § 2, 5-5-1975)  
Sec. 14-37. - Disturbing containers. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to another person. 
(Code 1997, § 8-2-103; Ord. No. 75-4, § 5, 5-5-1975)  
Secs. 14-38—14-62. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
 
Sec. 14-63. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abatement means the removal, storage, prostration, or destruction of that which causes or constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or otherwise destroying or effacing it. 
Owner means the owner of record based on the county assessor's record or any person with legal, financial or equitable interest in the property on which the alleged public nuisance exists at the time of the violation. 
Property means any real property, premises, structure or location on which a public nuisance is alleged to exist. 
Public nuisance means any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, dock, wharf or landing dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any one or more of the following particulars: 
(1)  By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the community. 
(2)  By reason of being a fire hazard. 
(3)  By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, about or around the aforesaid property. 
(4)  By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists. 
(5)  By reason of an act or omission unreasonably interferes with or obstructs rights common to the public. 
(6)  By reason of an act or omission endangers life or health or gives offense to the senses, violates the laws of decency or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of property to the detriment of the health and welfare of the public. 
Summary abatement means abatement of the nuisance by the city, or a contractor employed by the city, by removal, repair, or other acts without notice to owner, agent, or occupant of the property except for the notice required by this article. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-101; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-64. - Violation. 
It is hereby declared to be a violation of this article for any person to create, maintain or refuse to abate a public nuisance in the city. Violations are punishable by a fine of $500.00 for each such violation in addition to such other penalties as this article shall provide. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-102; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-65. - Summary abatement. 
(a)  Whenever a complaint is made to the city manager or codes administrator of a public nuisance, as that term is defined in section 14-63, the department of pubic works or city manager shall promptly cause to be inspected the property on which it is alleged that such public nuisance exists. Should there be found that a public nuisance exists, and that the public health, safety or welfare may be in immediate danger, then summary abatement procedures shall be implemented and the city manager may cause the nuisance to be removed or abated. The public health department and building inspector should be notified if the public nuisance involves a building that appears structurally unsafe. The building inspector, upon being notified shall cause the building on which it is alleged such public nuisance exists to be inspected and submit a written report of such inspection and the findings to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  When summary abatement is authorized, notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property is not required. Following summary abatement, the city manager shall cause to be posted on the property liable for the abatement a notice describing the action taken to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  The expense and cause of the summary abatement may be charged as a lien upon the real property where the public nuisance existed. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-103; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-66. - Abatement in other cases; notice, etc. 
(a)  If, after inspecting the property on which the nuisance is reported, the city manager or codes administrator manager declares the existence of a public nuisance, but the nature thereof is not such as to require the summary abatement of such nuisance, then, regular abatement procedures shall be followed. Photographs and reports of the findings and inspections shall be made and filed with the department of public works and codes administrator. 
(b)  The department of public works and codes administrator shall determine the individual, firm or corporation who, from the records in the recorder's office, appears to be the titled owner of the aforesaid property and immediately cause a written notice to be served on such individual, firm or corporation by personal service or by leaving a copy of the notice at the usual place of residence or business of such owner, or address of such owner shown in the recorder's records, or by copy mailed to such owner at such place or address by United States certified mail return receipt. If service of such written notice is unable to be perfected by any of the methods described above, the city manager shall cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once a week for two consecutive weeks, and shall further cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be left with the individual, if any, in possession of such property on which it is alleged such public nuisance exists, or if there is no individual in possession thereof, the city manager or codes administrator shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted at such structure, location or premises. The city manager or codes administrator shall also determine from the recorder's office who the lienholder of the property, if any, as documented therein, is and cause a written notice to be served on such lienholder by United States mail return receipt. 
(c)  The aforesaid notice to the owner, and lienholder, if any, of the property shall state clearly and concisely the findings of the codes administrator of the existence of a public nuisance. The notice shall further state that unless the owner thereof shall cause the abatement of the public nuisance, pursuant to the orders contained in the notice, the public nuisance shall be abated by the city at the expense of the owner. 
(d)  Any person who is the record owner of the premises, location or structure at the time an order pursuant to this article is issued and served upon him, shall be responsible for complying with the notice, and shall be liable for any costs incurred by the city therewith, notwithstanding the fact that he conveys his interests in the property to another after such order was issued and served. 
(e)  It shall not be a defense to the determination that a public nuisance exists that the property is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-104; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-67. - Abatement by owner. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the posting and mailing of a notice to abate a nuisance, the owner, agent of the owner, or individual in possession of the affected property shall remove and abate such nuisance or show that no nuisance in fact exists. Such showing shall be made by filing a written statement that no nuisance exists. The statement shall be filed with the department of public works of the city. 
(b)  The city manager or codes administrator, upon written application by the owner within the 30-day period after the notice has been served, may grant additional time for the owner to effect the abatement of the public nuisance, provided that such extension is limited to a specific time period. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-105; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-68. - Appeal procedures; hearing. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of the property who has been served with a notice pursuant to this article that a public nuisance exists and that it must be abated within 30 days, may, within seven calendar days after receipt of such notice, make a written demand to the codes administrator for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in fact exists. The hearing shall be held within seven calendar days following receipt by the city manager or codes administrator of the written demand and at least two days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the individual who made the written demand for the hearing. 
(b)  The hearing shall be conducted in such a manner as to afford the property owner or occupant an opportunity to be heard and present argument and evidence of whether a public nuisance in fact exists. Written notice of the determination shall be given the owner or occupant who requested the hearing. 
(c)  The owner, agent of the owner, occupant and lienholder, if any, of the subject property shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to the appeal's board in the course of the hearing. 
(d)  In those instances where the nuisance has been abated by the city, the city manager shall have discretion to waive the cost of abating a nuisance, in whole or in part, if, in the course of the hearing reviewing the decision, the city manager determines that any of the following did not conform to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The notice to remove the nuisance; 
(2)  The work performed in abating the nuisance; or 
(3)  The computation of charges. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-106; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-69. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  Should any public nuisance not be abated at the expiration of time stated in the notice or within such additional time as shall have been allowed by the city manager or codes administrator they shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate the public nuisance found thereon. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to seek abatement by filing of a suit in the court of appropriate jurisdiction praying for all necessary relief and may do so in lieu of or in addition to any other action authorized in this article. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-107; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-70. - Notice of assessment; appeal of charges. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the statement of costs from the department of public works or private contractor, the city manager shall mail to the owner of the property upon which the public nuisance has been abated notice of the amounts set forth in the statement plan an additional amount sufficient to defray the costs of the notice and stating that the city proposes to assess against the property the amount set forth in the notice and that objections to the proposed assessment must be made in writing and received by the city recorder within 20 days from the date of mailing such notice. Upon the expiration of the 20-day period, if no objections have been received by the city manager he shall cause a lien to be recorded on the subject property. 
(b)  If objections of either the property owner or their representative are received by the city manager, an administrative review shall be made on the objection. 
(c)  Upon conclusion of administrative review, the city manager shall make a written determination that the amount of the charges shall be canceled, reduced, or remain the same. A copy of this determination shall be furnished to the person making the objections together with a notice to such person that the decision is a final administrative decision of the city. Following such notice, a lien may be placed on the subject property. 
(d)  If, after a lien has been entered in the docket of city liens, there is a written request of an owner who alleges that the owner did not receive notice of the proposed assessment, the matter may be reviewed and the city manager may, upon a finding that notice was not given or received, authorize removal of the lien and may adjust any costs or liens imposed. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-108; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-71. - Personal liability of owner. 
(a)  The person who is the owner of the property at the time at which the notice required under this article is posted shall be personally liable for the amount of the assessment including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges. 
(b)  No overhead charge or civil penalty shall be imposed for any real property for which a waiver, pursuant to this section, shall have been approved. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-109; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 14-72. - Overhead charge; civil penalties. 
(a)  Whenever a nuisance is abated by the city, the department of public works shall keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred, including an overhead charge of 25 percent for administration and a civil penalty of $200.00 for each nuisance abated. 
(b)  When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by any owner of real property, for each subsequent nuisance that is abated by the city within two consecutive calendar years concerning real property, owned by the same person, an additional civil penalty of 50 percent, minimum of $50.00, of the cost of abatement shall be added to the costs, charges and civil penalties provided for in subsection (a) of this section. The civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the nuisance abated by the city involve the same real property or are of the same character. 
(c)  The city court is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce this article by fine or judgment to the limit of its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1997, § 8-4-110; Ord. No. 98-24, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Class C misdemeanors of the state adopted. 
All offenses against the state which are committed within the corporate limits of the city and which are defined by the law to be Class C misdemeanors and hereby designated and declared to be offenses against the municipality pursuant to T.C.A. §§ 16-18-302 and 55-10-307. Any person found guilty of violating any such misdemeanors shall be punished as provided in the general penalty clause for this Code, but in no event may a civil fine exceed $50.00. 
(Code 1997, § 10-1-101; Ord. No. 2006-44, 6-26-2006)  
Secs. 16-2—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES ENUMERATED 
 
Sec. 16-21. - Abandoned refrigerators, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox, or other container with any type latching or locking door which cannot be opened from the inside. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-101; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(23), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-22. - Anti-noise regulations. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful to create, emit or cause to be emitted any excessive, loud and disturbing noise. The following shall be prima facie evidence of excessive, loud and disturbing noise: 
(1)  Musical instruments, TVs and amplifying machines—Time condition. The use of any musical instrument, radio set, television set, phonograph, Victrola or other instrument, machine or device for amplifying, producing or reproducing sound, in such manner as to disturb the peace and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the persons who are in the room, chamber or in the vicinity in which such instrument, machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such instrument, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the building or structure in which it is located shall be prima facie a violation of this section. 
(2)  Same—Distance and decibel condition. Any noise created for the entertainment, enjoyment or benefit of the creator or their guests shall be presumed to be excessive, loud and disturbing if any of the following apply: 
a.  The noise is clearly audible for a distance of 50 feet or more from the property line from which the noise emanates; 
b.  The noise is clearly audible by a passenger of a motor vehicle, other than a vehicle from which the noise may come, on a public street or thoroughfare with the doors and windows of the vehicle closed; or 
c.  The noise occurring between the hours of: 
1.  9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in residential areas and OPS of the city; 
2.  Between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in commercial areas except OPS of the city on a Friday or Saturday night; or 
3.  Between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in commercial areas except OPS of the city from Sunday through Thursday nights; 
which can be heard more than 30 feet beyond the property line in residential areas of the city or 50 feet beyond the property line in commercial areas of the city. 
In the event noise measuring devices or equipment are available, or become available, to measure the noise as against the ambient background noise, and the noise exceeds the ambient background noise by 15 decibels at any time between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or the noise is 25 decibels louder than the ambient background noise at any hour without regard to cause. Measurements of noise and ambient background noise shall be made at the property line unless other persons using the same property are complaining about the noise in which case the measurement shall be from the source of the noise. The use of measuring devices may be used as a supplement to other evidence or as evidence of a violation but is not required for the establishment of a violation. 
(3)  Devices in vehicles other than horns. Noise created in vehicles, including a radio, tape or disk player, or by a device or devices on the vehicle or from the vehicle, other than vehicle horns, shall be a violation of this section and presumed excessive, loud and disturbing if the noise is audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from the vehicle. 
(4)  Vehicle horns. Vehicle horn blown for an extended or prolonged time when the vehicle or operator is not in immediate danger or when not used to warn or signal immediate and or eminent danger. 
(5)  Attracting attention to sales. Noise made to attract attention to an event or sale which is audible 50 feet or more from the source or which exceeds the ambient background noise by 15 decibels. 
(6)  Persistent animal sounds. Persistent barking of a dog or other animal sounds which are audible 50 feet or more from the source or which exceeds the ambient background noise by 15 decibels. Dog barking or any other animal sounds which are 15 decibels louder than the ambient background noise shall be presumed to be unreasonable and disturbing if it is created between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(7)  Construction. Exterior construction using hammers, power tools or motor-driven equipment: 
a.  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in residential areas or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in commercial areas; or 
b.  At anytime on Sunday. 
(8)  Lawn maintenance equipment. Lawnmowers, brush clearing equipment, blowers, and other equipment used for cleaning or maintenance shall be exempted from this section if the equipment meets the following provisions: 
a.  The equipment is being operated and used for the purpose for which it was intended. 
b.  The equipment is being operated with the use of all sound dampening devices which meet or exceed original equipment. 
c.  The equipment is being used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
d.  The equipment is used for the limited time required to accomplish the particular work or job activity. 
(b)  Refuse and recycling collection activities. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a) above for other noise emitting activities; no person utilizing vehicles or other motor-driven equipment for the purpose of refuse and recycling collection shall engage in such activities: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on commercially zoned property within 300 feet of residential zoned property. 
(2)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on residentially zoned properties. 
(c)  Dumpster type. 
(1)  Containers shall have a non-metal lid. 
(d)  Labeling of dumpster/container. Any dumpster-type containers must clearly display on an outside surface a label that includes the following information in letters at least two inches tall: 
(1)  The owner of the container; 
(2)  A telephone number for the owner of the container. 
(e)  Exempted. Instruments of husbandry used for agricultural purposes, or farming equipment and activities are excluded from the provisions of subsection (a)(8)b of this section and shall not apply to homeowners and occupants performing exterior work at or on their principal place of residence after 7:00 a.m. and before 9:00 p.m. 
(f)  City manager may suspend enforcement. The city manager, upon his determination that emergency or extraordinary circumstance require, to temporarily suspend the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-102; Ord. No. 98-32, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 2002-22, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 2004-32, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 1-24-2011)  
Sec. 16-23. - Assault and battery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and battery upon any person. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-103; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(1), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-24. - Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well, cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb without an adequate cover or safeguard. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-104; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(32), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-25. - Coercing people not to work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in association or agreement with any other person to assemble, congregate, or meet together in the vicinity of any premises where other persons are employed or reside for the purpose of inducing any such other person by threats, coercion, intimidation, or acts of violence to quit or refrain from entering a place of lawful employment. It is expressly not the purpose of this section to prohibit peaceful picketing. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-105; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(31), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-26. - Curfew for minors; responsibility of parents. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be abroad in the city at night after 12:00 midnight and before 5:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful custody of such minor (see also T.C.A. § 39-17-1702). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having custody of a minor to fail to prevent a minor under the age of 18 years from being abroad on the streets, parking lots and other public areas of the city at night after 12:00 midnight and before 5:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by an adult. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-106; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(24), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-27. - Disorderly houses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house or house of ill fame for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness or where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or other breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to visit any such house for the purpose of engaging in such activities. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-107; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(3), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-28. - Disturbing the peace. 
No person shall disturb, or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his control. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-108; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(2), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-29. - Drinking alcoholic beverages in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or have an open can or bottle of beer or intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley, avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park, public school ground, or other public place unless the place has a permit for on premises consumption of the particular beverage. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-109; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(29), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-30. - False emergency alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-110; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(17), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-31. - Fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Sell or use fireworks in the city except June 20 through July 5 and December 10 through January 2; 
(2)  Smoke within 50 feet of any place where fireworks are sold; 
(3)  Discharge or use fireworks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., except on December 31 and January 1 when the permissible hours shall include the two hours before and one hour after the start of the new year; 
(4)  Sell fireworks to a person under 18 years of age; 
(5)  Give fireworks to a person under 18 years of age; 
provided, however, this provision shall not apply to a parent who supervises the use of fireworks by his child. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-111; Ord. No. 97-15, 5-12-1997)  
Sec. 16-32. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play at any game of hazard or chance for money or other valuable thing or to make or accept any bet or wager for money or other valuable thing. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-112; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(15), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-33. - Guns, air rifles and projectiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any firearm, air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun, bow and arrow, or sling shot capable of discharging a projectile, bullet or pellet, whether propelled by spring, compressed air, expanding gas, explosive, or other force-producing means or method. It shall also be unlawful to point such devices at people or to threaten to use such devices against people. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the owner of land zoned agricultural and his invitees from firing shotguns with shot no larger (smaller shot number) than No. 4 shot so long as the gun does not send shot outside the property line. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit supervised firearms training using qualified instructors at a location approved by the chief of police. This section shall not prohibit discharging weapons in indoor firing ranges or at ranges approved, for safety, by the chief of police. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-113; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(13), 5-16-1974; Ord. No. 2018-19, 5-14-2018)  
Sec. 16-34. - Impersonating a government officer or employee. 
No person other than an official police officer of the city shall wear the uniform, apparel, or badge, or carry any identification card or other insignia or office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city. No person shall deceitfully impersonate or falsely represent that he is a government officer or employee. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-114; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(11), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-35. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall appear naked in public or expose his genitals in public. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-115; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(6), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-36. - Interference with traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk, bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-116; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(33), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-37. - Malicious mischief. 
It shall be unlawful and deemed to be malicious mischief for any person willfully, maliciously, or wantonly to damage, deface, destroy, conceal, tamper with, remove, or withhold real or personal property which does not belong to him. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-117; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(25), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-38. - Minors in beer places. 
No minor under 18 years of age shall loiter in or around, work in, or otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold at retail for consumption on the premises. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-118)  
Sec. 16-39. - Posting of notices, etc. 
No person shall fasten, in any way, any show-card, poster, or other advertising device upon any public or private property unless legally authorized to do so. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-119; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(27), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-40. - Resisting or interfering with city personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to resist or in any way interfere with or attempt to interfere with any officer or employee of the city while such officer or employee is performing or attempting to perform municipal duties. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-120; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(10), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-41. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public street or sidewalk or upon the floors or walks of any public place. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-121; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(30), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-42. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile at any vehicle, building, tree, or person. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-122; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(14), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-43. - Trespassing. 
(a)  The owner or person in charge of any land or structure within the city may post the property against trespassing. It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to go on such posted property or in a posted building without the permission of the owner or person in charge, except on official governmental business. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful and a trespass for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or any other person to fail to promptly leave the premises when requested to leave by the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a trespass for any person to use the city public park or any other facility owned by the city if the property is closed. 
(d)  It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for any person to fail to leave promptly the private premises of any person who requests or directs him to leave. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-123; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(26), 5-16-1974; Ord. No. 91-05, 4-1-1991)  
Sec. 16-44. - Wearing masks. 
No person may appear in public wearing a mask except: 
(1)  Children under the age of ten years; and 
(2)  Workers actually engaged in work requiring air filters or welding masks or protective shields. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-124)  
Sec. 16-45. - Window peeping. 
No person shall enter uninvited on private property to spy, peer, or peep into any window. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-125; Ord. No. 74-8, § 1(7), 5-16-1974)  
Sec. 16-46. - Vehicles, unlicensed or inoperable. 
(a)  It is unlawful to store, park or keep any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle on a residential lot in the city unless the vehicle is stored inside an enclosed building. It is unlawful to store, park or keep any unlicensed or inoperable vehicle on any commercial lot in the city unless the vehicle is stored inside an enclosed building; provided, however, that automobile repair shops operating on property zoned C-3 may keep up to ten vehicles being repaired so long as no vehicle stays on the lot more than 30 days and the storage area is screened from view from other properties. Automobile graveyards as mentioned in T.C.A. § 54-20-103 and automobile wrecking yards as mentioned in T.C.A. § 68-102-113 are prohibited except on C-3 planned unit development. This section shall not apply to vehicles used in agriculture and stored on property zoned agricultural. 
(b)  This section may be enforced by a citation to municipal court and/or by a notice of violation which may be appealed to the board of adjustment for new construction and property maintenance. 
(Code 1997, § 10-2-126; Ord. No. 2006-39, § 2, 9-11-2006)  
Secs. 16-47—16-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOITERING 
 
Sec. 16-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, or other place of business and also public grounds, and areas of parks. 
(Code 1997, § 10-3-2; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 1(3-2), 6-9-2008)  
Sec. 16-67. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone, and/or in consort with others in a public place in such a matter to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicle traffic or pedestrians; or 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free or uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon, and thereto. 
(Code 1997, § 10-3-1; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 1(3-1), 6-9-2008)  
Sec. 16-68. - Police order to disperse. 
(a)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in this article, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(Code 1997, § 10-3-3; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 1(3-3), 6-9-2008)  
Secs. 16-69—16-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 16-95. - Fees for firearms safety course held by police department. 
For the firearms safety course held by the police department the city establishes the following fees: 
(1)  Resident of the city: $25.00. 
(2)  Resident of the county: $50.00. 
(3)  Resident of the state: $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, 5-13-2002)  
Secs. 16-96—16-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 16-121. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  The commission finds that the increase in aggressive solicitation throughout the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation and disorder. 
(b)  Aggressive solicitation usually includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The commission further finds that the presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines, or in public transportation vehicles is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in those confined environments. Motorists also find themselves confronted by persons seeking money who, without permission, wash their automobile windows at traffic intersections, despite explicit indications by drivers not to do so. Such activity carries with it an implicit threat to both persons and property. People driving or parking on city streets frequently find themselves faced with persons seeking money by offering to open car doors or locate parking spaces. 
(c)  The commission is enacting this article pursuant to its police power. 
(d)  The law is not intended to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. Rather, its goal is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation that have become an unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 5-3-101)  
Sec. 16-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive manner means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is: 
a.  Likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is: 
a.  Likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation; such as soliciting within a traffic lane of a street or highway. 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or: 
a.  Likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is: 
a.  Likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. 
Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
Bank means the property upon which any company which loans money or accepts deposits of money does business. 
Check cashing business means any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them. 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(Code 1997, § 5-3-102)  
Sec. 16-123. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of this article may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or by both. If the person has been convicted of a violation of this section within the previous period of one year, the person shall be fined not more than $250.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(b)  In lieu of, or in addition to the penalty provided in this section, a person in violation of this article may be required to perform community service work as described by the court. 
(c)  Any arrest or conviction under this article shall be disclosed to government social service agencies who request that the applicable public official be notified of such events. 
(Code 1997, § 5-3-104)  
Sec. 16-124. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services: 
(1)  In an aggressive manner in a public area; 
(2)  In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or subway station or stop; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(5)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 5-3-103)  
Sec. 16-125. - Severability. 
(a)  Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the article. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  This article is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. 
(c)  This article is not intended to create a result through enforcement that is absurd, impossible or unreasonable. The article should be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be unconstitutional under the constitution of the state or the Constitution of the United States of America. 
(Code 1997, § 5-3-105)  
Chapter 18 - PLANNING AND ZONING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 18-21. - Established. 
To guide and coordinate harmonious development of the city, considering current and future needs, to best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, prosperity, and welfare as well as efficiency and economy in development, a municipal-regional planning commission is hereby created and established as authorized by T.C.A. § 13-4-101. The municipal-regional planning commission may be referred to as the planning commission. 
(Code 1997, § 11-1-101; Ord. No. 73-4, 4-19-1973; Ord. No. 95-8, 6-26-1995)  
Sec. 18-22. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of nine members. The mayor or his designee shall be one of the members. One member shall be appointed by the city commission from among its members. The remaining members shall be appointed and removed by the mayor at his pleasure. The term of the member appointed by the city commission shall expire with the end of that member's current term on the city commission. The term of the members appointed by the mayor shall be so arranged that the term of at least one member expires each year. Members shall serve without compensation. The term of members shall be four years except when shortened for rotation. 
(Code 1997, § 11-1-102)  
Sec. 18-23. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The municipal-regional planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its appointed members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall adopt procedural rules and shall adopt subdivision regulations which shall be submitted to and approved by the city commission. The planning commission may appoint or employ such staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city commission. 
(Code 1997, § 11-1-103; Ord. No. 73-4, § 2, 4-19-1973)  
Sec. 18-24. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in all applicable sections of the Tennessee Code and the zoning ordinance. See title 13 of the Tennessee Code. 
(Code 1997, § 11-1-104)  
Secs. 18-25—18-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-37. - Regulations. 
The subdivision ordinance will be published separately.  
Secs. 18-38—18-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING 
 
Sec. 18-58. - Regulations. 
The zoning ordinance will be published separately.  
Sec. 18-59. - Adopted by reference. 
The zoning ordinance is comprised of the complete zoning ordinance beginning with article I through article XIV and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(Code 1997, § 11-4-101; Ord. No. 98-22, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Secs. 18-60—18-77. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LAND USE PLAN 
 
Sec. 18-78. - Adoption by reference. 
The land use plan approved by the city regional planning commission is hereby adopted as the land use plan for the city. 
(Code 1997, § 11-5-101)  
Sec. 18-79. - Procedure. 
Any application for a change to the zoning ordinances established by the board of commissioners shall, when being presented to any board or commission for consideration, be accompanied by the current land use plan or the relevant portion thereof, along with a report from city staff indicating whether or not the application is consistent with the approved land use plan, and whether the zoning request was recommended for approval or disapproval by the city regional planning commission. 
(Code 1997, § 11-5-102; Ord. No. 2003-52, 11-24-2003)  
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. 
No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way for purposes of storing, selling, or exhibiting any vehicle, goods, wares, merchandise or materials. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-101)  
Sec. 24-2. - Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his property to project over any street or alley at a height of less than 14 feet or over any sidewalk at a height of less than eight feet. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-102)  
Sec. 24-3. - Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on his property any tree, shrub, sign or other obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection. The area within which obstructions are not allowed shall be a triangle with legs 35 feet in length, at the property line, with the apex or central angle at the property line at the intersection. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-103)  
Sec. 24-4. - Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property to allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley, or sidewalk except when required by law. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-104)  
Sec. 24-5. - Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any street, alley, or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud, or other objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their intended purpose. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-105)  
Sec. 24-6. - Obstruction of drainage ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public right-of-way or easement. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-106)  
Sec. 24-7. - Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. 
The occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk clean and free from debris and accumulations of snow. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-107)  
Sec. 24-8. - Parades, etc., regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, club organization, or other group to hold any meeting, parade, demonstration, or exhibition on the public streets without some responsible representative first securing a permit from the chief of police. The chief of police shall issue no permit unless such activity will not unreasonably interfere with traffic and unless such representative and the sponsoring organization shall agree to be responsible for immediately removing all litter from the affected streets after the activity. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-108)  
Sec. 24-9. - Operation of trains at crossings regulated. 
No person shall operate any railroad train across any street or alley without giving a warning of its approach, except for areas designated as a "quiet zone"; nor shall he make such crossing at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour, except for commuter rail services. It shall also be unlawful to stop a railroad train so as to block or obstruct any street or alley for a period of more than five consecutive minutes 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-109)  
Sec. 24-10. - Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull or place any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as unreasonably interferes with or inconveniences pedestrians using the sidewalk. Parents and guardians shall be liable for violating this section if they allow a minor to violate this section. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-110)  
Sec. 24-11. - Fires in streets, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set or contribute to any fire in any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Code 1997, § 12-1-111)  
Secs. 24-12—24-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Excavation code adopted by reference. 
The city has adopted the standard excavation code as adopted by the Southern Building Code Conference International, Inc., located at 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206 (phone 205-591-1853). A copy of the excavation code is located in the office of the public works director. For the terms of the standard excavation code, refer directly to that document. 
(Code 1997, § 12-2-101)  
Sec. 24-42. - Street cuts. 
(a)  Any person cutting or boring a road for any purpose within the City of Mt. Juliet shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Obtain a permit from the director of public works and pay a permit fee for cutting a road or boring under the road. The amount of the non-refundable permit fee shall be $200.00. The permit form shall be signed by the applicant and shall authorize the city to repair the roads at the expense of the applicant if necessary road and right-of-way repairs are not completed by the applicant to the satisfaction of the City of Mt. Juliet within 30 days of the completion of the roadway cut activities. 
(2)  Post a surety in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check with the City of Mt. Juliet in the amount of $10,000.00. The surety shall be from a financial institution with an office located within the City of Mt. Juliet. Persons drilling under the road at a depth of 40 inches or greater and inserting a casing or pipe the same diameter as the bore shall not be required to pay a permit fee but shall post an irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check. Surety for road cutting/or boring shall be refunded upon completion of all work and restoration associated with the permit. The road shall not be damaged and the site of the bore shall be restored to pre-bore conditions and stabilized to the requirements of the stormwater division of the department of public works. 
(3)  Pay an inspection fee of $50.00. 
(4)  The director of public works or his designated representative shall inspect all borings and cutting of roads. 
(5)  Roadway cuts and trench repairs shall be completed in compliance with the City of Mt. Juliet requirements, including Standard Detail ST-270, Trench Repair Within Roadway. All roadway cuts and trench repair work shall be coordinated with the department of public works. 
(6)  Any person boring a road shall repair all damage to the road, road shoulders, ditches, and area adjacent to the road. 
(7)  Persons cutting state or federal highways or roads shall obtain such additional state or federal permits as may be required. 
(b)  Any public utility, utility district, or municipality supplying Mt. Juliet with utilities may, in lieu of paying a fee of $200.00 per road cut, do all of the following: 
(1)  Obtain a permit from the director of public works prior to each road cut. 
(2)  Post a surety with the City of Mt. Juliet in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check in the amount of $50,000.00 to secure the city against loss for damage or premature deterioration of roads within the city due to road cuts made by the entity. The entity shall maintain the irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check for two years past the date of the last road cut permit. 
(3)  Agree in writing to repair the roadway to the satisfaction of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(c)  Any person violating any portion of this section shall be subject to a fine set by the city judge, said fine not to exceed $50.00 plus the $200.00 non-refundable permit fee, if said fee has not been paid. Each day the illegal condition continues shall be considered a new and separate violation. 
(Code 1997, § 12-2-102; Ord. No. 2013-83, §§ 1—3, 11-25-2013; Ord. No. 2014-50, §§ 1—3, 7-14-2014)  
Secs. 24-43—24-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, § 24-43 has been deleted from this Code. Former § 24-43 pertained to bond and derived from Code 1997, § 12-2-103.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET REQUIREMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 24-75. - Regulations. 
The city planning commission has adopted subdivision regulations which apply to new subdivisions. These subdivision regulations are a part of this Code, but are published in a separate volume. 
(Code 1997, § 12-3-101)  
Secs. 24-76—24-93. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-94. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable in city court by a fine of $50.00 per violation, per day, plus court costs and other actual costs incurred by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-304; Ord. No. 2006-33, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-304), 1-26-2009)  
Secs. 24-95—24-116. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MT. JULIET PARKS AND GREENWAYS BOARD 
 
Sec. 24-117. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city parks and greenways board is to provide advice, assistance and recommendations to the director of parks and recreation, the city manager and the board of commissioners on operational and resource matters related to parks, greenways and other recreational facilities and programs within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-102), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-118. - Membership and appointment. 
The parks and greenways board shall consist of seven voting members. Six members shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners, and one shall be a city commissioner elected by the board of commissioners. In addition to the seven voting members, the city planner shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-103), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-119. - Terms and vacancies. 
Members of the parks and greenways board as of February 1, 2009, with last names beginning with the letter "A" through the letter "K" shall be appointed to an additional one-year term on the board. Members of the board as of February 1, 2009, with last names beginning with the letter "L" through the letter "Z" shall be appointed to an additional two-year term on the board. All appointments to the board made after February 1, 2009, shall be for a term of five years. Vacancies created before the completion of a member's term shall be filled by the mayor and board of commissioners in like manner as original appointments, except that the term of office is restricted to the remainder of the unexpired term of the member being replaced. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-102; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-104), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-120. - Removal of members. 
The mayor may replace members of the parks and greenways board at any time upon: 
(1)  A failure to perform duties; 
(2)  An accrual of four or more unexcused absences from regular meetings; 
(3)  The demonstration of a reoccurring conflict of interest; 
(4)  The written request of the appointee; or 
(5)  The demonstration of actions detrimental to the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-105), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-121. - Compensation. 
Members of the parks and greenways board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed by the city manager for necessary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-106), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-122. - Enumeration and election of officers. 
The officers of the parks and greenways board shall be the chairperson, vice-chairperson, and the secretary. The officers shall be elected annually by the board at the first regularly scheduled meeting of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-107), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-123. - Vacancy. 
If an officer resigns during a term, the board shall nominate and elect a new officer at the next meeting after the resignation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-108), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-124. - Duties. 
(a)  Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, appoint committees, and call special meetings when he deems it advisable. The chairperson shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, an agenda for every regular or special meeting of the board. The chairperson shall prepare and post, or cause to be prepared and posted, a notice of each regular or special meeting of the board. Such notice shall contain the meeting agenda. 
(b)  Vice-chairperson. The vice-chairperson, in the absence of the chairperson, shall perform all of the duties of the chairperson. 
(c)  Secretary. The secretary shall keep a full and true permanent record of all meetings of the board. The secretary shall coordinate marketing activities and other communications the city and other stakeholders. The secretary, in the absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson, shall perform all of the duties of the chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-109), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-125. - Meetings. 
(a)  Quorum. Four voting members shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting for the purpose of conducting the business of the board, except that an amendment to the board's bylaws shall require a quorum of five voting members. 
(b)  Bylaws. The board may adopt bylaws to govern its meetings and procedures. 
(c)  Robert's Rules of Order. In the absence of specific rules to the contrary set by the board, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern all meetings of the board. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The board shall keep a written or electronically recorded record of its meetings, recommendations, findings and determinations. The original of these records shall be maintained by the director of parks and recreation, and a copy of these records shall be provided to the city recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-110), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-126. - Ethics. 
The members of the board shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 2, article XII, pertaining to the city's code of ethics. Copies of chapter 2, article XII, pertaining to the code of ethics, along with subsequent amendments thereto, shall be made available to the members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-111), 1-26-2009)  
Secs. 24-127—24-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 24-151. - Qualifications and duties. 
The director of parks and recreation (the director) shall have training and/or experience in parks and recreation administration. The director shall be the chief operational and administrative officer responsible for the management of all public parks, playgrounds and other recreational areas and responsible for the implementation and direction of a comprehensive recreational program for the city. The director shall be an employee of the city and shall report to and be supervised by the city manager. The director shall perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the city manager, including, but not limited to, assisting the board in fulfilling its duties under this article. 
(Code 1997, §§ 12-4-201, 12-4-202; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-201), 1-26-2009)  
Secs. 24-152—24-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKS RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 24-171. - In general. 
(a)  It shall be illegal to procure, aid, or cause to occur any act prohibited by this article. 
(b)  The parks director shall publish copies of these rules and regulation in each park, community center, or other recreational facility. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-301; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-301), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-172. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  No person shall damage, deface or destroy park property. 
(b)  No person shall litter in the park. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of household trash in park trash receptacles. 
(d)  No person shall advertise products or services in the park using either signs or sound. This prohibition shall not apply to signs affixed to vehicles used primarily to transport people to the park or to advertising affixed to uniforms or clothing. 
(e)  No person shall gamble in the parks. 
(f)  No person shall bring alcoholic beverages, drugs, firearms, fireworks, BB guns, air rifles, bows or arrows into a park, except as provided herein. This provision shall not apply to law enforcement officers. Persons may bring legally licensed handguns into the parks. 
(g)  No person shall perform routine vehicle maintenance (such as changing the oil) in the park. 
(h)  No person shall disobey an official regulatory or directional sign. 
(i)  No person, except a park employee, shall place a sign in the park. 
(j)  No person shall drive a motorized vehicle off of the road. 
(k)  There will be no fighting within any city parks. 
(l)  Violations of this section are subject to exclusion/expulsion from all city parks and, depending on the severity of the violation, may be subject to criminal or civil prosecution. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-302; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-302), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-173. - Regulated uses. 
The following uses are subject to permit or other restrictions: 
(1)  Persons with permits or scheduled reservations of ball diamonds, tennis courts, football fields, soccer fields, picnic areas and other facilities subject to scheduled use shall have superior right to use such facilities and no person shall interfere with such rights. 
(2)  No person shall sell any food or product without a permit. Such sales shall be confined to the concession stands. 
(3)  No person shall build a fire in a park except in metal grills. 
(4)  No person shall sleep in the park or remain in the park overnight. 
(5)  No person shall operate a powered model airplane or model vehicle except in prescribed areas outlined by the parks director. 
(6)  No person shall bring a horse or farm animals into the park without a permit. 
(7)  Dogs and cats are permitted in the park, but shall be restrained by a leash. Other pets are prohibited without a permit. 
(8)  No person shall operate a vehicle in the park at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. No person shall operate a vehicle such as a go-cart or offroad motorcycle off of areas designated for such vehicles. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-303; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-303), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-174. - Free community access time. 
(a)  The director shall designate ten hours per week as free community access time. During the hours designated as free community access time, citizens of the city shall be allowed to use the community center (with the exception of the weight room) without paying the currently applicable daily user fee. No reservations for facilities shall be taken during this time. 
(b)  The scheduled free community access time may, at the discretion of the director or the city manager, be preempted by special events. Such special events or functions shall be noticed to the public by posting at the community center and through such other methods as deemed necessary by the director or the city manager. 
(Code 1997, § 12-4-305; Ord. No. 2003-15, 3-24-2003; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(12-4-305), 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 24-175. - Use of amphitheater at Charlie Daniels Park. 
Applications, as set forth in this section, including terms and conditions for use of the amphitheater at Charlie Daniels Park will be used for taking reservations for the amphitheater. Application instructions and terms and conditions for amphitheater use are as follows: 
(1)  The base application fee is due on the date of application, subject to refund if application is refused. 
(2)  Applications for general use are accepted on the first business day in January each year. The parks and recreation department have first priority in scheduling events in all parks and facilities. All dates are reserved on first come, first served basis. Events dates are not confirmed until all related fees are paid. 
(3)  If the event will include elements added to park facilities, such as tents, rides, etc., a certificate of insurance must be submitted with this application. The policy must be in force for the duration of the event and be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, specifying public liability and property damage insurance with a single limit of not less than $1,000,000.00, naming the city and the city parks and recreation department as additionally insured. No event will be permitted unless this certificate has been received. 
(4)  Any changes to the event described in the application must be submitted in writing to the park office. Any aspect of the event not fully described in the application or an addendum submitted in accordance with this section will not be allowed in the parks facility. 
(5)  All events in city parks must fit with the following guidelines: 
a.  The proposed activity or use of the park must not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public's enjoyment of the park. 
b.  The proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation. 
c.  The proposed activity or use will not include or promote violence, crime or disorderly conduct. 
d.  The proposed activity or use will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operations by the city. 
(6)  All special events to be held in parks requesting permission to have amplified music will be considered by the parks department on a case-by-case basis. A park staff member to ensure proper sound levels will monitor the event. The staff member shall have the authority to direct a reduction of sound levels or to stop the performance if deemed necessary and in the best interest of the parks department and the persons in the immediate neighborhood. 
(7)  Prior to but not earlier than six hours before the event, the event holder must perform an inspection of the facility and must report in writing to the parks department the presence of any damage or trash on the premises. All damage evident or trash remaining on the premises after the event and not previously and specifically reported to the parks department as required in this subsection, will be considered to have resulted from the event and must be rectified at the sole expense of the event holder. 
(8)  It is the event holder's responsibility to return the park to the condition it was in prior to the permitted event or pay fees related to returning the property to condition prior to event. Event holders are responsible for all cleanups after each event. The parks department reserves the right to require, of any event holder, a security deposit. The posting of a deposit does not relieve the event holder from the responsibility for performing all cleanups and correcting all damage relating to the event as well as responsibility of loss of property. The event holder agrees to reimburse the parks department for all costs incurred in performing cleanups and repairs which, in the judgment of the department, the event holder has failed to perform. Cleanup and repair cost shall accrue at the rate of $30.00 per manhour. If cleanup or repair takes place on a holiday, the cost shall accrue at the rate of $50.00 per manhour. These rates do not include any additional cost of cleaning supplies, basic landscaping materials and the like. The event holder's deposit will be applied to cleanup and repair cost accruing under this subsection. 
(9)  The parks department reserves the right to require event holders to provide the following security at their expense: off-duty police officers and/or chaperones as the department deems necessary to ensure the safety of the public and park facilities. Three security personnel and their phone numbers shall be listed on the application. During the course of the event all security personnel must remain at the event or the event will be cancelled. The requirement in this subsection will be strictly enforced. 
(10)  No alcoholic beverages or drugs are allowed in park facility. 
(11)  All signage, advertising, publicity, exhibits or displays advertising an event and posted on city property must have prior approval by the parks department. All signs must comply with chapter 20, pertaining to signs. 
(12)  All events must end no later than 11:00 p.m. However, the event still shall be subject to section 16-22, pertaining to noise. 
(13)  Appropriate park personnel and members of the parks and police department must be provided access to event upon request in order to monitor event activities and ensure compliance with ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(14)  The parks department has the authority to revoke any permit for any violation of any of the rules set forth in this section or upon good cause shown. 
(15)  In the event of willful noncompliance with any provision of these terms and conditions, the parks department can in its sole discretion ban any event sponsor or professional event organizer, promoter or the like from further sponsorship or promotion of any event in the park facility for a period of two years. 
(16)  By submitting an application, the event organizer agrees to the following terms: 
a.  The event organizer will indemnify and hold harmless the city and the city parks department from any and all claims, damages, cost and attorney fees for injuries or damages arising in part or in whole from the organization's use of park facilities and described in the permit application, and any claims, damages, costs and attorney fees arising from any failure of the organization, its officers, employees and agents to observe applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
b.  The event organizer assumes all risk and responsibility for any dangerous or defective conditions on the grounds of the facility, whether known or unknown. 
c.  The event organizer agrees to restore the park facility to the condition in which it existed prior to the event. 
d.  The application shall set forth the entire agreement of the parties. 
e.  The individual executing the application on behalf of the event organizer affirms that he is authorized to do so. 
f.  All events are smoke-free events, the only exception being when designated smoking areas are provided. 
g.  No modifications of the application shall be valid unless in writing and signed by the director or other authorized representative of the parks department. 
h.  State law shall govern any dispute arising from the application, and any suit relating in any way to the application shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county. 
i.  All applicants must be at least 18 years of age. 
j.  No pyrotechnics of any kind will be allowed. 
k.  In case of inclement weather, deposits and fees will be refunded. 
l.  The fee schedule as set forth in section 24-176. 
(17)  Applications shall be submitted to the following location: Mt. Juliet Community Center, P.O. Box 256, Mt. Juliet, Tennessee 37121. 
(Ord. No. 2003-20, § 1, 5-12-2003)  
Sec. 24-176. - Fees. 
(a)  Starting July 1, 2009, the following fees will be charged: 
Location 	Fee 
Charlie Daniels Park (four pavilions, gazebo and amphitheater) 	
	Damage deposit 	$1,500.00 
	Rental fee (per day) 	
		Individual and for-profit 	  500.00 
		Not-for-profit 	  350.00 
Mt. Juliet Community Center 	
	Damage deposit 	 1,500.00 
	Mat fee 	  100.00 
	Stage rental 	  500.00 
	Rental fee 	
		Individual and for-profit (per hour) 	  175.00 
			8 hours 	 1,200.00 
			12 hours 	 1,500.00 
		Not-for-profit (per hour) 	  150.00 
			8 hours 	 1,000.00 
			12 hours 	 1,200.00 
Gymnasium rental 	
	Damage deposit 	  500.00 
	Mat fee 	  100.00 
	Rental fee 	
		Individual and for-profit (per hour) 	   85.00 
		Not-for-profit (per hour) 	   50.00 
Amphitheatre rental 	
	Damage deposit 	  300.00 
	Rental fee 	
		Not-for-profit 	
			Full day 	  150.00 
			Half day 	   75.00 
		Individual 	
			Full day 	  200.00 
			Half day 	  100.00 
		For-profit 	
			Full day 	  300.00 
			Half day 	  150.00 
Pavilion and gazebo rental 	
	Damage deposit 	   50.00 
	Rental fee 	
		Half day 	   40.00 
		Full day 	   80.00 
Game room rental 	
	Damage deposit 	  500.00 
	Rental fee (per hour) 	   30.00 
Mundy Park adult leagues (per team) 	
	Spring season 	  625.00 
	Fall season 	  525.00 
	Flag football 	  475.00 
MJCC daily rates 	
	Residents and senior citizen 	    2.00 
	Nonresident 	    4.00 
	Monthly member 	
		Resident 	   15.00 
		Senior 	   12.00 
		Nonresident 	   23.00 
	Yearly member 	
		Resident 	  150.00 
		Senior 	  120.00 
		Nonresident 	  225.00 
Mundy Park softball field rental 	
	Damage deposit 	  400.00 
	Booking fee 	  100.00 
	Per day 	   75.00 
	Fence fee per field (nonrefundable) 	  100.00 
 
(b)  Parks department employees shall post reservation notices no less than 12 hours in advance of a reserved pavilion or gazebo. Citizens may use the pavilions or gazebo at any time it is not reserved during park hours. 
(Ord. No. 2009-32, 5-26-2009)  
Chapter 26 - TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1997, § 6-1-101; Ord. No. 73-5, 6-7-1973)  
Sec. 26-2. - Official depositories of city funds. 
The following banks are hereby designated official depositories for funds of the City of Mt. Juliet: 
(1)  Wilson Bank and Trust; and 
(2)  State of TN — Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP). 
(Code 1997, § 6-1-102; Ord. No. 2007-49, 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 2008-15, §§ 1—3, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 2008-59, §§ 1—3, 11-24-2008; Ord. No. 2012-11, §§ 1, 2, 2-27-2012)  
Sec. 26-3. - Line item budget guidelines. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency expenditures include, but are not limited to, expenditures necessary to immediately protect the public health, safety or welfare or expenditures that are time-sensitive. 
(b)  Expenditures must be spent for the purposes designated in the operating budget. Each month, the city manager shall submit a resolution (omnibus resolution) for approval by the city commission that includes an itemization of all proposed intradepartmental line item transfers in excess of $2,000.00, provided that, in the event of an emergency, the city manager may make such intradepartmental transfer absent prior approval by the city commission. Any such emergency transfers shall be included for informational purposes in the next monthly omnibus resolution. 
(c)  Capital expenditures must be spent for the purposes designated in the capital outlay budget unless the city commission has approved a change in the capital outlay budget in the monthly omnibus resolution, provided that, in the event of an emergency, the city manager may make expenditures not in conformance with the capital outlay budget absent prior approval by the city commission. Any such emergency expenditure shall be included for informational purposes in the next monthly omnibus resolution. 
(d)  All routine purchases, payments for services, and payroll disbursements will not be affected by this section. Journal entries or standard entries made in accordance with generally accepted governmental accounting principles shall not be affected by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 3-13-2006)  
Secs. 26-4—26-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WHOLESALE BEER TAX 
 
Sec. 26-25. - To be collected. 
The recorder is hereby directed to take appropriate action to ensure payment to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied by the Wholesale Beer Tax Act as set out in T.C.A. § 57-6-101 et seq. 
(Code 1997, § 6-2-101)  
Secs. 26-26—26-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVILEGE TAXES 
 
Sec. 26-54. - Levied. 
A tax is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses declared by the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities, an annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by state laws. The tax provided for in the state's Business Tax Act as set out in T.C.A. § 67-4-701 et seq. are hereby expressly enacted, ordained and levied on the businesses, business activities, vocations, and occupations carried on within the city at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the act. 
(Code 1997, § 6-3-101; Ord. No. 83-22, § 1, 9-5-1983)  
Sec. 26-55. - License required. 
A license is required and no person shall exercise any such privilege within the city without a currently effective privilege license which shall be issued by the recorder to each applicant thereof upon the applicant's payment of the appropriate privilege tax. 
(Code 1997, § 6-3-102; Ord. No. 83-22, § 1, 9-5-1983)  
Sec. 26-56. - Hotel/motel tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bed and breakfast means establishments [that] are small businesses often located in a quaint setting or in a small structure with residential appearance. 
Consideration means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Hostle means an owner-occupied detached dwelling in which the owner rents rooms to temporary residents or travelers, such as college students, for the purpose of offering short-term accommodations. 
Hotel means any structure or space, or any portion thereof, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, motel or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel. 
Operator means the person operating the hotel whether as owner, lessee or otherwise. 
Persons means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, governmental units or any other group or combination acting as a unit; and 
Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for a period of less than 30 continuous days. 
(b)  Permit required. No person will conduct, keep, manage, operate or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, either as owner, lessor, agent or attorney, any hotel in the city without having obtained a permit from the city recorder or his designee to do so. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for each hotel permit will be $25.00. 
(d)  Permit not transferable. No permit issued under this section shall be transferred or assigned. 
(e)  Permit duration. Hotel permits shall be issued annually and shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(f)  Register required; availability for inspection. Every person to whom a hotel permit is issued under this section shall at all times keep a standard hotel register, in which shall be inscribed the names of all guests renting or occupying rooms or accommodations in his hotel. Such register shall include: 
(1)  The name of persons renting a room or accommodations; 
(2)  The number of the room or accommodation which the guest is to occupy; and 
(3)  The time during which such room or accommodation is rented. 
The register shall be open to inspection at all times to the city recorder or his designee. 
(g)  Privilege tax levied; use. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. § 67-4-1401 et seq., hereafter referred to as the Hotel Tax Act, there is hereby levied a privilege of occupancy in any hotel of each transient. From and after the operative date of this section the rate of the levy shall be four percent of the consideration charged by the operator. This privilege tax shall be collected by the hotel operator pursuant to the Hotel Tax Act. The hotel must disclose the amount of the tax to each invoice provided to guests. 
(2)  The proceeds received from this tax shall be available for the city's parks and recreation funds and may be expended for the purposes of buying, leasing, or otherwise acquiring an interest in real or personal property or equipment to promote recreational activity in the city. Proceeds of this tax may not be used to provide a subsidy in any form to any hotel or motel. 
(3)  The finance director shall be designated as the authorized collector to administer and enforce this section and the Hotel Tax Act. 
(h)  Remitting the tax. Remittance of the tax collected by the hotel operator to the city shall occur on or before than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month. When remitting the tax levied, the operator must submit a monthly report, under oath, on a form approved by the board of commissioners, and may report and deduct two percent of the amount due as compensation to the hotel operator for the accounting expense for remitting the tax. 
(i)  Interest and penalty for late payment. The hotel operator shall be liable to pay interest on delinquent hotel taxes, to be paid from the due date for remittance at the rate of 12 percent per annum, and is liable for a penalty of one percent for each month or fraction of a month that the hotel tax is delinquent. 
(j)  Audit and reporting of taxes. The city manager shall cause to be conducted an annual audit of each hotel operator and shall report on the audits made on a quarterly basis to the board of commissioners. 
(k)  Records requirement. The hotel operator must keep records of occupancy and taxes collected and remitted pursuant to this section for three years. The city may inspect these records at any time. 
(l)  Challenge and dispute of tax. The city manager is hereby designated as the municipal officer against whom suit may be brought when a dispute arises as to the amount of hotel/motel tax to be remitted by an operator. 
(m)  Violation. In addition to interest and penalties described in subsection (i) of this section, knowingly refusing to collect or remit the tax is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine for each day that the operator knowingly refused to collect or remit the tax. The fine for each offense shall be $50.00 per day. 
(Code 1997, § 6-3-201; Ord. No. 2007-60, 12-10-2007; Ord. No. 2008-20, § 1, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 2014-39, § 1, 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 2-23-2015; Ord. No. 2017-35, 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 26-57. - Concerning hotel/motel tax further defined. 
(1)  Hotels and motels shall include a minimum of 100 guest rooms with each room accessed from an interior corridor and not from an exterior parking lot or entrance. Hotels and motels must have a lobby, which is staffed, 24 hours, 7-days-a-week and offers daily complimentary maid service. In addition, all hotels and motels shall have a swimming pool and a fitness center. All hotels and motels must provide the following four amenities: 
(a)  A full hot breakfast offered to the public for a fee. 
(b)  A minimum of 3,000 square feet of indoor common area open to guests and the general public, including lobbies, but excluding guest rooms, corridors, meeting rooms, swimming pools, guest room corridors, or health club facilities. 
(c)  A business center located in a separate room adjacent to the lobby and measuring at least 450 square feet. The business center shall contain computers, Wi-Fi availability, printers, and associated office equipment. The business center will be furnished with desks and office chairs, and is available to hotel guests at all times. 
(d)  A minimum of 1,800 square feet of dedicated meeting space that is of ballroom quality and available to rent to the general public and guests of the hotel for compensation. The meeting space should be one contiguous space that can be divided with temporary soundproof wall (minimum of STC rating of 45). 
(2)  Bed and breakfast and hostels establishments are not considered hotels and motels for the purpose of this section. Bed and breakfast establishments are small businesses often located in a quaint setting or in a small structure with a residential appearance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 2-23-2015; Ord. No. 2016-2, § 1, 1-11-2016)  
Secs. 26-58—26-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 26-86. - Levied. 
As authorized by T.C.A. §§ 67-6-701—67-6-712, as amended, there is levied a tax in the same manner and on the same privileges subject to the Retailers' Sales Tax Act, T.C.A. § 67-6-101 et seq., as amended, which are exercised in the city. The tax is levied on all such privileges at a rate of three-fourths of one percent. Penalties and interest for delinquencies shall be the same as provided or authorized by state statutes. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-101)  
Sec. 26-87. - When collections to begin. 
If a majority of those voting in the election required by T.C.A. § 67-6-706 vote for the provisions of this article, collection of the tax levied by this article shall begin on the first day of the month occurring 30 or more days after the county election commission makes its official canvass of the election returns. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-102; Ord. No. 83-15, § 2)  
Sec. 26-88. - Collection by department of revenue. 
It having been determined by the department of revenue of the state that it is feasible for this tax to be collected by that department, this determination being evidenced by local option sales and use tax rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the department of revenue, the department shall collect the tax concurrently with the collection of the state tax in the same manner as the state tax is collected in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the department. The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Contract with the department of revenue for the collection of the tax by the department; 
(2)  Provide in the contract that the department of revenue for the collection of the tax by the department; and 
(3)  Provide in the contract that the department may deduct from the tax collected, a reasonable amount or percentage to cover the expense of the administration and collection of the tax. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-103; Ord. No. 83-15, § 3)  
Sec. 26-89. - Suits for recovery of illegal taxes. 
In the event the tax is collected by the department of revenue, suits for the recovery of any tax illegally assessed or collected shall be brought against the mayor of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-104; Ord. No. 83-15, § 4)  
Sec. 26-90. - Base to which tax applicable. 
The base upon which the tax is applicable shall be the maximum amount allowed by law. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-105; Ord. No. 83-19, § 2) 
State Law reference— Base for sales tax, T.C.A. § 67-6-702(a)(1) and (2).  
Sec. 26-91. - Increase automatic. 
Future increases in the base beginning on the dates specified in this Code shall be automatic and shall not require further action of the board of commissioners of the city. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-106; Ord. No. 83-19, § 3)  
Sec. 26-92. - Tax rate unaffected by increase in base. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to increase the local option sales tax rate heretofore in effect in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 6-4-107; Ord. No. 83-19, § 4)  
Secs. 26-93—26-112. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 26-113. - Imposition, calculation and collection. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article and any amendment to this article, the city may impose impact fees as a condition of approval of all new development projects covered by this article. The fee will be imposed based on the square feet of floor area. Floor area shall mean the total of the gross horizontal area of all floors, including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the center lines of party wall separating such buildings or portions thereof. 
(b)  The base fee amount of each residential development shall be calculated annually and adopted by the board of commissioners by resolution not to exceed the maximum fees allowed by law. The fee is set at $0.50 per gross square foot of new residential development and may be amended by resolution on an annual basis as provided for in this article. 
(c)  Impact fees shall be collected by the city engineer or, at his direction, at the time and as a condition for issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Impact fees shall be expended for: 
(1)  Streets and parks; 
(2)  Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas; and 
(3)  Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules. 
(Code 1997, § 6-5-101; Ord. No. 98-16, 6-5-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 26-114. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person or concern affected by the imposition of an impact fee may challenge the imposition of a fee imposed pursuant to this article by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal with a full statement of the grounds and an appeal fee of $200.00 or such other amounts as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. The city may continue processing the development application if the notice of appeal is accompanied with a bond or other security in an amount equal to the impact fee. 
(b)  The appellant bears the burden of demonstrating that the amount of the fee was not calculated according to the procedures established in the ordinance or by resolution adopting fees. 
(c)  At a regular meeting following the filing of the appeal, the board of commissioners shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the city recorder shall mail notice of the hearing to the appellant at the address given in the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be conducted at the time and place stated in the notice, and the determination of the board of commissioners shall be announced at the conclusion of the hearing or at the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The determination of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Code 1997, § 6-5-102; Ord. No. 98-16, 6-5-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Secs. 26-115—26-141. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNING/ZONING FEES 
 
Sec. 26-142. - Action to applicant. 
Revenue-neutral fees shall be charged each applicant presenting a subdivision of land, a change in zoning classification or a site development plan for approval. 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-102)  
Sec. 26-143. - When payments are due. 
Prior to initiating a response to any subdivision plat submitted pursuant to the subdivision regulations or to any change in zoning classification or any site development plan submitted pursuant to requirements of the zoning ordinance, the applicant shall pay to the city the fees established herein to cover the expected direct costs associated with processing of such application and the annual administration of these regulations. Full cost recovery (revenue neutral) fees set forth herein shall be charged each applicant presenting a subdivision of land, a change in zoning classification or a site development plan for approval. 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-103)  
Sec. 26-144. - Accountability. 
The city shall maintain careful records of its costs of administering these regulations and shall, by amendment to the regulations, endeavor to match application fees with average associated costs on a revenue neutral basis, reflecting the city's cost of administration experience hereunder. 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-104)  
Sec. 26-145. - What fees are to cover. 
(a)  The full cost of administration to be recovered shall consist of the following two components: 
(1)  The direct cost of the administration of the subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance, whether by city personnel or professional firms under contract to the city to perform such services, dealing with the specific application on a timely and efficient, yet thorough, manner; 
(2)  The reasonable costs, prorated among all applicants during the year, prorated by acreage and/or number of lots potentially constructed on the applicant's site should the application be approved, to be shared among all applicants of the land use planning for the regional area and the administration of the subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following costs: 
a.  Per diem salaries, if any, of the planning commission; 
b.  Regional geophysical data assessments and associated land use planning reflecting; 
c.  Floodplains; 
d.  Traffic management; 
e.  Regional utility service planning; 
f.  Legal costs associated with drafting and administering these regulations and legal defense of the city and its officials arising as a result of actions taken pursuant to the regulations; 
g.  Population growth forecasting; 
h.  Aerial photography; 
i.  Maintenance of land use management computer data bases; and 
j.  All other actual costs to the city associated with administration of these regulations. 
(b)  A development and construction fee shall be hereinafter assessed against each new construction project/development in the city in order to defray the costs incurred by the city for services incident thereto, including cost of employing a road and street inspector. 
(c)  The cost to the city of providing such service shall be borne by developers of new construction projects in the city. 
(d)  The public works director shall determine the amount of the fee to be paid, which shall be a revenue-neutral, prorated amount necessary to fund inspection based upon all new construction/development projects in the city. 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-105; Ord. No. 2004-13, 4-5-2004)  
Sec. 26-146. - Not connected to sewer fees. 
The fees shall be paid at the time an application is made and as a condition for the processing of any application. The fees charged in this article are in addition to and separate from any fees charged for sewer development, sewer use or sewer rate fees as set forth in city ordinances. 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-107; Ord. No. 98-18, 6-15-1998)  
Sec. 26-147. - Fee schedule. 
In pursuance of the purposes established by this article, the following interim fee schedule has been adopted: 
Purpose 	Fee 
Zoning 	
	Land use plan amendment 	$ 250.00 
	Rezoning requests for all zoning districts, except residential or commercial planned unit development districts (includes all public notices and processing to planning commission and city commission) 	
		Text amendments 	  400.00 
		Property 	
			Up to five acres 	  400.00 
			Plus, next 6—100 acres (per acre) 	    5.00 
			Plus, over 100 acres (per acre) 	    2.50 
	Rezoning requests with preliminary master development plan for residential, mixed use or commercial planned unit developments 	
		New preliminary plan 	
			Up to five acres 	  400.00 
			Plus, next 6—100 acres (per acre) 	   20.00 
			Plus, over 101—500 acres (per acre) 	   10.00 
			Plus, next 501 acres and up (per acre) 	    5.00 
		Revise/amend/cancel preliminary plan 50 percent or more 	
			Up to five acres 	  400.00 
			Plus, next 6—100 acres (per acre) 	   20.00 
			Plus, over 101—500 acres (per acre) 	   10.00 
			Plus, next 501 acres and up (per acre) 	    5.00 
		Revise/amend/cancel preliminary plan 50 percent or less 	
			Up to five acres 	  300.00 
			Plus, next 6—100 acres (per acre) 	   15.00 
			Plus, over 101—500 acres (per acre) 	    7.50 
			Plus, next 501 acres and up (per acre) 	    3.75 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
	Final master development plan review fees for residential, mixed use and commercial planned unit developments 	
		Up to five acres 	  200.00 
		Next 6—100 acres (per acre) 	    5.00 
		Over 101—500 (per acre) 	    2.50 
		Next 501 acres and up (per acre) 	    1.25 
	Master development plan review fees for variable lot residential developments (cluster subdivisions), multifamily developments, manufactured home parks, commercial complexes 	  500.00 
		Plus, beginning at 3.01 acres (per acre or any fraction thereof) 	  100.00 
		Maximum of per project 	3,000.00 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
		Master development plan modification 	Same 
	Commercial site plan review fees 	  500.00 
		Plus, beginning at 3.01 acres (per acre or any fraction thereof) 	  100.00 
		Maximum of per project 	3,000.00 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
		Master development plan modification 	Same 
	Expansion of existing commercial 	
		Type 1 expansion 	
			Structure, either an addition to an existing building or a freestanding accessory structure up to 2,000 square feet in floor area or 50 percent of the total square footage of the existing building, whichever is less 	  250.00 
				Plus, beginning at 3.01 acres (per acre) 	   50.00 
				Maximum of per project 	1,500.00 
			Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
			Modification of type 1 site plan 	Same 
		Type 2 expansion (same as new commercial) 	
			Structure, either an addition to an existing building or a freestanding accessory structure up to 2,001 square feet in floor area or in excess of 50 percent of the total square footage of the existing building, whichever is less 	  500.00 
				Plus, beginning at 3.01 acres (per acre) 	  100.00 
				Maximum of per project 	3,000.00 
			Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
			Modification of type 2 site plan 	Same 
	Landscape plan review fees for commercial site plans, commercial complexes and residential, mixed use and commercial planned unit developments 	  150.00 
			Plus, beginning at 3.01 acres (per acre) 	   50.00 
			Maximum of per project 	1,000.00 
		Modification of landscape plan 	Same 
	Landscape plan review fees for transitional protective yards in residential subdivisions 	
		Per linear foot of required transitional protective yard 	    0.25 
		Modification of landscape plan (TPY) 	Same 
	Zoning certificate (letter) 	   15.00 
	Board of zoning appeals 	
		Variance request, plus cost of all public notices and signs 	  100.00 
		Administrative appeals, plus cost of all public notices and signs 	  100.00 
		Conditional use permit, plus cost of all public notices and signs 	  100.00 
		Fees to be paid at the time application and as condition for processing any application. The fees charged herein, in addition to and separate from any fee charges for sewer development, sewer use or sewer rate fees as set forth in city ordinances 	
	Copy of city zoning regulations 	   75.00 
Subdivisions 	
	Conceptual subdivision plat 	1,000.00 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
		Modification of conceptual subdivision plat 	Same 
	Preliminary subdivision plat 	
			10—25 lots 	  500.00 
				Plus, per lot for construction plan review 	   25.00 
			26—50 lots 	1,000.00 
				Plus, per lot for construction plan review 	   25.00 
			50 lots or more 	2,500.00 
				Plus, per lot for construction plan review 	   25.00 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
		Modification of preliminary subdivision plat 	Same 
	Final subdivision plat 	  100.00 
		Plus, per lot 	   25.00 
		Plus, cost of traffic studies, flood studies, geotechnical studies or any other studies required by the planning commission or city commission 	
		Modification of final subdivision plat 	Same 
	Subdivision amendment 	  100.00 
		Plus, per lot 	    7.50 
		Subdivision variance (per variance) 	  100.00 
	Subdivision performance bond 	
			New or replacement, with application 	   50.00 
			Extension of existing 	   25.00 
			Reduction only 	   25.00 
			Release 	No fee 
	Subdivision maintenance bond 	
		New or replacement 	   50.00 
		Extension of existing 	   25.00 
		Reduction only 	   25.00 
		Release 	
No fee 
	Copy of subdivision regulations 	   75.00 
 
(Code 1997, § 6-6-106; Ord. No. 2002-37, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-12, §§ 2—4, 2-11-2008)  
Secs. 26-148—26-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-41, §§ 1—[13], adopted July 25, 2011, amended the former Art. VII, §§ 26-161—26-169, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2011-26, §§ 1—12, adopted June 13, 2011. 
 
Sec. 26-161. - [Building permit fee for residential construction.] 
A building permit fee for residential and non-residential construction is adopted as follows: 
For residential, decks, miscellaneous, remodels and renovation construction the fees shall be determined by Fee Schedule Number 1. 
FEE SCHEDULE NUMBER 1 
TOTAL VALUATION* 	FEE 
$1,000.00 and Less 	$15.00 fee for each inspection shall be charged. Minimum charge of $50.00. 
$1,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$15.00 for the first $1,000 plus $5.00 for each additional 1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000. Minimum charge of $50.00 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$260.00 for the first $50,000 plus $4.00 for each additional 1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000. 
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 	$460.00 for the first $100,000 plus $3.00 for each additional 1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000. 
$500,001.00 and Up 	$1660.00 for the first $500,000 plus $2.00 for each additional 1,000 or fraction thereof. 
 
Valuation shall be determined by the most current published "building valuation data" (without the regional modifier) as published by the International Code Council on their website, www.iccsafe.org . 
For all non-residential new construction the fees shall be determined by Fee Schedule Number 2. 
FEE SCHEDULE NUMBER 2 
Buildings Size in Square Footage 	Permit Fee 
10,000 sq. ft. or less 	$.40 per sq. ft. 
10,001—30,000 sq. ft. 	$.30 per sq. ft. 
30,001—50,000 sq. ft. 	$.25 per sq. ft. 
50,001—100,000 sq. ft. 	$.20 per sq. ft. 
100,001—200,000 sq. ft. 	$.11 per sq. ft. 
200,001—400,000 sq. ft. 	$.09 per sq. ft. 
400,001 sq. ft. or greater 	$.05 per sq. ft. 
 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 2, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 2, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-162. - [Plan review fee.] 
A plan review fee shall be charged for all construction is adopted as follows: 
Residential construction the plan review fee shall be equal to one-half the building permit fee. 
Non-residential construction the plan review fee shall be equal to the building permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 3, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 3, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-163. - [Plumbing permit fee.] 
A plumbing permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
Plumbing permit base fee: 	$75.00, plus, 
Cost per each additional fixture of: 	$ 9.25 each fixture, plus 
Sewer connection fee: 	$38.50 (if applicable), plus 
Water connection fee: 	$38.50 (if applicable) 
 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 4, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 4, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-164. - [Mechanical permit fee.] 
A mechanical permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
Residential mechanical permit base fee: 	$75.00, plus 
Cost of each additional fixture of: 	$10.00 each fixture, plus 
Water heater fee: 	$19.00 (if applicable) 
Residential dwellings (per unit if multi-family) 
 
Mechanical permit base fee non-residential: $75.00 for the first $1,000.00, plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 5, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 5, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-165. - [Electrical permit fee.] 
An electrical permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
(1)  For lighting circuits or any other circuit where the outlets are intended to be installed for low-voltage devices or lamp-holding devices or receptacles for the attachment of small portable electrical devices and appliances; 130 volts or less: 
a. 	For the installation of 10 or less such outlets 	$5.70 
b. 	For additional outlets over 10, each 	$0.50 
 
(2)  Motors and generators: 
a. 	One horsepower or less, each 	$2.00 
b. 	Over 1 and including 10 horsepower, each 	$7.55 
c. 	Over 10 horsepower, each 	$13.25 
d. 	Motor-Generator Sets, each 	$19.00 
 
(3)  Electric ranges: 
a. 	Residential, each 	$19.00 
b. 	Commercial, each 	$22.75 
 
(4)  Water heaters: 
a. 	Residential, each 	$15.00 
b. 	Commercial, each 	$19.00 
 
(5)  Electrical heat and electrically heated appliances other than ranges and water heaters: 
a. 	Over 1 kw and including 5 kw, each 	$7.55 
b. 	Over 5 kw and including 10 kw, each 	$13.25 
c. 	Over 10 kw, each 	$19.00 
d. 	HVAC, each air handling unit 	$40.00 
 
(6)  Electric Dryers: 
a. 	Residential, each 	$ 9.50 
b. 	Commercial, each 	$13.50 
 
(7)  Electric signs (excluding service), each       $19.00 
(8)  Lunch wagons, bookmobiles, medical service vehicles, and similar 
structures on wheels, for lighting only       $19.00 
(9)  Service, new installation, increasing size, or relocation, per meter       $11.50 
(10)  Installation of any wiring, device, apparatus, appliance or equipment not 
specifically covered herein, such as but not limited to disconnects, 220 volt 
receptacles, each       $7.55 
(11)  Distribution, lighting or switch panels: 
a. 	Up to, and including 200 amperes, each 	$9.50 
b. 	201 to 400 amperes, each 	$19.00 
c. 	401 to 800 amperes, each 	$28.50 
d. 	801 to 1600 amperes, each 	$47.50 
e. 	1601 to 3000 amperes, each 	$75.50 
f. 	3001 to 6000 amperes, each 	$142.00 
Each additional 100 amperes or fraction thereof 	$2.85 
 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Temporary poles and service releases: 
a. 	0 to 200 amperes 	$40.00 
b. 	201 to 400 amperes 	$50.00 
c. 	401 to 600 amperes 	$60.00 
d. 	601 to 1,000 amperes 	$100.00 
e. 	Over 1,000 amperes 	$350.00 
 
(14)  Low voltage: 
a. 	Commercial, per inspection 	$100.00 
b. 	Residential, per inspection 	$40.00 
 
(15)  Occupancy final: 
a. 	Commercial, per inspection 	$100.00 
b. 	Residential, per inspection 	$50.00 
 
(16)  Emergency re-connection of service, each       $100.00 
(17)  Consultation fee       $30.00 
(18)  Rough-in       $40.00 
(19)  Minimum fee       $75.00 
(Including permit for the installation of any electrical system or part thereof, including but not limited to the installation of both new electrical systems and additions, alterations and repairs to existing electrical systems, the installation of electrical fixtures, equipment, devices and appurtenances thereto, temporary services, etc.) 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 6, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 6, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-166. - [Demolition permit fee.] 
A demolition permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
For a residential single-family dwelling the fee shall be: $125.00 
For all other demolition the fee shall be: 
0 to 100,000 cubic feet: $125.00 
100,000 cubic feet and up: $125.00 plus $0.50 per 1,000 cubic feet or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 7, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 7, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-167. - [Swimming pool permit fee.] 
A swimming pool permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
For an above ground residential private pool the fee shall be: $50.00 
For all other pools the fee shall be based upon the contract or purchase price based upon Fee Schedule Number 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 8, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 8, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-168. - [Fire code system permit fee.] 
A fire code system permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
For a residential single-family dwelling the fee shall be: $25.00 
For all other structures the base fee shall be: $250.00 or $1.00 per sprinkler head or suppression fixture (whichever is greater). 
All other construction or operation permits required by the International Fire Code: $100.00 each event or annually as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 9, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 9, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-169. - [Structure moving permit fee.] 
A structure moving permit fee for all construction is adopted as follows: 
A fee for the moving of a structure into, out of, or through the city shall be: $100.00 plus any fees charged by the regional planning commission (if required). 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, § 10, 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, § 10, 1-8-2018)  
Sec. 26-170. - [Additional fees.] 
(a)  Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or fire suppression system prior to obtaining the appropriate permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(b)  If any construction work that requires an inspection, does not meet the minimum standards and fails inspection shall be subject to a re-inspection fee as follows: 
For the first failed inspection the fee shall be $50.00. 
For each subsequent failed inspection after the first the fee shall be $100.00 each inspection. 
This fee must be paid prior to re-inspection being performed unless other arrangements are made with the building official. 
(c)  If the construction must comply with the requirements for review by the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance as provided for in Rule 0780-02-03, and the plans must be reviewed and permits issued by the City of Mt. Juliet, an additional plan review fee of $250.00 plus $2.50 per each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, based on valuation of construction, will be added to the above fees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-41, §§ 11—[13], 7-25-2011; Ord. No. 2018-1, §§ 11—13, 1-8-2018)  
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY TRAFFIC COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 28-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established within the city a management entity to be known as the city traffic commission. The authority is established pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. §§ 6-19-101 et seq., 7-51-1001 and 7-56-101 et seq. The traffic commission is vested with all powers provided and authorized pursuant to this Code and state statutes. In addition to these powers, the traffic commission shall have authority to: 
(1)  Approve or deny decisions made by city staff as the result of a warrants study for a new traffic control sign or device or a warrants study for a revision to an existing traffic control sign or device; 
(2)  Exempt streets or alleys, or sections of streets or alleys, from the requirements of section 28-193; and 
(3)  Otherwise establish parking requirements and designations within the city. 
(Code 1997, § 5-9-101; Ord. No. 98-23, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2008-47, § 2, 8-11-2008; Ord. No. 2012-30, § 1, 5-29-2012; Ord. No. 2014-55, § 1, 7-14-2014)  
Sec. 28-22. - Membership. 
The traffic commission shall consist of four members who are residents of the city to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of commissioners. The members of said commission shall be bona fide residents of the city at the time of their appointment and shall remain residents of the city or the area comprising said city during the term of their appointment. In addition to the four members set forth in this section, the chief of police shall serve as a member with the right to vote and the city manager shall serve as member but shall have no vote except in case of a tie. The members of the first commission appointed shall take office as of the date of their appointment and qualification. The chief of police and city manager shall serve as permanent members. The remaining members shall serve for terms of three years, provided that one member shall be appointed for a term of one year from the date of appointment, one for two years and the remaining two for three years. 
(Code 1997, § 5-9-102; Ord. No. 98-23, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998)  
Sec. 28-23. - Duties. 
(a)  The traffic commission shall organize by selecting among its membership a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. Each shall serve in such capacity for a term of one year or until their successors have been chosen for like terms. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep all records, conduct official correspondence and generally supervise the clerical work of the commission. Said secretary is authorized to draw upon the employees of the city for such assistance as may be necessary in the performance of his duties. 
(c)  The traffic commission shall hold regular sessions at such times as it shall establish in its rules. The initial organizational meeting shall be called by the city manager and the traffic commission shall organize and set the times of its regular meetings. Special sessions may be called by the chairperson or at the request of any member thereof, provided that notice of such special session has been mailed to each member at least 24 hours before the time set, provided further that the announcement shall constitute sufficient notice. 
(d)  All hearings of the traffic commission shall be held at city hall and shall be open to the public. The traffic commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member. Three voting members shall constitute a quorum. 
(e)  No item may be voted upon without first holding a public hearing and signage placed at the location notifying the public. Signage shall be displayed no more than 60 days. The notice shall appear for at least 30 days immediately preceding the meeting of the traffic commission. The sign shall contain such information as date, time, location of hearing and summary. 
(Code 1997, § 5-9-103; Ord. No. 98-23, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 98-37, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2014-55, § 2, 7-14-2014)  
Sec. 28-24. - Agenda guidelines. 
(a)  Appeal items shall be received by the city recorder at least 60 days prior to the quarterly meeting of the Mt. Juliet Traffic Commission. Meetings are held the third Tuesday of the first month of each quarter (if needed): (January; April; July; October). 
(b)  Other agenda items shall be received by the city recorder at least 30 days prior to the regular scheduled quarterly meeting. 
(c)  Any item that is voted on by the Mt. Juliet Traffic Commission in a regular scheduled meeting or in a special called meeting of the commission shall not be eligible for reconsideration by the Mt. Juliet Traffic Commission for a period of one year after the meeting in which the vote occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30, § 2, 5-29-2012; Ord. No. 2014-55, § 3, 7-14-2014)  
Secs. 28-25—28-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 28-50. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-101; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(1), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-51. - Operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Pursuit. Pursuing fleeing traffic offenders presents some shortterm danger to other motorists. Failure to pursue fleeing traffic offenders breeds a disregard for law and the authority of the police to enforce the law, which presents a longterm danger to other motorists. A police officer driving a police vehicle in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law may deviate from normal legal driving rules after weighing the need for haste against the dangers to other people using the roads. In weighing the need for haste, police officers shall weigh the seriousness of the violation of person pursued. They shall also weigh the public danger of people escaping at will from violations by merely fleeing. In pursuing someone merely for violating a traffic law, they shall consider the need for high-speed pursuit once they have obtained a license number. 
(b)  Fire and ambulance emergency runs. The driver of an ambulance or fire engine shall obey all driving laws under normal conditions, as for example returning from a fire call, but may deviate from the driving laws in an emergency when it appears to the driver that the deviation can be done safely and it appears to the driver that the benefits of the deviation outweigh the risk to the public. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-113) 
State Law reference— See Haynes v. Hamilton County , 883 S.W.2d. 606 (1994) for liability for accidents which occur during a chase. See Ezell v. Cockrell , 902 S.W.2d. 394, holding there is no liability for failure to chase.  
Sec. 28-52. - Backing vehicles. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-102; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(22), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-53. - Bicycles and off-street motor-driven vehicles. 
(a)  Every person riding or operating a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic ordinances, rules and regulations of the city applicable to the driver of other vehicles except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application to bicycles, motorcycles or motor scooters. 
(b)  No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person upon such vehicle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat. 
(c)  No bicycle, motor cycle, or motor scooter shall be used to carry more persons than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(d)  No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon handlebar. 
(e)  No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any motorcycle, motorbike, or motor scooter while any other person is a passenger upon the vehicle. 
(f)  No person shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle, motorbike, or motor scooter unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a safety helmet with a secured chin strap and suspension lining. The helmet shall conform to the type and design manufactured for the use of operators and riders of motor vehicles. 
(g)  No person shall operate or ride upon any off-street motor-driven or battery powered vehicle on any public street or alley at any time. All vehicles operated on public streets or alleys, other than bicycles, shall be equipped with headlight, taillight, turn signals and proper registration and license for such vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-103; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(27), 6-20-1974; Ord. No. 2003-53, § 1, 12-8-2003) 
State Law reference— Bicycles, T.C.A. §§ 55-8-171—55-8-173.  
Sec. 28-54. - Causing unnecessary noise. 
No person shall cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, racing the motor, or causing the screeching or squealing of the tires on any motor vehicle, or by playing any amplified electronic device audible at a distance of 25 feet from the vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-104; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(24), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-55. - Clinging to vehicles in motion. 
No person traveling on any bicycle, coaster, sled or roller skates shall cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-105; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(20), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-56. - Damaging pavements. 
No person shall operate any vehicle on a city street which by reason of its weight or the character of its wheels or tracks is likely to damage the surface or foundation of a street. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-106; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(19), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-57. - Driving on streets closed for repairs. 
Except for necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-107; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(6), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-58. - Driving through funerals or other processions. 
Except when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-108; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(18), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-59. - Following emergency vehicles. 
No driver of any vehicle shall follow any authorized emergency vehicle running with lights or siren at a distance closer than 500 feet. No person shall park within 500 feet of a fire engine stopped to answer an alarm. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-109; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(4), 6-20-1974) 
State Law reference— Following fire apparatus, T.C.A. § 55-8-168.  
Sec. 28-60. - General requirements for traffic control signs, etc. 
All traffic control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform to the latest revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration and shall, so far as practical, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. The manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. This section is not mandatory, it is merely directive. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-110; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(14), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-61. - Compliance with traffic control devices; directions of police officer. 
(a)  No pedestrian or operator of any vehicle shall violate or fail to comply with any traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state or the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  No pedestrian or operator of any vehicle willfully shall violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police officer. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-111; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(13), 6-20-1974) 
State Law reference— Compliance with lawful orders or directions of police officers, T.C.A. § 55-8-1-4.  
Sec. 28-62. - Motor vehicle requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such vehicle is equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and such other equipment as is prescribed and required by chapter 9, title 55, of the Tennessee Code (T.C.A. § 55-9-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-112; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(1), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-63. - Passing. 
(a)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(b)  When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of sufficient width for four or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement can be made in safety. 
(d)  No person shall dive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street in overtaking or passing on the right. 
(e)  When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle approaching form the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(f)  No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-114; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(26), 6-20-1974) 
State Law reference— Overtaking and passing, T.C.A. § 55-8-117; overtaking and passing on right, T.C.A. § 55-8-118.  
Sec. 28-64. - Presumption with respect to traffic control signs, etc. 
When a traffic control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by the proper authority. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-115; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(16), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-65. - Projections from the rear of vehicles. 
Whenever the load or any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in such position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not less than 12 inches square. Between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of a red flag a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of the vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-116; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(23), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-66. - Reckless driving; careless or negligent driving. 
Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no person, including operators of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property, and such driving shall constitute the offense of reckless driving. No person shall operate a vehicle in a careless or negligent manner disregarding sensible and accepted standards of safe driving, and to do so shall constitute the offense of careless driving. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-117; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(9), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-67. - Riding on outside of vehicles. 
No person shall ride on any portion of a vehicle not intended for the use of passengers. No driver shall allow any person to ride on any portion of the vehicle which was not intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-118; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(21), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-68. - Running over fire hoses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any hose or other equipment of the fire department except in obedience to directions of a firefighter or police officer. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-119; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(5), 6-20-1974) 
State Law reference— Fire hoses, T.C.A. § 55-8-169.  
Sec. 28-69. - School safety patrols. 
All motorists and pedestrians shall obey the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with instructions, provided that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction shall at the time be wearing some insignia or using authorized flags for giving signals. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-120; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(17), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-70. - Soliciting on right-of way. 
Solicitation of funds, loitering, impeding the flow of vehicular traffic or passing out materials on the paved portions of public roadways or on the gravel shoulder within three feet of pavement is prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-121; Ord. No. 93-22, 10-4-1993)  
Sec. 28-71. - Streets marked with lanes. 
(a)  On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparing to make a turning movement. 
(b)  On two-lane or three-lane streets, the proper land for travel shall be the righthand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four or more lanes, either of the righthand lanes shall be available for use except that traffic moving at less than the rate of speed of other vehicles shall use the extreme righthand lane. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-122; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(11), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-72. - Streets without marked lanes. 
(a)  Upon all streets not marked with lanes, a vehicle shall be driven on the right half of the street except: 
(1)  When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(2)  When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair. 
(b)  Persons driving at less than the speed of other vehicles traveling in the same direction shall drive as close to the right margin of the road as is practical except when passing or turning left. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-123; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(10), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-73. - Unauthorized traffic control signs, etc. 
No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control sigh, signal, marking, or device or railroad sing or signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control sigh, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-124; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(15), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-74. - Vehicles shortcutting through private property. 
No person shall drive a vehicle from the public roadway across private property to another portion of the public roadway to avoid an intersection or to avoid traffic that is backed up on the public roadway. This provision shall not apply to the owner of the property so crossed or to persons bearing written authorization by the property owner to cross their property. It shall be presumed that the vehicle operator is not merely trying to avoid traffic or a traffic control device if he stops the vehicle and shops or does business on the property. It shall be presumed that the driver of the vehicle is trying to avoid a traffic control device or avoid traffic and violating this Code if he drives directly through private property without stopping or exiting the vehicle. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-126)  
Sec. 28-75. - Yellow lines. 
On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of any land line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone, and no operator shall drive a vehicle or any part thereof across or to the left of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from such street. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-127; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1(12), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-76. - Obstructing of the flow of traffic. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct the flow of vehicular traffic on streets or public highways within the city without first providing notice to the city chief of police the intent to do so, which notice shall include the date, time and probable length of duration of said obstruction and a description of the project. 
(b)  Any such obstruction of the flow of traffic shall be supervised and regulated by an officer assigned by the city police department to such project after review of such project and traffic flow issues and or obstructions by the chief of police or his designee. Once the traffic project/plan has been reviewed and a needs assessment conducted, the chief of police or his designee will determine if an officer is necessary or if other means of traffic control will be appropriate. If the needs assessment determines that an officer is necessary, the contractor/developer or other responsible party will be directed to contact the office of secondary employment and arrange for the use of an officer at the contractor/developer's or other responsible party's cost. 
(Code 1997, § 9-1-128; Ord. No. 2003-57, 12-22-2003)  
Sec. 28-77. - Bicycle lanes. 
(a)  Every person operating a motor vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane. A person operating a motor vehicle may cross a bicycle lane when making a turn or when entering or leaving the roadway, but a bicycle lane shall not be used as turning lane or passing lane. 
(b)  Motor vehicles should not be parked, stopped or left standing in bicycle lanes unless there is an emergency circumstance. 
(c)  A person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane shall give an audible signal when passing another person operating a bicycle proceeding in the same direction and shall further pass on the left. 
(d)  A person operating a bicycle entering a bicycle lane shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles in the bicycle lane. A person operating a bicycle leaving a bicycle lane shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians. No person operating a bicycle lane shall leave it until the movement can be made with reasonable safety and, if any vehicle would be affected by the movement, by giving an appropriate signal before the movement is made. 
(e)  A person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane shall travel in the same direction as motor vehicles traveling in the adjacent traffic lane. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 28-78—28-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 28-96. - Unposted streets have 25 mph limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating other speed limits, in which case the posted speed limits shall apply. 
(Code 1997, § 9-2-101; Ord. No. 73-10, § 1, 10-11-1973; Ord. No. 00-25, 1-8-2000)  
Sec. 28-97. - Intersections. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of 15 miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by traffic control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the intersecting street. 
(Code 1997, § 9-2-102; Ord. No. 73-10, § 2, 10-11-1973)  
Sec. 28-98. - School zones school property. 
Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit in school zones shall be 15 miles per hour during a period of 40 minutes before school and a period of 40 minutes after school adjourns. Driving in excess of the posted limit or in excess of 15 miles per hour if not posted at a time when children are actually going to or leaving school shall be prima facie evidence of reckless driving in T.C.A. § 55-8-152. It shall be unlawful to drive in excess of 15 miles per hour on school grounds at any time. It shall be unlawful to disobey traffic control signs erected on school property. 
(Code 1997, § 9-2-103)  
Sec. 28-99. - Congested areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed in excess of any posted speed limit. 
(Code 1997, § 9-2-104; Ord. No. 73-10, § 4, 10-11-1973)  
Secs. 28-100—28-126. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 28-127. - Operator must make turn safely and signal intention. 
No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any turning movement, which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any other vehicle, without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in safety and without signaling his intention. 
(Code 1997, § 9-3-101; Ord. No. 74-9, § 1, 6-20-1974) 
State Law reference— Similar, T.C.A. § 55-8-143.  
Sec. 28-128. - Right turns. 
Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1997, § 9-3-102; Ord. No. 74-9, § 2(2), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-129. - Left turns on two-way roadways. 
At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach of a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. 
(Code 1997, § 9-3-103; Ord. No. 74-9, § 2(3), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-130. - Left turns on other than two-way roadways. 
At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand land lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1997, § 9-3-104; Ord. No. 74-9, § 2(4), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-131. - U-turns. 
U-turns are prohibited. 
(Code 1997, § 9-3-105; Ord. No. 74-9, § 2(5), 6-20-1974)  
Secs. 28-132—28-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING AND YIELDING 
 
Sec. 28-161. - Approach of emergency vehicles. 
Upon the immediate approach of an emergency vehicle making use of audible or visual signals or of a police vehicle making use of an audible signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the emergency vehicle has passed. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-101; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(1), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-162. - Emerging from alleys, etc. 
The drivers of all vehicles emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways, or buildings shall stop such vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any sidewalk or street. They shall not proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street until they can safely do so without colliding or interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-102; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(2), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-163. - Prevent obstruction of an intersection. 
No driver shall enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting street or crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-103; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(3), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-164. - Railroad crossings. 
Any driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing shall stop at least 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives warning of the approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the approach of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train is approaching within 1,500 feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal indicating its approach or is visible and in hazardous proximity to the crossing. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-104; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(4), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-165. - Stop signs. 
The driver of a vehicle facing a stop sign shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he can proceed through the intersection in safety. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-105; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(5), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-166. - Yield signs. 
The driver of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where yield signs have been posted. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-106; Ord. No. 74-9, § 3(6), 6-20-1974)  
Sec. 28-167. - Traffic control signals. 
Traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go," "caution," or "stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone (go signal). 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign prohibits a movement. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians within the intersection at the time the signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow alone (caution signal). 
a.  A yellow signal is a warning that the red or stop signal will be soon exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red alone (stop signal). 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a red signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk or the intersection. Vehicles may turn right on red if the turn can be made safely and is not prohibited by a sign. Vehicles may not cross or turn left on a red signal. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway. 
(4)  Steady red with green arrows. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a red signal with a green arrow may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic using the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway. 
(5)  Nonintersections. If an official traffic control signal is erected other than at an intersection, this section shall also apply. Any stop shall be at least a vehicle length short of the signal. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-107)  
Sec. 28-168. - Flashing traffic control signals. 
Drivers of vehicles shall obey illuminated flashing red or yellow traffic control signals as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signals). When a red lens is illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the crosswalk or intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-108)  
Sec. 28-169. - Stops to be signaled. 
All drivers shall signal their intent to stop, pursuant to T.C.A. § 55-8-143. 
(Code 1997, § 9-4-109)  
Secs. 28-170—28-191. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING 
 
Sec. 28-192. - Penalties. 
The total parking fine, including court costs, for any violation of any part of this article shall be $20.00. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-120; Ord. No. 2003-53, § 3, 12-8-2003)  
Sec. 28-193. - Regulations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall leave any vehicle or trailer or other conveyance parked on any public street or alley between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Notwithstanding the foregoing, temporary permits for overnight parking may be issued by the chief of police, upon application, for extraordinary and temporary circumstances. Further, the city traffic commission may exempt individual streets or alleys, or sections of streets or alleys, from the prohibition against parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. when such a request is made by the affected homeowners or the applicable homeowners association and upon a showing that such an exemption will not unreasonably impede safe traffic flow or otherwise create an unsafe condition. Vehicles or trailers found parked on any nonexempt public street or alley between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. without a temporary permit will be ticketed. Vehicles that are parked in such a way as to cause an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic flow will be towed, with all towing and storage costs charged to the owner. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-101; Ord. No. 2003-53, § 2, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 2008-47, § 1, 8-11-2008)  
Sec. 28-194. - Angle parking. 
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person shall angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has a length in excess of 24 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-102)  
Sec. 28-195. - Occupancy of more than one space. 
No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one space or protrudes beyond the official markings on the street or curb designating such space unless the vehicle is too large to park within a single designated space. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-103)  
Sec. 28-196. - Prohibited parking. 
No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any sign placed or erected by the state or city or in the following locations: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within or within 15 feet of an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  Within a pedestrian crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing. 
(7)  Within 20 feet of the driveway and on the opposite side of the street of the driveway entrance to any fire station; and within 75 feet of the entrance to the fire station. 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when other traffic would be obstructed. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(10)  Upon any bridge. 
(11)  Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the city. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-104)  
Sec. 28-197. - Loading and unloading zones. 
No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the city as a loading and unloading zone. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-105)  
Sec. 28-198. - Presumptions with respect to illegal parking. 
When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this article, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle is responsible for such illegal parking. 
(Code 1997, § 9-5-106)  
Secs. 28-199—28-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 28-221. - Failure to obey citation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a written promise to appear in court. 
(Code 1997, § 9-6-102)  
Sec. 28-222. - Illegal parking. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions of this Code, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a citation for the driver and owner to answer the violation at a place and time specified in the citation. 
(b)  Parking violations involving disabled person spaces, fire lanes, obstructing traffic, parking near a fire hydrant and parking providing a danger to the public shall be punished by a fine in an amount set by the city judge not to exceed $500.00. For other parking violations which present no danger to the public, the defendant may waive a hearing and pay a fine of $10.00 if paid prior to the court date; otherwise the fine will be the amount set by the city judge. 
(Code 1997, § 9-6-103)  
Sec. 28-223. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  Police officers are authorized, when reasonably necessary to prevent the obstruction of traffic to remove from the streets and impound any vehicle: 
(1)  Whose operator is arrested; 
(2)  Which is illegally parked or abandoned; or 
(3)  Which is an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. 
(b)  Any vehicle left parked on any street or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours without permission from the chief of police shall be presumed to have been abandoned, if the owner cannot be located after a reasonable investigation. 
(c)  An impounded vehicle shall be stored until: 
(1)  The owner claims it; 
(2)  Gives satisfactory evidence of ownership; and 
(3)  Pays all applicable fines and costs. 
(d)  The fee for impounding a vehicle shall be $25.00 and all wrecker charges and a storage cost of $10.00 per day if stored by the city. If stored at a private storage facility, the storage cost shall be the charge of the private facility. 
(Code 1997, § 9-6-104)  
Sec. 28-224. - Automated traffic enforcement. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Citations and warning notices includes: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  The registration plate number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location of the violation; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded images; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid; 
(8)  A signed statement by a member of the city police department that, based on inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of subsection (c) of this section; 
(9)  A statement that recorded images are evidence of a violation of this chapter; and 
(10)  Information advising the person alleged to be liable under this section: 
a.  Of the manner and time in which liability alleged in the citation occurred and that the citation may be contested in city court; and 
b.  Warning that failure to contest in the manner and time provided shall be deemed an admission of liability and that a default judgment may be entered thereon. 
In operation means operating in good working condition. 
Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic control photographic system showing the rear of a motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly identifying the registration number of the motor vehicle on the following: 
(1)  Two or more photographs; 
(2)  Two or more microphotographs; 
(3)  Two or more electronic images; 
(4)  Videotape; or 
(5)  Any other medium. 
Stop line means a transverse white marking at an approach to an intersection that indicates a point behind which all vehicles must stop when so required by a traffic control sign, signal or device. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
Traffic control photographic system means an electronic system consisting of a photographic, video or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic control sign, signal or device, and to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control sign, signal or device. 
Vehicle owner means the person identified by the state department of safety as the registered owner of a vehicle or a lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six months or more. 
(b)  General. 
(1)  The police department or an agent of the department shall administer the traffic control photographic systems and shall maintain a list of system locations where traffic control photographic systems are installed. 
(2)  Any citation or warning for a violation of this chapter issued by an officer of the police department at a system location shall be treated in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(3)  The city shall adopt procedures for the issuance of citations. A citation or warning alleging that the violation of subsection (c) of this section occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a law enforcement officer of the city, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic control photographic system, shall be evidence of the facts contained therein and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation under this section. The citation or warning shall be forwarded by first class mail to the vehicle owner's address as given on the motor vehicle registration. Personal service of process on the vehicle owner shall not be required. 
(4)  Signs to indicate the use of traffic control photographic systems shall be posted in advance of individual system locations and may be posted elsewhere in the city. 
(c)  Offense. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to cross the stop line at a system location or for a vehicle to violate any other traffic regulation specified in this chapter. 
(2)  A person who receives a citation or warning under subsection (c) of this section may: 
a.  Pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation or warning, directly to city court; or 
b.  Elect to contest the citation for the alleged violation. 
(3)  The owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for a violation under this section, except when such owner can provide evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time of the violation, as described in subsection (c)(4) of this section, in which circumstance the person who had the care, custody and control of the vehicle at the time of the violation shall be responsible. 
(4)  Notwithstanding this subsection, the owner of the vehicle shall not be responsible for the violation if, within 30 days of mailing of such citation, such owner furnishes the city court an affidavit, by said owner, stating: 
a.  The name and address of the person or entity who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody and control of the vehicle at the time of the violation; or 
b.  The vehicle or its registration plates were stolen at the time of the alleged violation and the registered owner was not operating the vehicle. In order to demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit a certified copy of the police report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates. 
(5)  If the person named in the citation is an owner of a commercial vehicle with a registered gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more, a tractor vehicle, a trailer operated in combination with a tractor vehicle or a passenger bus, in order to demonstrate that said owner was not the violator that person shall, in a letter mailed to city court by certified mail, return receipt requested: 
a.  Swear that the person named in the citation was not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation; and 
b.  Provide the name, address and driver's license identification number of the person who was operating the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any violation of subsection (c) of this section shall be deemed a noncriminal violation for which no points shall be assigned to the owner or driver of the vehicle. The civil penalty shall be $50.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty or to request a hearing within 30 days after the date of issuance of the citation shall lead to entry of a default judgment and court costs may be assessed in addition to the civil penalty after a second notice is sent by first class mail to the registered owner of the motor vehicle providing such owner an additional 30 days for payment of the citation. 
(2)  A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section is considered a nonmoving traffic violation and may not be recorded by the police department or the state department of safety on the driving record of the owner or driver of the vehicle and may not be considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, 1-26-2009)  
Secs. 28-225—28-241. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 28-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which deviates from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Residential neighborhood means an area of the city zoned for and used for the purpose of single or multifamily dwellings and having streets designed for residential use. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds 10,000 pounds. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets as designated in this article over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. 
(Code 1997, § 9-7-101; Ord. No. 99-38, 10-18-1999)  
Sec. 28-243. - Application of regulations. 
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes herein established and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted. This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, or any contractor or person engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where the truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which the detour is established. 
(Code 1997, § 9-7-102)  
Sec. 28-244. - Established. 
There is hereby established within the city the following truck routes: 
(1)  Outside origin to outside destination. All trucks entering the city for destination points outside the city shall operate only over the following designated routes: 
a.  When entering the city from the east or west on Highway 70 and traveling southbound, trucks shall use Mt. Juliet Road from Highway 70 to I-40. 
b.  When entering the city from the south, trucks shall travel north on Mt. Juliet Road to Highway 70. 
(2)  Local trucks. The following streets are designated for the use of trucks: 
a.  Mt. Juliet Road; 
b.  Industrial Drive; 
c.  Pleasant Grove Road from the point where it enters Mt. Juliet Road westward for 2,000 feet; and 
d.  East Hill Street east from where it enters Mt. Juliet Road and not exceeding 1,000 feet. 
(Code 1997, § 9-7-103)  
Sec. 28-245. - Truck traffic in the city. 
(a)  Trucks in residential neighborhoods. Trucks may only deviate from a truck route for pickup, delivery or travel in a residential neighborhood if the pickup, delivery or travel is for one of the following purposes: 
(1)  To or from a permitted construction or demolition site. 
(2)  Moving vans for the purpose of relocating to or from a residential site. 
(3)  Delivery or pickup of appliances or furnishings at a residence for use at the residence or dwelling. 
(4)  Emergency vehicles or the delivery of or servicing of emergency equipment. 
(5)  Where the travel to or from a residential neighborhood is authorized by the chief of police. 
(b)  Outside origin. Trucks with an outside origination and destination points inside the city are as follows: 
(1)  One destination. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(2)  Multiple destinations. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(c)  Inside origin. Trucks with origination inside the city are as follows: 
(1)  Outside destinations. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as herein established. 
(2)  Inside destinations. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. 
(Code 1997, § 9-7-104; Ord. No. 99-38, 10-18-1999)  
Sec. 28-246. - Unlawful not to use truck routes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck rated at two tons or more over any city street not designated as a truck route. Trucks making deliveries or pickups not on a truck route may do so, provided that a truck route is used until reaching the intersection nearest the designated point and that the trucks shall return by the most direct route. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall apply to vehicles of any person rendering services to the city by contract or agreement, nor to vehicles of any public utility or public body when they are in route to or from points within the city in connection with public business. 
(Code 1997, § 9-7-105)  
Secs. 28-247—28-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PROOF OF INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 28-271. - Compliance with financial responsibility law required. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Financial responsibility means: 
(1)  Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance policy, an insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, stating that a policy of insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55 (T.C.A. § 55-12-101 et seq.), has been issued; 
(2)  A certificate, valid for one year, issued by the commissioner of safety, stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount required by the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55, has been paid or filed with the commissioner, or the operator has qualified as a self-insurer under T.C.A. § 55-12-111; or 
(3)  The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the department of safety or the interstate commerce commission, or was owned by the United States, the state or any political subdivision thereof, and that such motor vehicle was being operated with the owner's consent. 
(b)  Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in compliance with the financial responsibility law. 
(c)  At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any moving violation under title 55, chapters 8 and 10 (T.C.A. §§ 55-8-101 et seq. and 55-10-101 et seq.), parts 1—5, chapter 50 (T.C.A. §§ 55-50-101—55-50-515); any provision in this chapter; or at the time of an accident for which notice is required under T.C.A. § 55-10-106, the officer shall request evidence of financial responsibility as required by this section. In the case of an accident for which notice is required under T.C.A. § 55-10-106, the officer shall request such evidence from all drivers involved in the accident, without regard to apparent or actual fault. 
(Code 1997, §§ 9-1-129(a)—(c), 9-8-101; Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1(a)—(c), 2-25-2002)  
Sec. 28-272. - Civil offense. 
It is a civil offence to fail to provide evidence of financial responsibility pursuant to this article. Any violation of this article is punishable by a civil penalty of up to $50.00. The civil penalty is prescribed by this article is shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by the laws of the state or by this Code. 
(Code 1997, §§ 9-1-129(d), 9-8-102; Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1(d), 2-25-2002)  
Sec. 28-273. - Evidence of compliance after violation. 
On or before the court date, the person charged with a violation of this article may submit evidence of compliance with this article in effect at the time of the violation. If the court is satisfied that compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the charge or failure to provide evidence of financial responsibility may be dismissed. 
(Code 1997, §§ 9-1-129(e), 9-8-103; Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1(e), 2-25-2002)  
Secs. 28-274—28-294. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - CRUISING 
 
Sec. 28-295. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Congested traffic means traffic on any public street which is delayed to the point that motor vehicles back up in any direction for more than one block, restricting vehicular movement on any public street because the average traffic speed has dropped to less than five miles per hour, where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of other motor vehicles. 
Cruising means the unnecessary repetitive driving of a motor vehicle on a designated street or roadway past the same traffic control point three or more times in any two-hour period during the restricted hours, upon a designated street, parking area, or roadway with posted signs informing the public that the street is subject to regulation under this article and that said regulation is in effect. 
Designated street or parking area means any street, parking area, or roadway designated as a no cruising area pursuant to this article. Any street, parking area or roadway so designated shall be clearly marked with signs advising the public that the street parking area or roadway is subject to such regulation. 
Restricted area means those streets, roadways, parking lots and areas frequented by the public designated by the city police department as a no cruising area and that are within that area of the city. 
Restricted hours means the days and times that cruising is prohibited, specifically between the hours of 9:00 p.m. until 3:00 a.m. each day of the week. 
Traffic control point means a clearly identified reference point on a designated street, as determined and marked by an official traffic control device posted at the direction of the city police department or public works director. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-102; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-296. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 per citation issued. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-101; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-297. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Reduce traffic congestion and excessive noise and pollution; 
(2)  Ensure passage for emergency vehicles during hours when congestion occurs in certain areas known as no cruising zones; and 
(3)  Increase access by members of the general public to such areas, which access is currently restricted due to unnecessary traffic congestion arising from cruising. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-101; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-298. - Designation of no cruising areas. 
(a)  Private property. This article may be enforced on any private property upon the submission of a written request by the property owner to the chief of police and upon the chief of police's approval of such request. The private property owner requesting a no cruising area shall be responsible for the cost and placement of the required signage. 
(b)  Public right-of-way and city-owned property. This article may be enforced on public rights-of-way, parks, and other city property upon the approval by the chief of police and upon the placement of the required signage. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-103; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-299. - Prohibited. 
No person shall engage in unnecessary repetitive driving, also known as cruising, as defined in section 28-295, while operating a motor vehicle, and no owner of a motor vehicle shall permit another to engage in cruising while operating a motor vehicle under his care, custody and control, after notice as described in section 28-300. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-104; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-300. - Notice. 
Upon observation that a motor vehicle has been operated on a designated and posted street, parking area or roadway past the same traffic control point three or more times during the restricted hours, the vehicle may be stopped after the third or subsequent observation for the purpose of giving notice to the operator and to each passenger in the vehicle. The notice, which may be verbal or in writing, shall inform the operator and passengers that this article is in effect and that subsequent operation of the vehicle shall constitute a violation of this article. The notice shall include a brief and general description of the designated streets or the area containing the designated streets and a description of the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-105; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-301. - Enforcement. 
The operation of a motor vehicle past the same traffic control point where a posted official traffic control device prohibits cruising constitutes a violation of section 28-286, and a citation may be issued to the operator of the motor vehicle at the time the offense occurs. It shall be immaterial whether the operator at the time the offense occurs actually operated the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control point. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-106; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-302. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An official public safety or emergency vehicle; 
(2)  A licensed public transportation vehicle; 
(3)  A vehicle being used for legitimate business purposes; 
(4)  Any special event as declared by the city; 
(5)  Residents living within the designated no cruising area. 
(Code 1997, § 9-9-107; Ord. No. 2008-22, 5-12-2008)  
Chapter 30 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-397, and enacted a new Ch. 30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 30 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Ch. 30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to set uniform requirements for all users of the city's wastewater collection system and treatment works to enable the city to comply with all applicable state, federal, and local laws, including the state pretreatment requirements (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14), the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et seq.), the general pretreatment regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403), and the Metro Water Services (Nashville, TN) wastewater discharge requirements (including Chapters 15.04 and 15.60). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To protect both POTW's personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW. 
This article establishes conditions for connection to the sanitary sewer system. Certain acts which may be detrimental to the sewer system are prohibited. This article provides a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits. This article also establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria and provides that certain users shall pretreat waste to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and meet the objectives of this article. This article provides measures for the enforcement of its provisions and abatement of violations. 
(b)  Application and administration. This article shall apply to the City of Mt. Juliet and to persons outside the city limits who are, by contract or agreement with the City of Mt. Juliet, users of the Mt. Juliet publicly owned treatment works. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Mt. Juliet Public Works Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-20. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Approval authority means Metro Water Services (Nashville, TN) and the Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control Director or his/her representative(s). 
Approved pretreatment program means a program administered by a publicly owned treatment works that meets the criteria established in Chapter 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations) 403.8 and 403.9, and which has been approved by the regional administrator or state director in accordance with 40 Code of Federal Regulations 403.11. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to city. 
Availability charge means a charge to all non-exempt habitable structures, to which sewers are available, regardless of whether they actually connect to the sewer or not. The first 2,000 gallons of use is provided without charge to those who pay the availability charge. This charge was formerly called the "minimum bill" or "minimum use charge". The name was changed to reflect that this charge is also paid by people who do not use the system but could use the system. In this Code the charge is called "base charge" or service line charge. 
Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section [30-136] [Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.05(1)(a) and (2)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Also, BMPs include alternative means (i.e. management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits. 
Board means the elected mayor and board of commissioners for the City of Mt. Juliet. 
BOD 5 means biochemical oxygen demand (five-day). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a community sanitary sewer. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a treatment facility. 
Capacity charge means Mt. Juliet has purchased a certain amount of capacity in the Metro Nashville sewer plant. To reimburse Mt. Juliet the cost of this capacity which was purchased by the residents of Mt. Juliet as the city limits were constituted on October 31, 1984, this and prior ordinances impose a charge per single-family unit (SFU) on all new development of land utilizing sewers. Building lots in existence and in Mt. Juliet on October 31, 1984, are exempt as they participated in the original purchase of the capacity. New lots created by subdivision of existing lots are subject to the capacity charge. 
Categorical industrial user, or CIU means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Categorical standards or categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City means City of Mt. Juliet, TN; Mt. Juliet Public Works Department. 
Combined sewer means a sewer which has been designed to carry both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff. 
Commercial (commercial user) means commercial and commercial user shall apply to any non-residential use or user. 
Composite sample means sample consisting of several sample portions collected during a specified period (usually 24 hours) and combined to form a representative sample. Composite samples can be collected on a flow proportional or timed basis, depending on the nature of the discharge. 
Connection charge is a fee to pay for the cost of connection and inspection of the connection to the sewer system. It includes the cost of the grinder pump, if used, and other materials and supplies used by the city. 
Control authority means City of Mt. Juliet, TN. 
Conventional pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), pH, fecal coliform, and oil and grease. 
Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant (except pH) collected during a calendar day. 
Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Tennessee. 
Director or director of public works means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the director. 
Discharge monitoring report means a report submitted by an industrial user to the public works director containing information regarding the nature and concentration of pollutants and flow characteristics of a discharge by the user to the publicly owned treatment works. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
Fats, oils and grease or FOG means any fats, oils or grease residues, products, or by-products used in food preparation or manufacturing; usually organic, polar compounds derived from vegetable, or plant, and animal sources that are composed of long chain triglycerides; but monoglycerides and diglycerides may be considered FOG as well. 
Food service establishment means an establishment engaged in production/clean-up of non-residential food and/or drink. Any building, vehicle, place, or structure, or any room or division in a building, vehicle, place, or structure where food is prepared, served, or sold for immediate consumption on or in the vicinity of the premises; called for or taken out by customers; or prepared prior to being delivered to another location for consumption. 
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Habitable structures means structures used as dwellings or workplaces or which contain facilities for the disposal of human waste. Barns or other agricultural buildings with dirt floors shall not be considered habitable structures. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. This specifically includes wastewater from industrial users conveyed to the publicly owned treatment works by any means other than by a standard sewer tie-on. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source (including any holding tank waste discharge). 
Industrial user or user means a source of indirect discharge. For the purposes of this article, an industrial user is a source of non-domestic wastes. 
Infiltration means water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. 
Inflow means water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, fountain drains, drains from springs and swamp areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm and sanitary sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface runoff, street wash water, and drainage. 
Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any grab or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or collection system; or contributes to a violation of any requirement of a NPDES permit, or other jurisdictional agreement or permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in section [30-136]. 
Mass discharge rate means the weight of material discharged to community sewer during a given time interval, normally given in pounds per day. 
Medical wastes means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. mg/l - milligrams per liter. 
Monthly average means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the program for issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
National pretreatment standard means any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. These terms also include prohibited discharges promulgated in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 403.5 and local limits adopted as part of the city's pretreatment program. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
(i)  any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Pharmaceuticals means a substance used in the treatment of disease: drug, medicament, medication, medicine. Pharmaceuticals are drugs or medicine that is prepared or dispensed in pharmacies and used in medical treatment. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the publicly owned treatment works into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the publicly owned treatment work's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any and all persons, including individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, public or private institutions, state and federal agencies, municipalities or political subdivisions, or officers thereof, departments, agencies, or instrumentalities, or public or private corporations or officers thereof, organized or existing under the laws of this or any state or country. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollution means the manmade or man induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; process change or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. Pretreatment requirements — Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 30-136. 
Publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by Mt. Juliet or to which Mt. Juliet connects its sewer lines. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such a treatment works and any devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or liquid industrial waste. 
Residential (residential user) means residential use, residential user and residential occupant is defined as and shall apply to all users of the sanitary sewer service for a residential zoned property permitted for and used primarily for residential occupants where the end user and occupant has a legal fee ownership interest in the real property or dwelling and is subject to a property tax. Residential use is subject to verification as set forth in [this article] below as amended and shall include all single-family and duplex homes. 
Sewers are available means when a sewer line, to which the property owner could connect, is no further than 200 feet from any part of the property line along an easement or public right-of-way. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section, a significant industrial user is: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The industrial user, prior to the city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in section [30-224] [see Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(17)], together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.08(6)(f), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance means the director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the area served by the Mt. Juliet Public Works Department, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section [30-144] and the Mt. Juliet Local Limits Operational Division Policy No. 2008-01; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section [30-144], multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section [30-144] (Daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Single-family unit (SFU) means a single-family unit is a unit of measure for the average amount of water used by an average family. The capacity or tap charge for all users is based upon the number of SFUs. No user is charged for less than one SFU and others are charged based upon the ration of their anticipated use as compared to a SFU. A SFU is assumed to use 350 gallons of water per day. 
Slug discharge or slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section [30-136] of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions, or any discharge of whatever duration that interferes with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment facilities or pumping stations. 
Standard industrial classification means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. The Mt. Juliet Director of Public Works shall also be the "superintendent" as the term is used in this Code unless the city manager designates someone else as superintendent. 
Tap fee is the charge levied against a new sewer connection to partially pay for the cost of the overall cost of the system to which the new user is connecting. The tap fee is a privilege charge. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutants means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 Code of Federal Regulations part 401 as promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Act. 
Usage charge is a fee based upon water volume to pay for the cost of processing the sewage, operation and depreciation of the system. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water borne industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the publicly owned treatment works. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including toxicity, volume, and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to classify, define, or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater. 
Waters of the State of Tennessee means any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the state. 
Workplace means any nonresidential building used as a place of work for more than six hours per day for more than 200 days per year. 
(b)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand 
BMP — Best management practice 
BMR — Baseline monitoring report 
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU — Categorical industrial user 
COD — Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA — U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG — Fats, oils and grease 
gpd — gallons per day 
IU — Industrial user 
mg/l — milligrams per liter 
NPDES — National pollutant discharge elimination system 
NSCIU — Non-significant categorical industrial user 
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIU — Significant industrial user 
SNC — Significant noncompliance 
TSS — Total suspended solids 
U.S.C. — United States Code 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-21—30-43. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 30-44. - Connection with sanitary sewer required. 
Every building having plumbing fixtures installed and intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use on premises abutting a street, alley, or easement in which segment there is a sanitary sewer which is within 200 feet of the building drain of the parcel shall be considered as being served by the city's sanitary sewer system. 
All buildings hereafter constructed on property which is served by the publicly owned treatment works shall not be occupied until connected to the public sewer. The owner or occupant of each lot or parcel of land which is now served or which may hereafter be served by the Mt. Juliet sewer system feeding into a publicly owned treatment works shall cease to use any other method for the disposal of sewage except as provided for direct discharge by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation or by discharge to a properly functioning and approved septic tank. Septic tanks shall not be used where sewers are available unless the user is exempt under the following provisions. The public works director shall decide whether sewers are available using the criteria established herein. All premises served by the publicly owned treatment works are subject to sewer use charges as described in [sections 30-356 through 30-370] unless exempt under the following exemptions. 
Natural persons meeting all of the following conditions are exempt from mandatory hookup and use charges: 
(1)  Original or annexed owners: Owners of residential property who have owned and occupied the property continuously since September 30, 1987, or who were or are annexed into the city thereafter are exempt from mandatory connection and from payment of mandatory use charges and mandatory connection (but not the availability charge) if: 
a.  They have not transferred the property or any ownership interest therein; and 
b.  Their private system is not defective and does not hereafter become defective for a continuous ten-day period; and 
c.  They have not constructed a new dwelling or workplace on the property since September 30, 1987; and 
d.  They have not voluntarily purchased a tap other than pursuant to a condemnation settlement or as a part of a settlement about sewer right-of-way acquisition by the city; and 
e.  The property is used only as the home of the owner. 
(2)  Owners of property to which sewers become available: Owners of residential property to which sewers become available, and who do not meet the criteria of paragraph (1) above, shall pay the same charge which they would pay if connected to the sewer. They shall be required to pay connection and tap fees and shall connect to the sewer system when the first of the following events occur: 
a.  The day they sell the property; or 
b.  The occurrence of failure or defect of their septic or other alternative sewer system for a continuous period of ten days; or 
c.  The date of completion of a new dwelling. 
(3)  Purchasers of property to which sewer is available: Any purchaser of property containing a habitable structure, who does not meet the exemptions contained in the preceding two paragraphs, shall immediately pay any unpaid tap or connection fees and connect the property to the sewer system. The seller of property shall be responsible to the buyer for paying the tap fee and connection charges unless they agree otherwise in writing. Both the buyer and seller shall be responsible to the city for the tap fee and all connection charges. 
(4)  People totally exempt: People who have owned and occupied their homes since October 31, 1984, are exempt from the availability charge and from any minimum charge on the home unless they are connected to the system or have purchased a tap or their alternative septic system is failing. This exemption is granted because it was the promise made to them at the time the system was proposed (see Ord. 87-10 Sec. 2 et. al.) and bought their acquiescence in the construction of the system, without which the system may have never been built. 
(5)  Water not entering the sewer system. To the extent feasible sewer use charges are based upon water placed in the sewer system by the user. The amount of water used by an owner or occupant of property shall be the amount used to establish the amount of water entering the sewer system. Any person using an unmetered source of water such as a well, shall install a meter and notify the director of public works. Adjustments for use of water during warm weather and peak use months shall be provided for by totaling the charges billed in the months of December, January, February and March and obtaining the average of these bills by dividing the total of the four months bills by four. The amount derived shall be the amount billed during the months of June, July, August, September, October and November. The remaining months will be billed for actual use. 
If a sewer user can prove to the satisfaction of the public works director that a specific amount of water is not going to the system, and is not adjusted, the public works director is authorized, subject to approval of the city manager, to adjust the bill. If such adjustments are recurring the public works director may require the user to obtain a separate meter and system, for measuring water not going to the sewer system, as a requirement to consideration of further adjustments. (Amended by Ordinance 98-46 dated 12-7-98). 
(b)  Unconnected sewer service lines prohibited. Except for discharge to a properly functioning septic tank system or discharges permitted by an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, the discharge of sewage into places other than the publicly owned treatment works is prohibited. 
(c)  Insufficient capacity, connection moratorium. In those parts of the sewer system where no additional capacity exists and a sewer moratorium has been established pursuant to orders of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, no new or additional sewer connections shall be permitted. Permits issued prior to the date of the moratorium may be completed. No new plumbing permits shall be issued for new buildings in a moratorium area after the effective date of the moratorium. A moratorium shall continue to be in effect until capacity restriction has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-45. - Adequate and minimum fixtures. 
(a)  Minimum number of fixtures. A dwelling shall have at least one commode, one bathtub or shower, one lavatory, one kitchen-type sink, and an adequate source of hot water for each family unit to meet minimum basic requirements for health, sanitation, and personal hygiene. All other buildings, structures, or premises intended for human occupancy or use shall be provided with adequate sanitary facilities as may be required by any other law or regulation, but not less than one commode and one hand washing lavatory. 
(b)  Adequate water for disposal of waste. It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of premises into which a pipe or other connection with the sanitary sewers and drains have been laid to permit the building to remain without adequate fixtures attached to allow sufficient quantity of water to be so applied as to properly carry off all waste matter and keep the same unobstructed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-46. - Right to enter and inspect connection. 
The public works director, building inspector, or their representative shall have free and unobstructed access to any part of the premises where house drains or other drains connected with or draining into the sanitary sewer are laid for the purpose of examining the construction, condition, and method of use of the same, upon cause of reasonable suspicion that there may be inadequate facilities, the facilities present may not be properly functioning, there is an improper discharge, or upon a periodic systematic inspection of a particular drainage basin or other large segment of the system through those facilities at any time of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or at any other time in the event of an emergency. If such entry is refused, the sewer service may be disconnected upon reasonable notice and an opportunity for a hearing. The service may be suspended immediately in the event of an emergency if there is reasonable cause to suspect that the discharge will endanger the public health or the environment, shall have the potential to disrupt the treatment process, or shall damage the publicly owned treatment work's lines or facilities, and a hearing shall thereafter be afforded the user as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-47. - Demolished buildings. 
When a building is demolished, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to have the sewer service line plugged securely so that extraneous water will not enter the sewer. The owner of the premises or his representative shall notify the public works director of the plug and have the plug inspected prior to covering any work. Before reusing a plugged line, it must first be inspected by the public works director and be in conformity with the existing standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-48. - Discharges into manholes. 
No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole. Any holding tank waste, including septage, portable toilets, grease interceptor or trap waste, and other non-domestic waste, must be disposed at an approved location and facility. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-49. - Vehicle wash racks. 
All gasoline stations, garages, self-service vehicle washers, and other public wash racks where vehicles are washed shall install catch basins in conformity with the plumbing code in accordance with a permit obtained from the building official. In the event any existing premises does not have a catch basin and the sewer line servicing the facility stops up due to grit or slime in the sewer lines, then the owner or operator of such premises shall be required to modify these facilities to construct a catch basin as a condition of continuing use of the system. If such users are industrial users as defined in [division 7 of this article], a permit as specified therein will be required. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-50. - Grease, grit, oil, and lint interceptors or traps. 
Restaurants, laundries, wash racks, service stations, private multi-user systems, engine or machinery repair shops, veterinarian facilities, and other facilities that produce grease, grit, oil, lint, or other materials which accumulate and cause or threaten to cause stoppages or impair the efficiency of the publicly owned treatment works sewers or threaten the safety of its employees, shall install and maintain a grease interceptor or trap, grit trap, lint trap, oil interceptor, or other appropriate device of standard design and construction to prevent excess discharges of such materials. The design and construction of any such device shall be subject to prior approval of the public works director and constructed in accordance with applicable building codes. All food service establishments, including but not limited to, restaurants, cafes, grocery stores, hospitals, quick stop markets, nursing homes, retirement centers, prisons, mobile food units, schools and other food preparation facilities must meet the requirements of the Mt. Juliet FOG Program Operational Division Policy No. 2008-02. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-51. - Multi-use private sewer systems. 
Excluding those industrial waste facilities with a permit issued pursuant to [division 7], the owner or operator of a private sewer system such as, but not limited to, multi-tenant buildings, building complexes, strip malls, and shopping centers shall be responsible for the quality of wastewater discharged at the point of connection to the publicly owned treatment work's sanitary sewer system and shall be responsible for any violations of the provisions of this article, including liability for the damage or injury caused to the publicly owned treatment works as a result of any discharge through the private system. All strip malls and shopping centers must meet the requirements of the Mt. Juliet FOG Program Operational Division Policy No. 2008.02. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-52—30-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS, AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 30-76. - Installation, maintenance, repair of sewer service lines. 
(a)  Definition. The minimum size of a standard sanitary sewer service line shall be a four-inch pipe. A standard sanitary sewer service line shall extend from the sewer main or trunk location in a street, alley, or easement to the building served by the sewer system. 
(b)  Installation of sewer service lines. 
Gravity. Four inch building sewers shall be laid on a grade greater than one-eighth-inch per foot (at least one percent). Larger building sewers shall be laid on a grade that will produce a velocity when flowing full of at least two feet per second. The slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be neat and regular. The land owner shall be responsible for hiring a licensed plumber to install gravity lines. 
Pressure. The city shall install all pressure lines between the trunk and a grinder pot. The city shall install the grinder pot. The owner shall be responsible for plumbing from the structure to the grinder pot. On new construction the owner shall dig all the ditch required for installation. 
Building sewers shall be constructed only of one of the following approved materials: (1) cast iron soil pipe using rubber compression joints of approved type; (2) polyvinyl chloride pipe with rubber compression joints; (3) ABS composite sewer pipe with solvent welded or rubber compression joints of approved type; or (4) similar materials of equal or superior quality following public works director approval. Under no circumstances will cement mortar joints be acceptable. Each connection to the sewer system must be made at a wye, or service line stubbed out, or in the absence of any other provision, by means of a saddle attached to the sewer. The city must approve the type and manner of all connections. No person may connect to the sewer by breaking into an existing sewer and inserting the service line. 
The building sewer may be brought into the building below the basement floor when gravity flow from the building to the sewer is at a grade of one percent or more. In cases where basement or floor levels are lower than the ground levels at the point of connection to the sewer the owner shall install a check valve or other back flow prevention device adequate to prevent flooding. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer, wastes carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged into the publicly owned treatment works sewer. 
(c)  Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be located five feet outside of the building, one as it taps on to the utility laterally and one at each change of direction of the building sewer greater than 45 degrees. Additional cleanouts shall be placed not more than 75 feet apart in horizontal building sewers of four-inch diameter and not more than 100 feet apart for larger pipes. Cleanouts shall extend to or above the finished grade level directly above the place where the cleanout is installed. A "Y" (wye) and one-eighth bend shall be used for the cleanout base. Cleanouts shall not be smaller than four inches on a four-inch pipe. 
(d)  Fees. All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The city reserves the right to impose a sewer service line charge for every sanitary sewer service line installed where a lateral sewer connection has been provided for use by the applicant. The rate of charge will be established by the public works director. 
Any person constructing lines for a subdivision shall pay an inspection fee of five percent of the cost of constructing the sewer system. They shall sign a comprehensive contract provided by the public works director and shall pay the inspection fee and the capacity fee and post the bond and do the other things required in the contract prior to commencing construction. A sample contract is [available in the office of the city clerk]. 
(e)  Title and maintenance. When a property owner ties into a sanitary sewer service line and pays the appropriate sewer service line fees, the city shall retain ownership of the grinder pump and pot and lines between them and the trunk lines. For gravity systems the city shall own only the trunk line. The property owner shall pay for all repairs and maintenance of the sanitary sewer service line between the user and the trunk line. 
(f)  Location of sewer stub-out. The plumbing contractor is responsible for locating the sewer stub-out, publicly owned treatment works personnel will provide whatever information is available for this purpose. If no "Y" or tee exists within three feet of either side of the location shown on the sewer plats, then a tap will be provided by the publicly owned treatment works when the sewer main is exposed. If a manhole needed for locating a service line has been lost, then the publicly owned treatment works shall be responsible for locating the manhole. 
(g)  Taps on utility sewers. All taps made directly into the city's sewer lines shall be made by sewer maintenance personnel. The plumbing contractor shall excavate to the city's sewer and expose the pipe in preparation for the tap. Only one service line shall be allowed to be installed in a trench. New taps shall be made using a "Y"-type connection. 
(h)  Manhole requirements. A new manhole will be required whenever a sewer service line larger than six inches is needed to tie into the city's sewer. The plumbing contractor shall excavate to the sewer and sufficiently expose the pipe for installation of the manhole. The user's licensed plumber shall install the manhole. The user shall pay for the cost of the manhole and the inspection fee and vacuum test prior to commencing construction. 
(i)  Maintenance of service lines. All repairs and maintenance of the sewer service line to include correction of excessive inflow or infiltration shall be the responsibility of the property owner or user of the sewer. The city shall be responsible for the maintenance of collector lines only up to the point where the owner's service line connects to the city's lines. 
(j)  Methods of installation. The methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, or other activities in the construction or repair of a building sewer which have not been described in this section shall conform to the requirements of the building or plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or to the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and Water Pollution Control Federation manuals. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures must be approved by the public works director. 
(k)  Public safety. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from potential hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(l)  Prohibitions. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, basement drains, or other sources of surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or drain which in turn is connected either directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-77. - Service line to enter sewer at junction; exceptions. 
No service lines shall enter the sanitary sewer at any point except where a junction has been made unless special permission has been given by the public works director. In any case where such permission has been given, the work shall be done under the inspection of the public works director or his representative and at the risk and expense of the party making the connection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-78. - Application for discharge of domestic wastewater. 
All users or prospective users which generate domestic wastewater shall make application to the public works director for written authorization to discharge to the sanitary sewer. Applications shall be required from all new dischargers as well as for existing dischargers desiring additional service. Connection to the sanitary sewer shall not be made until the application is received and approved by the public works director, the building sewer is installed in accordance with [this division] and an inspection has been performed by the public works director or his representative. 
Connections made without an approved application may be severed by order of the public works director. Such unapproved connection may be allowed to remain active if inspected and accepted; however, the owner shall be required to pay an alternative fee in lieu of the normal fees, but in an amount double the normal fees. 
The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's application for service shall in no way obligate the city to render the service. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this article and the city's rules and regulations, the connection charge will be refunded in full, and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for such service, except that conditional waivers may be granted for additional services by the public works director for interim periods if compliance may be assured within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-79. - Acceptance of work. 
All sewer construction involving interceptor lines, pump stations, metering stations, and appurtenances which shall become part of the city's sewer system shall not be constructed until the plans are approved and the construction inspected and approved by the public works director. Any construction work where sewers are opened, uncovered, or undercut must also have the prior approval of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-80—30-101. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE DOMESTIC WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 30-102. - Availability. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section [30-44], the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of this section. 
Where a public sewer shall become available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days after official notification by the public works director or his representative to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-103. - Requirements. 
(a)  A private domestic wastewater disposal system may not be constructed within the service area unless and until a certificate is obtained from the public works director stating that a public sewer is not accessible to the property and no such sewer is proposed for construction in the immediate future. No certificate shall be issued for any private domestic wastewater disposal system employing sub-surface oil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that specified by the City of Mt. Juliet and the Wilson County Health Department. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from the city and the Wilson County Health Department. The owner shall supply any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city and the Wilson County Health Department. 
(c)  A private sewage disposal system shall not be placed in operation until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city and Wilson County Health Department. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the owner shall notify the city and Wilson County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within a reasonable period of time after the receipt of notice by the city and Wilson County Health Department. 
(d)  The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all the recommendations of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, the Wilson County Health Department, and the City of Mt. Juliet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(f)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city or the Wilson County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-104—30-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-135. - Purpose and policy. 
This section establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of wastewater which may be legally discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. Pretreatment of some wastewater discharges will be required to achieve the goals established by this section and the Clean Water Act. The specific limitations set forth in this section are subject to change as necessary to enable the city to provide efficient wastewater treatment, to protect the public health and environment, to enable the city to meet requirements contained in its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, or other jurisdictional wastewater permits. The public works director shall review the limitations from time to time to ensure that they are sufficient to protect the health and safety of publicly owned treatment works personnel and the operation of the treatment works to enable the facility to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, other jurisdictional wastewater permits, provide for a cost effective means of operating the treatment works, and protect the public health and environment. The public works director shall recommend changes or modifications as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-136. - Prohibited pollutants. 
General prohibitions. No person shall introduce into the publicly owned treatment works any pollutant(s) which cause pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the publicly owned treatment works, including but not limited to, pollutants with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, or pollutants which cause an exceedance of ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the publicly owned treatment works. 
(2)  Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the publicly owned treatment works, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 5.0 standard units or higher than 10.0 standard units. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference with the operation of or which may cause damage to the publicly owned treatment works, including fats, oils, greases, waxy or other materials which tend to clog or coat a sewer line or other related appurtenances. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge of such volume or strength (slug) so as to cause interference in the publicly owned treatment works or individual unit operations or cause adverse effects on its workers or the environment. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the publicly owned treatment works resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Centigrade). 
Unless a higher discharge temperature is specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit, no user shall discharge into a sewer line or other appurtenance of the publicly owned treatment works wastewater with a temperature exceeding 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Centigrade). 
(6)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the publicly owned treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(7)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points specified by the publicly owned treatment works. 
(8)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that cause interference or pass-through. 
(9)  Any pollutant which causes a discoloration of the wastewater treatment plant effluent, or at the discharge point to another wastewater jurisdiction, which may result in a degradation of receiving water quality or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit violation. Wastewater discharges that impart color at the city's discharge point, including but are not limited to, dye wastes, ink wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(10)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city. 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test. 
(15)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(16)  Unused or out-dated pharmaceuticals. 
(17)  Antifreeze or antifreeze mixtures. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. The foresaid pollutants represent a general description of harmful or dangerous conditions and are in addition to such specific pollutants as may be identified and added from time to time to section [30-144], or the industrial user's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-137. - Affirmative defenses. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in section [30-136] of this article where the user can demonstrate one of the following: 
(1)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference. 
(2)  A local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference, as the case may be, was developed pursuant to sections [30-144 and 30-145] of this article for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass-through or interference and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference. 
(3)  If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass-through or interference and the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference did not change substantially in nature of constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the publicly owned treatment works was regularly in compliance with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-138. - Wastewater constituent evaluation. 
The wastewater of every industrial user shall be evaluated using the following criteria: 
(1)  Wastewater containing any element or compound which is known to be an environmental hazard and which is not adequately removed by the treatment works. 
(2)  Wastewater causing a pass-through, discoloration, foam, floating oil and grease, or any other condition in the quality of the treatment works effluent such that receiving water quality requirements established by law cannot be met or the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit requirements are violated. 
(3)  Wastewater causing conditions at or near the city's treatment works which violate any statute, rule, or regulation of any public agency of Tennessee or the United States. 
(4)  Wastewater containing any element or compound known to act as a lacrimator, known to cause nausea, or known to cause odors constituting a public nuisance. 
(5)  Wastewater causing interference with the effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues, sludge, or scum causing them to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse, causing interference with the reclamation process, or causing them to be unsuitable for disposal. 
(6)  Wastewater discharged at a point in the collection system that is upstream of any overflow, bypass, or combined sewer overflow and which may thereby cause special environmental problems or specific discharge limitations. 
(7)  Wastewater having constituents and concentrations which cause an exceedance of the limits in Mt. Juliet Local Limits Operational Division Policy No. 2008-01, referenced at section [30-144]. 
(8)  The capacity of existing sewer lines to carry the anticipated wastewater flow, particularly with respect to any problems, overflows, or overloads caused by heavy rain infiltration. 
(9)  The toxicity of each wastewater shall be evaluated by an appropriate biomonitoring technique to determine if a specific discharge may significantly affect the overall toxic level of the publicly owned treatment works influent. 
The public works director shall establish reasonable limitations, prohibitions, or monitoring requirements in addition to the limits established pursuant to sections [30-139 and 30-144] of this article in the wastewater discharge permit of any industrial user that discharges wastewater violating any of the above criteria, or that has processes that generate wastewater that could violate any of the above criteria, as shall be reasonably necessary to achieve the purpose and policy of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-139. - National pretreatment standards. 
Certain industrial users are now or hereafter shall become subject to National Pretreatment Standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into the publicly owned treatment works. All industrial users subject to such a standard shall comply with all requirements and with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), the Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, in this article, in their permit, or this article. Compliance with national pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such standards or for existing sources which hereafter become subject to such standards shall be within three years following promulgation of the standards unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with national pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard. Except where expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with such standard. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-140. - Dilution. 
Except where expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any local, state or federal standard. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-141. - Limitations on radioactive waste. 
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged any radioactive waste into a community sewer, except as follows: 
(1)  When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation or the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
(2)  When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with applicable laws and regulations of the agencies having jurisdiction. 
(3)  When a copy of permits received from regulatory agencies has been filed with the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-142. - Septic tank hauling, pumping, and discharge. 
No person owning vacuum, or cesspool pump trucks, or grease waste trucks, or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge sewage directly or indirectly into the publicly owned treatment works. The operator of such trucks shall haul the wastes to Metropolitan Nashville, or other approved hauled waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-143. - Other holding tank wastes. 
No user shall discharge any other holding tank wastes, including hauled industrial waste, into the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-144. - Restrictions on wastewater strength. 
No person or user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the pollutant concentrations identified in the Mt. Juliet Local Limits Operational Division Policy No. 2008-01 (Table A). The city shall monitor the wastewater to Metro Water Services, City of Nashville collection system for each pollutant in Table A of the Mt. Juliet Local Limits Operational Division Policy No. 2008-01. Industrial users shall be subject to reporting and monitoring requirements as set forth in this article and the Mt. Juliet Local Limits Operational Division Policy No. 2008-01. In the event that the discharge to the Metro Water Services, City of Nashville collection system reaches or exceeds the levels set forth in this table, the public works director shall initiate technical studies to determine the cause of the exceedance and shall recommend to the city the necessary remedial measures. The public works director may also recommend changes to these criteria, or establish new local limits, in the event that the City of Mt. Juliet permit limits are changed, there are changes in applicable laws or regulations, or changes are needed for more effective operation of the publicly owned treatment works. 
The city may develop best management practices (BMPs) by policy, or in individual wastewater discharge permits, or general permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of ordinance. All users subject to BMP requirements must provide documentation to show compliance with BMPs. Any categorical industrial user or significant industrial user subject to BMP requirements must submit documentation to the city to show compliance with BMPs. The BMP documentation must be retained by the user for at least four years. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-145. - Storm drainage, ground, unpolluted and contaminated stormwater. 
(a)  No stormwater, ground water, rain water, street drainage, rooftop drainage, basement drainage, subsurface drainage, foundation drainage, yard drainage, swimming pool drainage, process water drainage, cooling water, or other unpolluted or minimally polluted water shall be discharged into the city's sewer unless no other reasonable alternative is available, except with permission from the public works director. Reasonable conditions shall be prescribed, and a sewer service charge will be issued based upon the quantity of water discharged as measured by a flow meter or a reasonable estimate accepted by the public works director. All users shall be required to maintain their private sewer lines so as to prevent infiltration of ground or stormwater as a condition of use of the system and shall immediately replace or repair any leaking or damaged lines. 
(b)  The publicly owned treatment works will accept discharge of contaminated stormwater if the following criteria are met: (1) all known and available technology will not prevent contamination or treat contaminated water to meet state standards for discharge to receiving waters or will cause unreasonable financial burden; (2) the contaminated stormwater meets the publicly owned treatment work's discharge limits and all state and federal pretreatment requirements; and (3) the volume of discharge will not exceed the hydraulic loading in the collection system or the treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-146. - Use of garbage disposals. 
No waste from garbage disposals shall be discharged into the publicly owned treatment work's sewers except from private garbage disposals used in an individual residence or upon permit issued by the public works director for preparation of food consumed on premises, and then only when applicable fees are paid. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a garbage disposal grinder connected to the sewer system for the purpose of grinding and discharging plastic, paper products, inert materials, or anything other than the waste products from normal food preparation and consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-147. - Human blood and tissue waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of human blood or tissue in excess of nine ounces per four-hour period into the sewer. Any such waste shall be diluted by water of 20 times the volume of the waste. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-148. - Obstruction or damage to sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any waste which may obstruct or damage storm or sanitary sewer lines or which may inhibit, disrupt, or damage either system, including the sewage treatment process and operations. This prohibition includes all substances, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive and whether associated with human habitation, of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing. It shall be unlawful to block or obstruct any catch basin, sewer line, or other appurtenance; or to break, injure, or remove any portion from any part of a sewer, drain, or catch basin, including plates covering manholes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-149. - State pretreatment standards. 
Industrial users must comply with state pretreatment requirements (Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14). 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-150. - Additional pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-151—30-179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CONTROL OF PROHIBITED POLLUTANTS 
 
Sec. 30-180. - Pretreatment requirements. 
Industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works shall design, construct, operate, and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities when necessary to reduce or modify the user's wastewater composition to achieve compliance with the limitations in wastewater strength set forth in sections 30-144 and 30-145] of this article, to meet applicable national pretreatment standards, to prevent slug discharges or to meet any other wastewater condition or limitation contained in the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-181. - Plans and specifications. 
Plans and specifications for wastewater monitoring and pretreatment facilities shall be prepared, signed, and dated by a competent environmental professional, and be submitted to the public works director for review in accordance with accepted practices. The public works director shall review the plans within 30 days of receipt and recommend to the user any appropriate changes. Prior to beginning construction of a monitoring or pretreatment facility, the user shall submit a set of construction plans and specifications to be maintained by the public works director. Prior to beginning construction, the industrial user shall also secure all necessary permits. 
The user shall construct the pretreatment facility within the time frame specified in the compliance schedule of the wastewater discharge permit. Following completion of construction, the user shall provide the public works director with as-built drawings to be maintained by the public works director. The review of such plans and specifications will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce effluent complying with the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operations shall be reported to and approved by the public works director prior to implementation. 
All new food service establishments, or existing food service establishments that are being upgraded or remodeled, must meet the requirements of the Mt. Juliet FOG Program Operational Division Policy No. 2008-02. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-182. - Prevention of accidental discharges. 
All users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the publicly owned treatment works of waste regulated by this article from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds of any waste regulated by this article. The wastewater discharge permit of any user who has a history of significant leaks, spills, or other accidental discharge of regulated waste shall be subject on a case by case basis to a special permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge. Plans, specifications, and operating procedures shall be developed by the user and submitted to the public works director for review. Section [30-184] includes slug discharge control program requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-183. - Oil and grease control program. 
Disposal of oil by discharge to the sewer system is not permitted. Oils include automotive lubricating oils, transmission fluid, coolants, including anti-freeze, brake fluid, cutting oils, other industrial oils, pure vegetable oils, and yellow grease (oils or greases that can be recycled) used in a restaurant or food processing facility. 
All food service establishments, including but not limited to, restaurants, cafes, grocery stores, hospitals, quick stop markets, nursing homes, retirement centers, prisons, mobile food units, schools and other food preparation facilities must meet the requirements of the Mt. Juliet FOG Program Operational Division Policy No. 2008-02. 
Oil and grease waste pretreatment shall be required to provide an equivalent of primary treatment based on gravity separation of visible and floating oil and grease sludge from wastewater discharges. Such treatment processes shall be subject to best management practices and approved by the public works director. Discharges shall also be subject to monitoring, entry, inspection, reporting, and other requirements as determined by the public works director. These dischargers may be required to apply for industrial waste discharge permits if it is determined that the dischargers are a source of prohibited pollutants, toxic pollutants, or are otherwise controlled by federal or state regulations. All dischargers of oil and grease as listed above are subject to all enforcement and penalty provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-184. - Slug discharge control program. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, a slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. All industrial users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste regulated by this permit from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, from diked areas or holding ponds. The permittee shall notify the POTW immediately (within 30 minutes of becoming aware of the slug discharge) by telephone, or in person, of any slug loadings, spills, bypasses, upsets, etc., and a follow up written notification within five days, as prescribed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). 
*Significant industrial users are required to notify the city immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. The city must evaluate all SIUs for the need for a slug control plan or other actions at least one time. Should the city decide that a slug control plan is needed by the industrial user, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements; 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5 (b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  Certain users will be required to prepare spill response plans showing facilities and procedures for providing this protection. These plans shall be submitted to the public works director for review and approval. All users required to have such a plan shall submit it within 30 days of notification by the public works director and complete implementation within 90 days of notification. 
(c)  In the case of a slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately (within 30 minutes of becoming aware of the slug discharge) notify the publicly owned treatment works of the incident by telephone or in person. Information concerning the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective action shall be provided by the user. 
Within five days following a slug discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures being taken by the user to prevent future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's premises advising employees of a contact to call in the event of a slug discharge. The user shall ensure that all employees who may cause or allow such slug discharge to occur are advised of the proper emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-185. - Prohibition of bypass. 
(a)  Except as allowed in paragraph (c) below, bypass is prohibited, and the public works director may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed. 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required in section [30-263]. 
(b)  The public works director may approve an anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effect if the public works director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the reporting provisions of section [30-263]. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-186. - Exceptions to wastewater limitations. 
(a)  Applicability. This section provides a method for industrial users subject to the limitation on wastewater pollutants listed in sections [30-144 and 30-145] to apply for and receive a temporary exemption to the discharge level for one or more pollutants or parameters. 
(b)  Time of application. Applicants shall apply for a temporary exemption when they are required to apply for a wastewater discharge permit or renewal provided that the public works director allows applications at any time unless the applicant has submitted the same or substantially similar application within the preceding year that was denied by the board. 
(c)  Written applications. All applications for an exception shall be in writing and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation of each of the factors to be considered by the public works director pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section. 
(d)  Review by the public works director. All applications for an exception shall be reviewed by the public works director. If the application does not contain sufficient information for complete evaluation, the public works director shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and request additional information. The applicant shall have 30 days following notification by the public works director to correct such deficiencies. This 30-day period may be extended by the public works director upon application and for just cause. Upon receipt of a complete application, the public works director shall evaluate it within 30 days and approve or deny the application based upon the following factors: 
(1)  The public works director shall consider if the applicant is subject to a national pretreatment standard containing discharge limitations more stringent than those in sections [30-144 and 30-145] and grant an exception only if such exception is within limitations of applicable federal regulations. 
(2)  The public works director shall consider if the exception would apply to discharge of a substance classified as a toxic substance under regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act, or similar state regulation, and then grant an exception only if such exception may be granted within the limitations of federal and state regulations. 
(3)  The public works director shall consider if the exception would create conditions or a hazard to city personnel that would reduce the effectiveness of the publicly owned treatment works taking into consideration the concentration of the pollutant in the treatment works' influent and the design capability of the treatment works. 
(4)  The public works director shall consider the possibility of the exception causing the publicly owned treatment works to violate its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. 
(5)  The public works director shall consider if the exception would cause elements or compounds to be present in the sludge of the treatment works which would prevent sludge use or disposal by the publicly owned treatment works or which would cause the publicly owned treatment works to violate any regulation promulgated by Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 405 of the Act or similar state regulatory measure. 
(6)  The public works director may consider the cost of pretreatment or other types of control techniques which would be necessary for the user to achieve effluent reduction, but prohibitive cost alone shall not be the basis for granting an exception. 
(7)  The public works director may consider the age of equipment and industrial facilities involved to the extent that such factors affect the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(8)  The public works director may consider the process employed by the user and process changes available which would affect the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(9)  The public works director may consider the engineering aspects of various types of pretreatment or other control techniques available to the user to improve the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(10)  The public works director may consider an application for exception based upon the fact that water conservation measures instituted or proposed by the user result in a higher concentration of particular pollutants in the wastewater discharge of the user without increasing the amount of mass pollutants discharged. To be eligible for an exception under this subparagraph, the applicant must show that except for wastewater conservation measures, the applicant's discharge has been or would be in compliance with the limitations on wastewater strength set forth in section [30-144]. No such exception shall be granted if the increased concentration of pollutants in the applicant's wastewater would have significant adverse impact upon the operation of the publicly owned treatment works. 
(e)  Review by wastewater hearing authority board. The board shall review any appeal to a denial by the public works director of an application for an exception and shall take into account the same factors considered by the public works director. At such a hearing, the applicant and the public works director shall have the right to present relevant proof by oral or documentary evidence. The procedure set forth in section [30-296] shall be applicable to such a hearing. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in an appeal hearing. 
(f)  Best management practices. The public works director or board shall not grant an exception unless the applicant demonstrates to the board that best management practices are being employed to reduce or prevent the contribution of pollutants to the publicly owned treatment works. Best management practices include, but are not limited to, preventive operating and maintenance procedures, schedule of activities, process changes, prohibiting activities, and other management practices to reduce the quantity or increase the quality of effluent discharged and to control plant site runoff, spillage, leaks, and drainage from raw material storage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-187—30-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 30-211. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article are applicable to all industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works. The city has an "approved publicly owned treatment works pretreatment program" as that term is defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403(c)(d) and any permits issued hereunder to industrial users who are subject to or who become subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall be conditioned upon the industrial user also complying with all applicable substantive and procedural requirements promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency or the State of Tennessee regarding such categorical standards unless an exception for the city's program or for the specific industrial categories is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-212. - Application and permit requirements. 
Prior to discharging non-domestic waste into the publicly owned treatment works, all significant industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. The industrial user shall request that the public works director determine if the proposed discharge is significant as defined in section [30-20]. If the discharge is determined not to be significant, the public works director may still establish appropriate discharge conditions for the user. Any uncategorized industrial user designated as significant may petition the public works director to be deleted from the list as significant on the grounds that there exists no potential for adverse effect on the publicly owned treatment work's operation or violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
All significant industrial users shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit and shall complete such forms as required by the public works director, pay appropriate fees, and agree to abide by the provisions of this article and any specific conditions or regulation established by the public works director. All original applications shall be accompanied by a report containing the information specified in section [30-213]. All original applications shall also include a site plan, floor plan, and mechanical and plumbing plans with sufficient detail to show all sewers and appurtenances in the user's premises by size, location, and elevation. The industrial user shall also submit revised plans to the public works director when alterations or additions to the user's premises affect the plans. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-213. - Report requirements. 
The report required for all significant industrial users by section [30-212] or other provisions of this article shall contain in units and terms appropriate for evaluation the information listed in subparagraphs (a) through (e) below. Industrial users subject to national pretreatment standards shall submit to the public works director a report which contains the information listed in subparagraphs (a) through (f) below within 180 days after the promulgation by the Environmental Protection Agency of a National Pretreatment Standard under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act. This report is called the baseline monitoring report (BMR). Industrial users who are unable to achieve a discharge limit set forth in sections [30-135 through 30-148] without improved operation and maintenance procedures or pretreatment shall submit a report which contains the information listed in subparagraphs (a) through (g) of this section. 
As specified, the report shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the industrial user. 
(2)  The location of the industrial user. 
(3)  The nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user. 
(4)  The average and maximum flow in gallons per day of discharge from the industrial user to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(5)  The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process from the industrial user and identification of any applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The concentration shall be reported as a maximum or average level as provided for in the applicable pretreatment standard and as approved by standard methods approved by the public works director. If an equivalent concentration limit has been calculated in accordance with any pretreatment standard, this adjusted concentration limit shall also be submitted to the public works director for approval. 
(6)  A statement that has been reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by an environmental professional indicating if pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance procedures or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to achieve compliance. 
(7)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the report shall contain the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide the additional pretreatment. The completion date in the schedule shall be no later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(8)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit. 
(9)  Measurement of pollutants: (a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. (b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. (c) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. (d) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section [30-254] of this article. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(10)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the permit application. 
For purposes of this paragraph when the context so indicates, the phrase "pretreatment standard" shall include either a national pretreatment standard or a pretreatment standard imposed as a result of the industrial user's discharging any incompatible pollutant regulated by sections [30-135 through 30-148]. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "pollutant" shall include any pollutant identified in a national pretreatment standard or any incompatible pollutant identified in sections [30-135 through 30-148]. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-214. - Incomplete applications. 
The public works director will act only on applications that are accompanied by a report which lists all the information required in section [30-213]. Industrial users who have filed incomplete applications will be notified by the public works director that the application is deficient and the nature of the deficiency and will be given 30 days to correct such. If the deficiency is not corrected within that period or with such extended time as allowed by the public works director, the public works director shall deny the application and notify the applicant in writing of such action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-215. - Evaluation of application. 
Upon receipt of completed applications, the public works director shall review and evaluate the applications and shall propose such special permit conditions as the public works director deems advisable. All wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of this article and all other applicable laws and regulations. The public works director may also propose that the wastewater discharge permit be subject to one or more special conditions in regard to any of the following: 
(1)  Pretreatment requirements. 
(2)  The average and maximum wastewater constituents. 
(3)  Limits on rate and time of discharge for flow equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Specifications for self-monitoring procedures. 
(6)  Requirements for submission of technical or discharge reports. 
(7)  Requirements for records maintenance. 
(8)  Average and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when toxic pollutants are proposed or present in the industrial user's wastewater discharge. 
(9)  Other conditions deemed appropriate by the public works director to ensure compliance with the ordinance or other applicable law or regulation. 
(10)  A reasonable compliance schedule, as determined by the public works director, up to one year in duration or such earlier date as may be required by other applicable law or regulation, whichever is sooner, to ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements or improved methods of operation and maintenance. 
(11)  Requirements for the installation of facilities to prevent and control accidental discharges or spills at the user's premises. 
(12)  The unit charge or schedule of charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-216. - Notification of proposed permit conditions. 
(a)  Upon completion of the evaluation, the public works director shall notify the applicant of any special permit conditions proposed for inclusion in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  The applicant shall have 45 days from and after the date of the public works director's recommendations for special permit conditions to review same and file written objections with the public works director in regard to any special permit conditions recommended. The public works director may, but is not required, to schedule a meeting with applicant's authorized representative within 15 days following receipt of the applicant's objections, to attempt to resolve disputed issues concerning special permit conditions. 
(c)  If applicant files no objection to special permit conditions proposed by the public works director or a subsequent agreement is reached concerning same, the public works director shall issue a wastewater discharge permit to applicant with such special conditions incorporated therein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-217. - Board to establish permit conditions. 
(a)  In the event that the public works director cannot issue a permit pursuant to section [30-216] above, the public works director shall submit to the board the proposed permit conditions and the applicant's written objections at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board or at a specially convened meeting. 
(b)  The board shall schedule a hearing within 30 days following the meeting referred to above unless such time is extended for just cause shown to resolve any disputed matters relevant to such permit. 
(c)  The public works director shall notify the applicant of the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing scheduled by the board. The applicant and the public works director shall have the right to participate in the hearing and present any relevant evidence to the board concerning proposed special permit conditions or other matters being considered by the board. 
(d)  Following the hearing or additional hearings deemed necessary and advisable by the board, the board shall establish special permit conditions deemed advisable to ensure the applicant's compliance with this article or other applicable laws or regulations and direct the public works director to issue a wastewater discharge permit to the applicant accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-218. - Individual wastewater discharge permits. 
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date. No permit is to exceed a five-year duration; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards, local limits, state or local law; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practices) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. 
(5)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge. 
(6)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(7)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. All SIU permits must contain immediate notification requirements of any changes affecting potential to slug as per 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). 
(8)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the director must be included as a condition in the user's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-219. - General wastewater discharge permits. 
At the discretion of the director, general permits may be used to control SIU, industrial user, or commercial user discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
(1)  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
(2)  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
(3)  Require the same effluent limitations; 
(4)  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
(5)  In the opinion of the director are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits. 
a.  To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, and any other information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the director has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted. 
b.  The director will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to support the POTW's determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria in this section and applicable state regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the general permit. 
c.  General permits will contain the same required information as listed in section [30-218]. 
The city may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the combined wastestream formula or net/gross calculations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-220. - Compliance schedule and reporting requirements. 
SIU compliance monitoring reports: All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by city submit no less than twice per year, on dates specified, reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section [30-244]. 
The following conditions shall apply to the schedules required by section [30-215] of this article: 
(1)  Schedule components. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment requirements for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(2)  Schedule intervals. No such increment shall exceed nine months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-221. - Duration of permits. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a time period not to exceed five years. Permits issued to industrial users pursuant to section [30-186] may be issued for a period of one year. 
Industrial users subject to a national pretreatment standard shall apply for new permits on the effective date of such standards. The public works director shall notify in writing any industrial user whom the public works director has cause to believe is subject to a national pretreatment standard of the promulgation of such regulations, but any failure of the public works director in this regard shall not relieve the user of the duty of complying with such standards. An industrial user must apply in writing for a renewal permit within a period of time not more than 90 days and not less than 30 days prior to expiration of the current permit. 
Limitations or conditions of a permit are subject to modification or change as such changes become necessary due to changes in applicable water quality standards, changes in the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, changes in section [30-144 or 30-145], changes in other applicable law or regulation, or for other just cause. Users will be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the public works director at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new condition in the permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The user may appeal the decision of the public works director in regard to any changed permit conditions as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-222. - Transfer of permit. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation, unless as approved by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-223. - Revocation of a permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article is subject to modification, suspension, or revocation in whole or in part during its term for cause, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit or other applicable law or regulation. 
(2)  Obtaining of a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts. 
(3)  A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-224. - Application signatories and certifications. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(b)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the director must annually submit the following certification statement signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from ________, _____ to ________, _____ [months, days, year]: 
(a)  The facility described as ___________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user. 
(b)  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
(c)  This compliance certification is based on the following information. 
(c)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-225—30-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, AND ENTRY 
 
Sec. 30-251. - Inspections, monitoring, and entry. 
(a)  When required to carry out the objective of this article, including but not limited to: (1) developing or assisting in the development of any effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or permit condition under this article; (2) determining whether any person is in violation of any such effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or permit condition; (3) any requirement established under this section. 
(b)  The public works director shall require any industrial user to: (1) establish and maintain records; (2) make reports; (3) install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or methods, including biological monitoring methods when appropriate; (4) sample effluent in accordance with these methods, at such locations and intervals and in such a manner as the public works director shall prescribe; (5) provide such other information as the public works director may reasonably require. 
(c)  Specific requirements under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section shall be established by the public works director, or the board as applicable, for each industrial user, and such requirements shall be included as a condition of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. The nature of any requirement under this provision shall depend on the nature of the user's discharge, the impact of the discharge upon the publicly owned treatment works, the volume of water discharged, and the technical feasibility of an economic reasonableness of any such requirement. 
(d)  The public works director or his authorized representative, employees of the State of Tennessee, and employees of the Environmental Protection Agency shall, upon presentation of credentials: 
(1)  Have a right of entry to, upon, or through any user's premises in which an effluent source is located or in which any records are required to be maintained under this article are located. 
(2)  Have access at reasonable times to copy any records, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required of the user, and sample any discharge which the owner or operator of such source is required to sample. 
(e)  In the event any user denies the right of entry for inspection, sampling, inspecting and copying records, or verifying that a user is not discharging industrial wastes or performing other duties as shall be imposed upon the public works director by this article, the public works director shall seek a warrant or use such other legal procedures as advisable and reasonably necessary to perform the duties of this article. 
(f)  Any user failing or refusing to perform any duty imposed upon the user under the provisions of this section, or who denies the right to enter the user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, inspecting and copying records, or other such duties as may be imposed upon the user by this section, shall be deemed to have violated the conditions of the wastewater discharge permit and such permit shall be subject to modification, suspension, or revocation under the procedures established in this article. A user who does not have an industrial waste discharge permit and denies the right to inspect as described herein is subject to having the sewer service in question terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-252. - Reports. 
(a)  Progress reports. No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the public works director, including as a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such a date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the public works director. 
(b)  90-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the public works director a report containing the information described in section [30-213(4)—(6)]. 
(c)  Self-monitoring reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall submit to the public works director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or in the industrial user's permit, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by their permit. In addition, this report shall include a record of average and maximum daily flows. At the discretion of the public works director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the public works director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are submitted. 
(2)  The public works director, as applicable, may impose limitations on industrial users employing dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by paragraph (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(d)  The reports required in this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and nature and concentration or production rates and mass limits where requested by the public works director, as applicable, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards or industrial permit. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the public works director as alternative standards, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measured operation), the report shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable treatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-253. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall install a monitoring station of a standard design or one satisfactory to the public works director. 
All users who propose to discharge or who in the judgment of the publicly owned treatment works could now or in the future discharge wastewater with constituents and characteristics different from that produced by a domestic premise may be required to install a monitoring facility. 
(b)  Installation. Required monitoring facilities shall be constructed, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. The purpose of the facility is to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of wastewater. If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the publicly owned treatment works, it shall be provided, installed, and operated at the user's expense. The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the user's premises outside the building. The publicly owned treatment works may, however, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-way with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(c)  Access. If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow safe and immediate access for publicly owned treatment works, State of Tennessee, or Environmental Protection Agency personnel. There shall be ample room in or near such a facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The entire facility and any sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by and at the expense of the user. 
(d)  The industrial user shall be required to design any necessary facility and to submit according to the permit compliance schedule an engineering report, including detailed design plans and operating procedures to the public works director for review in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The public works director shall review the plans and other documents within 30 days and shall recommend any change deemed appropriate. 
(e)  Upon approval of plans and other documents, the industrial user shall secure all building, electrical, plumbing, and other permits required and proceed to construct any necessary facility and establish required operating procedures within the time provided in the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-254. - Sampling and analysis. 
All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by Metro, using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report submitted to the city. Where the categorical pretreatment standard, local limit, or permit requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
(1)  Sample collection and analyses. Samples and measurements taken in compliance with the monitoring requirements of this permit shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored discharge during a normal production day and shall be taken as follows: 
a.  Be performed on composite and if applicable, grab samples, representative of the total wastewater flow discharged to the POTW with the maximum time interval between samples no longer than 60 minutes. 
b.  Be conducted in accordance with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency protocol. The results must be reported to the lowest detectable limit of the methodology. Samples are to be analyzed by a laboratory, certified by Metro Water Services (Nashville, TN) for the required parameters. 
c.  Provide the flow rate for which the results are indicative to the nearest 100 gallons per day. 
d.  Except as indicated in subsection (1)e. below or if designated different in the user's permit, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period, upon approval from the director, may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
e.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
f.  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports [40 CFR 403.12(g)(4) and Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(2) and (4)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the city may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section [30-220] [40 CFR 403.12(g)(4) and Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(5) and (8)], the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(2)  Sample location. All approved sampling shall be collected from the sample collection point as designated in the industrial user's permit as issued by the city. 
(3)  Test procedures. 
a.  Test procedures for the analysis of pollutants shall conform to regulations published pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act of 1977, under which such procedures may be required. 
b.  Unless otherwise noted in the permit, all pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-255. - Dangerous discharge notification. 
(a)  Telephone notification. Any person or user causing or suffering any discharge, whether accidental or not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to human health and welfare or the environment, or which is likely to cause interference with the publicly owned treatment works, shall notify the public works director immediately (within 30 minutes of becoming aware of the discharge) by telephone. In the absence of the public works director, notification shall be given to the publicly owned treatment works employee then in charge of the treatment works. Such notification will not relieve the user from any expense, loss, liability, fines, or penalty which may be incurred as a consequence of the discharge. 
(b)  Written report. Within five days following such an occurrence, the user shall provide the public works director with a detailed written report describing the cause of the dangerous discharge and measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of a contact in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-256. - Slug reporting. 
The industrial user shall notify the publicly owned treatment works immediately (within 30 minutes of becoming aware of the discharge) by telephone of any slug loading, as defined by section [30-184], by the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-257. - Notification of hazardous waste discharge. 
(a)  The industrial user shall notify the city (department of public works), the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and type of discharge. Additional notification requirements may apply as required by 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(b)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of this paragraph during a calendar month in which they generate no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261(e)(2), (f), (g), and (j). Generation of more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste do not require additional notification, except for the acute hazardous wastes specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261.5(3), (f), (g), and (j). 
(c)  In the case of new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the publicly owned treatment works of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations, except for the exemption in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practicable and that it has selected the method of treatment, storage, or disposal currently available which minimizes the present and future threat to human health and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-258. - Notification of changed discharge. 
All industrial users shall promptly notify the publicly owned treatment works in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes, for which the user has submitted initial notification under section [30-257]. 
(1)  The permittee shall notify the City of Mt. Juliet Department of Public Works on any of the following changes to the system no later than 180 days prior to change of discharge; 
a.  New introduction into such works of pollutants from any source which would be a new source, if such source were discharging pollutants. 
b.  New introduction of pollutants into such works from a source which would be subject to the Sewer Use Ordinance - Title 30 if it were discharging such pollutants. 
c.  A substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants being discharged into such works at the time the permit is issued. 
(2)  This notice will include information on the quality and quantity of the wastewater introduced by the new source into the publicly owned treatment works, and on any anticipated impact on the effluent discharged from such works. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-259. - Provisions governing fraud and false statements. 
The reports required to be submitted under this section shall be subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the provisions of Sections 309(c)(4) and (6) of the Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation, or certifications in reports required by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-260. - Signatory requirements. 
The reports required by this section shall include a certification statement as follows: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
The reports shall be signed as follows: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-261. - Reporting of violation and repeat sampling. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. If the city performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-262. - Reporting of all monitoring. 
If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in section [30-213] of this article monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the public works director using approved procedures prescribed in this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-263. - Notice of bypass. 
(a)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the public works director. 
(b)  An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the public works director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The public works director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-264. - Maintenance of records. 
Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the samples. 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed. 
(3)  Who performed the analyses. 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods. 
(5)  The results of the analyses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-265. - Records retention period. 
Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement established in this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of four years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section) and shall make these records available for inspection and copying by the public works director, Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Director of the Division of Water Pollution Control, and Environmental Protection Agency. The retention period shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user or upon request from the public works director, the director, or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-266. - Confidential information. 
Any records, reports, or information obtained under this section shall (1) in the case of effluent data, be related to any applicable effluent limitations, toxic, pretreatment, or permit condition, and (2) be available to the public to the extent provided by 40 Code of Federal Regulations, part 232. If, upon showing to the public works director by any person that, if made public, records, reports, information, or particular parts (other than effluent data) to which the public works director has access under this section, would divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets of such person, the public works director shall consider such record, report, or information, or particular portion thereof confidential in accordance with the purposes of this article. Such record, report, or information may be disclosed to officers, employees, or authorized representatives of the United States or the State of Tennessee concerned with carrying out the provisions of the Act or when relevant in any proceeding under this article or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-267—30-295. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-296. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any hearing or re-hearing brought before the board, as defined in section [30-395], shall be conducted in accordance with following: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged violator pursuant to this section, the public works director shall give the petitioner ten days written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  The hearing provided may be conducted by the board at a regular or special meeting. A quorum (two members) of the board must be present at the regular or special meeting in order to conduct the hearing. 
(3)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the hearings shall be made and filed with the board in conjunction with the findings of fact and conclusions of law made pursuant to subsection [(a)(6) of this section]. The transcript shall be made available to the petitioner or any party to a hearing upon payment of a charge set by the public works director to cover preparation fees. 
(4)  In connection with the hearing, the chairperson of the board shall issue subpoenas in response to any reasonable request by any party to the hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. In the case of refusal to obey a notice of hearing or subpoena issued under this section, the chancery court of Wilson County shall have the jurisdiction upon the application of the public works director to issue an order requiring such person to appear and testify or produce evidence as the case may require. Failure to obey such an order of the court is punishable by the court as contempt. 
(5)  On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further the purposes of the pretreatment program and shall give written notice of such decisions and orders to the alleged violator. The order issued under this subsection shall be issued no later than 30 days following the close of the hearing by the person or persons designated by the chairperson. 
(6)  The decision of the board shall become final and binding on all parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in [this section and section 30-297]. 
(7)  Any person to whom an emergency order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but on petition to the board shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, but in no case shall such a hearing be held later than three days from the receipt of such a petition by the board. 
(8)  Upon agreement of all parties, the testimony of any person may be taken by deposition or written interrogatories. Unless otherwise agreed, the deposition shall be taken in a manner consistent with Rules 26 through 33 of the Tennessee Rules of Civil Procedure, with the chairperson to rule on such manners as would require a ruling by the court under the rules. 
(9)  The public works director shall first call witnesses, which shall be followed by witnesses called by the other party. Rebuttal witnesses shall be called in the same order. The chairperson shall rule on any evidentiary questions arising during such hearing and shall make other rulings necessary or advisable to facilitate an orderly hearing subject to approval of the board. The board, the public works director, his representative, and all parties shall have the right to examine any witness. The board shall not be bound by or limited to rules of evidence applicable to legal proceedings. 
(10)  Any person aggrieved by an order or determination of the public works director where an appeal is not otherwise provided by this section may appeal the order or determination to the board. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the public works director, and the notice shall set forth with particularity the action or inaction of the public works director complained of and the relief being sought by the person filing the appeal. A special meeting of the board may be called by the chairperson upon the filing of such an appeal, and the board may, at member's discretion, suspend the operation of the order or determination of the public works director on which is based the appeal until such time as the board has acted upon the appeal. 
(b)  An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final determination of the public works director or board by any party who is or may be adversely affected thereby to the Wilson County Chancery Court pursuant to the common law writ of certiorari set in Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.) § 27-8-101, within 60 days from the date such order or determination is made. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-297. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  (1)  Any person or user who does any of the following acts or omissions shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000.00 per day for each day during which the act or omission continues or occurs: 
a.  Violates any effluent standard or limitation imposed by a pretreatment program. 
b.  Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant to a pretreatment program. 
c.  Fails to complete a filing requirement of a pretreatment program. 
d.  Fails to allow or perform an entry, inspection, monitoring, or reporting requirement of a pretreatment program. 
e.  Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed by a pretreatment program. 
f.  Violates a final determination or order of the board. 
(2)  Any civil penalty shall be assessed in the following manner: 
a.  The public works director may issue an assessment against any person or user responsible for the violation. 
b.  Any person or user against whom an assessment has been issued may secure a review of such assessment by filing with the public works director a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons for his objections and asking for a hearing on the matter involved before the board. If a petition for review of the assessment is not filed within 30 days of the date the assessment is served, the violator shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and it shall become final. 
c.  When any assessment becomes final because of a person's failure to appeal the public works director's assessment, the public works director may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution of such judgment and the court, in such proceedings, shall treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of the assessment. Civil penalties will be assessed based on the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity. 
2.  Damages to the publicly owned treatment works, including compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the publicly owned treatment works, which also includes any penalties, costs, and attorney's fees incurred by the publicly owned treatment works as the result of the illegal activity, as well as the expenses involved in enforcing this section and the costs involved in rectifying any damage. 
3.  Cause of the discharge or violation. 
4.  The severity of the discharge and its effect upon the facilities of the publicly owned treatment works and upon the quality and quantity of the receiving waters. 
5.  Effectiveness of action taken by the violator. 
6.  The technical and economic feasibility of reducing or eliminating the discharge. 
7.  The economic benefit gained by the violator. 
d.  The public works director may institute proceedings for assessment in the name of the City of Mt. Juliet in the chancery court of the county in which all or part of the violation occurred. 
(3)  The board may establish by regulation a schedule of the amount of civil penalty which can be assessed by the public works director for certain specific violations or categories of violations. 
(b)  Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this section may be in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the commissioner of environment and conservation for violations of T.C.A. § 69-3-115(a)(a)(F). Provided, however, the sum of the penalties imposed by this section and by [T.C.A. §] 69-3-115(a) shall not exceed $10,000.00 per day for each day during which the act or omission continues to occur. For violation of any provision of this article for which the civil penalty of up to $10,000.00 does not apply there shall be assessed a fine of up to $500.00 per violation. Each act and each day shall be considered a separate violation. Maintaining a violation or failing to correct a violation or maintaining an unapproved line shall be a separate violation for each day it is connected or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-298. - Assessment of noncompliance and significant noncompliance. 
(a)  The public works director may assess the liability of any polluter or violator for damages to the pretreatment agency resulting from any person(s) or user(s) pollution or violation, failure, or neglect in complying with any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the pretreatment program. To assure fair, consistent and impartial enforcement, the public works director will use the Mt. Juliet Enforcement Response Plan as a reference to make enforcement action decisions. 
(b)  If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the public works director by the polluter or violator within 30 days of notification of such assessment, he shall be deemed to have consented to such assessment and it shall become final. 
(c)  Damages may include any expenses incurred in investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program or any other sections of the ordinance, in removing, correcting, and terminating any pollution, and also compensation for actual damages caused by the violation to the publicly owned treatment works. The public works director shall assess the expenses and damages incurred by the publicly owned treatment works to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the publicly owned treatment works, and otherwise rectify any impairment caused by the violation. 
(d)  Whenever any assessment has become final because of a person's failure to appeal within 30 days, the public works director shall bill the person responsible for the damage for reimbursement of all expenses and damages suffered by the publicly owned treatment works. If the person responsible refuses to pay, the public works director may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek execution on such judgment. The court, in such proceedings, shall treat the failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in the amount of assessment. 
(e)  Significant noncompliance includes: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by Section 2 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of their emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-299. - Judicial proceedings and relief. 
The public works director may initiate proceedings in the chancery court of Wilson County against any person or user who is alleged to have violated or is about to violate the pretreatment program, its industrial user permit, any article of this article, or any order of the public works director or board. In such action, the public works director may seek, and the court may grant, injunctive relief and any other relief available in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-300. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the public works director finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the public works director or his agent may serve upon the user a written notice of violation (NOV). Within ten days of receipt of the NOV, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the public works director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. 
(b)  Consent orders. The public works director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time frame also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to paragraph (d) below. 
(c)  Show-cause hearing. The public works director may order any user which causes or contributes to a violation of this article, its wastewater permit, or any order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principle executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the public works director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements deemed reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the public works director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, the public works director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to do one of the following: 
(1)  Comply with the order. 
(2)  Take the appropriate remedial or preventive action needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(f)  Emergency termination of service. When the public works director finds that an emergency exists in which immediate action is required to protect public health, safety, or welfare, the health of animals, fish, or aquatic life, a public water supply, or the facilities of the publicly owned treatment works, the public works director may, without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that certain action(s) be taken as the public works director deems necessary to meet the emergency. 
If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to the public works director's order, the public works director may take such emergency action as deemed necessary or contract with a qualified person to carry out the emergency measures. The public works director may assess the person(s) responsible for the emergency condition for actual costs incurred by the public works director in meeting the emergency. 
If the emergency action adversely affects the user, the public works director shall provide the user an opportunity for a hearing as soon as possible thereafter to consider restoration of service upon abatement of the condition or other reasonable conditions. Following the hearing, the public works director may take any such authorized should the proof warrant such action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-301. - Disposition of damage payments and penalties. 
All damages or penalties assessed and collected under the provisions of this section shall be placed in a special fund by the city and allocated and appropriated to the sewer system for the administration of its pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-302. - Vandalism. 
Any and all damages incurred by the publicly owned treatment works due to acts of vandalism will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-303—30-322. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - WASTEWATER VOLUME DETERMINATION 
 
Sec. 30-323. - Metered water supply. 
Charges and fees related to the volume of wastewater discharged to the publicly owned treatment works shall be based upon the user's total water consumption from all water supply sources. The total amount of water used shall be determined from public meters installed and maintained by the city or private meters installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-324. - Wastewater volume. 
When charges and fees based upon water usage or discharge and where, in the opinion of the publicly owned treatment works, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the sewer because of the principle activity of the user or removal by other means, the charges and fees will be applied only against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the sanitary sewer. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user and approved by the city. The users may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the city to measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be maintained at the expense of the user and be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-325. - Estimated wastewater volume. 
For users where, in the opinion of the city, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, charges and fees may be based upon an estimate of the volume to be discharged. The estimate shall be prepared by the user and approved by the public works director or his representative. The number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of goods and services, and other such factors as deemed rational by the publicly owned treatment works shall be used to estimate the wastewater discharge volume. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Sec. 30-326. - Domestic flows. 
For the separate determination of the volumes of domestic and process flows from users for the purposes of calculating charges based on process wastewater flows alone, users shall install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the publicly owned treatment works. For users where, in the opinion of the publicly owned treatment works, it is unnecessary or impractical to install such a meter, the volume of the domestic and process wastewater shall be based upon an estimate prepared by the user and approved by the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, 12-10-2012)  
Secs. 30-327—30-355. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan 28, 2013, deleted the former Art. II, Div. 11, §§ 30-356—39-368, and enacted a new Art. II, Div. 11, as set out herein. The former Art. II, Div. 11, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2012. 
 
Sec. 30-356. - Purpose and types of charges and fees. 
The fees established by this division comply with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, and the regulations adopted thereunder. These rates are designed to be consistent with the Federal Grant Program. These rates will raise sufficient revenues to defray all operating and treatment costs and to pay for equipment replacement, capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements, and depreciation. The charges and fees established in the city's schedule of charges and fees may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Charge for opening an account. 
(2)  Base charge, also known as availability charge and service line charge. 
(3)  Capacity charge. 
(4)  Connection and inspection fees. 
(5)  Industrial user permit fees. 
(6)  Monitoring fees for monitoring requested by the user. 
(7)  Permit application fees. 
(8)  Pretreatment program operating fees. 
(9)  Tap fee. 
(10)  Usage charge. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-357. - Adjustments. 
The city may make appropriate adjustments in the charges to sewer customers for over registration of utility meters, leaks, or other problems not resulting in costs to the city. Such adjustments shall be subject to the discretion of the director of finance. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of finance may appeal to the city board of civil appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-358. - Application charge. 
All persons seeking to subdivide land within the city utilizing the city sewer system shall make application on a form supplied by the planning director. Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall pay $2,000.00 with the city recorder for the purpose of funding administration of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-359. - Base charge. 
There is hereby established a base use charge, of $11.76 per month for all, nonexempt, habitable structures to which sewers are available. The new rate shall take effect with the October 1, 2009, bill as follows: 
Type of Service 	Rate 
Residential 	
	Inside city 	
	Minimum base rate charge (first 2,000 gallons) 	$12.12 
	Per 1,000 gallons for all usage in excess of 2,000 gallons (Use Charge) 	5.94 
	Outside city 	
	Minimum base rate charge (first 2,000 gallons) 	15.01 
	Per 1,000 gallons for all usage in excess of 2,000 gallons (Use Charge) 	7.30 
	Customers prior to 1984 customers 	
	Flat rate 	12.12 
Commercial 	
	Inside city 	
	Minimum base rate charge (first 2,000 gallons) 	17.10 
	Per 1,000 gallons for all usage in excess of 2,000 gallons (Use Charge) 	8.27 
	Outside city 	
	Minimum base rate charge (first 2,000 gallons) 	21.25 
	Per 1,000 gallons for all usage in excess of 2,000 gallons 	10.21 
 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2013-57, § 1, 7-22-2013)  
Sec. 30-360. - Capacity charge. 
(a)  The city has purchased a certain amount of capacity in the Metropolitan Nashville sewer plant. To reimburse the city the cost of this capacity which was purchased by the residents of the city as the city limits were constituted on October 31, 1984, there is hereby established a capacity charge on all new lots created by subdivision if the lots will utilize sewers. The minimum capacity charge shall be $1,285.00 per lot. Sewer capacity charges are adjusted as follows: 
Residential Classifications 	Per Unit 
RS-40 	$1,285.00 
RS-30 	1,535.00 
RS-20 	1,785.00 
RS-15 	2,035.00 
RS-10 	2,285.00 
All other residential classifications 	2,535.00 
Outside city limits capacity fee 	1,910.00 
 
(b)  Building lots in existence and in the city on October 31, 1984, are exempt for one SFU as they participated in the original purchase of the capacity. Only new lots created by subdivision of land are subject to the charge. 
(c)  The owner of the land shall pay the charge at the time of subdivision based on the proposed use. The charge shall be recalculated at the time of application for a tap. The applicant for a tap shall be given credit for any capacity charge previously paid and shall be charged for any additional sums owed due to a change in the proposed use. The city shall not be required to refund excess payments. 
(d)  New commercial and industrial users shall pay a capacity fee based on the size of the domestic use water meter. See chart below: 
Sanitary Sewer Capacity Fees 
Commercial Capacity Fees 
Water Tap Size 	Capacity Fees 
5/8 " 	$1,285.00 
1" 	1,980.00 
1½" 	3,300.00 
2" 	7,260.00 
3" 	15,180.00 
4" 	27,060.00 
5" 	42,240.00 
6" 	60,720.00 
7" 	82,500.00 
8" 	107,580.00 
9" 	135,210.00 
10" 	167,640.00 
11" 	202,620.00 
12" 	240,900.00 
13" 	283,140.00 
14" 	328,020.00 
 
Rate change as per City of Mt. Juliet Ordinance 2009-52 effective Nov. 9, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-361. - Collection. 
Wastewater charges and fees imposed by this article shall be collected by the city in a manner established by the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-362. - Connection and inspection fees. 
(a)  Gravity. Mt. Juliet shall inspect all connections to the sewer system. No person shall connect to the sewer system without an inspection. The inspection fee shall be $50.00 for connections with gravity flow connections. 
(b)  Pressure. All pressure connections shall be installed and inspected by Mt. Juliet. The charge shall be based on the cost and overhead expended by Mt. Juliet. Mt. Juliet shall determine whether a connection shall be a pressure connection or a gravity connection. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-363. - Delinquent accounts. 
The director of finance may cause the supplier of water to discontinue water service to any customer who has a delinquent wastewater charge until the wastewater charge has been paid. Any person aggrieved by such action may appeal the discontinuance of water service to the wastewater hearing authority board. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-364. - Infiltration and extraneous flows. 
The costs of operation and maintenance for all flow not directly attributable to users such as infiltration and inflow shall be distributed proportionally among all users of the treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-365. - Tap fee. 
(a)  Residential single-family dwelling. 
(1)  There shall be a tap fee or equivalent, applicable to all properties that hook to the sewer or to which sewers are available per single-family unit (SFU) for residents: 
a.  Inside the city limits of $1,500.00; and 
b.  Outside the city limits of $2,000.00. 
The tap fee shall be paid before the property is hooked to the sewer system. A separate tap fee is required for each connection to the sewer system. Taps and tap fee payments run with the land. No owner shall be required to pay a tap fee for a connection if a previous owner has paid a tap fee for the same connection and same use. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer tap fees for existing single-family dwellings: 
a.  Which are within the city limits of the city; 
b.  Occupied by the owner as recorded by the county tax assessor; and 
(3)  Multifamily dwelling. The tap fee for multifamily dwellings shall be $1,500.00 per unit for locations within the city limits and $2,000.00 per unit for locations outside the city limits. 
a.  Commercial and industrial. The tap fee for commercial and industrial users shall be calculated by taking the area of the cross section of the new user's water meter tap and dividing it by 0.31 (the tap area of a five-eighths-inch meter), rounding up to the nearest whole number and multiplying the resulting number by $1,250.00. See the following formula: 
 
For example, the tap fee for a one inch tap would be: 
 
The chart below provides calculated values for tap and capacity fees based on various water meter sizes. 
Residential Tap Fees 
Inside city limits gravity tap fee 	$1,500.00 
Inside city limits grinder, additional 	2,000.00 
Outside city limits tap fee 	2,000.00 
Inspection fee 	50.00 
 
  
Commercial Tap Fees 
Water Tap Size 	Fee 	Inspection Fees 
5/8 " 	$ 1,250.00 	$50.00 
1" 	3,750.00 	50.00 
1½" 	6,250.00 	50.00 
2" 	13,750.00 	50.00 
3" 	28,750.00 	50.00 
4" 	51,250.00 	50.00 
5" 	80,000.00 	50.00 
6" 	115,000.00 	50.00 
7" 	156,250.00 	50.00 
8" 	203,750.00 	50.00 
9" 	257,000.00 	50.00 
10" 	317,000.00 	50.00 
11" 	383,750.00 	50.00 
12" 	456,250.00 	50.00 
13" 	536,250.00 	50.00 
14" 	621,250.00 	50.00 
 
Rate change as per City of Mt. Juliet Ordinance 2009-52 effective 11/09/2009 
Commercial and industrial users who exceed 25,000 square feet of heated and cooled structures and who are required to contribute or construct any off-site improvements, extensions, or upgrades to the city sewer system shall be allowed to use 50 percent of their financial contributions as a credit towards the payment of future tap fees for the site served by such improvements. Commercial and industrial users whose approved site plans include at least 25,000 square feet of heated and cooled structures and who are required to advance contributions for the costs of relocation of any natural gas transmission pipeline done in order to facilitate the relocation or improvement of any city or state road or highway, shall be allowed to use 50 percent of said financial contributions up to a maximum of $207,000.00 as a credit towards the payment of future tap fees for the site served by such improvements; provided, however, that such 50 percent financial contribution shall be calculated only on expenditures for which there is no reimbursement to the commercial or industrial user. This is not retroactive and applies from this day forward of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall relieve a property or business owner applying for a sewer tap fee for a new construction from paying the sewer tap fee in a single payment. Existing business establishments are required to pay the sewer tap fee in a single payment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-366. - Use charges. 
(a)  Quantity based. Use charges shall be based upon units of 1,000 gallons of water delivered to the user. For all persons who pay the base charge, there shall be no use charge for the first 2,000 gallons of water used. The use charge shall be $5.76 for each 1,000 gallons or part thereof in excess of the first 2,000 gallons until modified by the director of finance pursuant to the provisions of the next subsection. Use charges shall be due and payable monthly. Customers who utilize wells or private water supplies who discharge wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works shall notify the director of finance, in writing, and shall meter the waste placed in the system by a meter approved by the director of finance. Failure to so notify the director of finance, in writing, shall be a continuing violation for each day of failure and shall be subject to a fine. 
(b)  Waste characteristics. Waste water exceeding the following characteristics shall bear additional charges set by the director of public works. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (5-day) 	300 mg/l 
Chemical oxygen demand 	600 mg/l 
Suspended solids - 	325 mg/l 
Ammonia-nitrogen - 	30 mg/l 
Oil and grease - 	100 mg/l 
 
(c)  Method of setting use charges. Annually on 1 November of each year the director of public works shall calculate the cost of providing sewer services and calculate a new base charge and a new use charge for the following year. Calculations shall be based on actual costs in the previous fiscal year. The base charge shall be the same as the use rate for 2,000 gallons of waste water. The new charges shall take effect on January 1 of the following calendar year. 
(d)  Constituents of use charge. The user charge will be computed from operating costs and depreciation. The user charge will be the user's share of the costs of operation, maintenance, and replacement for handling its periodic volume of normal wastewater plus the user's share of any bond amortization costs of the city. 
(1)  Operation, maintenance, and replacement user charges. Each user's share of operation, maintenance and repair costs will be computed by the following formula: 
u = 	C t 	(V u ) 
	V t 	
 
Where: 
C u = User's charge for operation, maintenance and repair per unit time. 
C t = Total operation, maintenance and repair costs per unit of time, less costs recovered from surcharges. 
V t = Total volume contribution from all users per unit time. 
V u = Volume contribution from individual user per unit time. 
(2)  Bonded indebtedness charges. Each user's share of bonded indebtedness costs will be based on a schedule which reflects the user's volumetric and waste strength contribution to the system. 
(3)  User surcharges. The surcharge will be the user's proportionate share of the operation, maintenance and repair costs for handling its periodic volume of wastewater which exceeds the strength of biochemical oxygen demand (five-day), suspended solids, or other pollutants in normal wastewater as listed in the section 30-358. The amount of surcharge will be determined by the following formula: 
C s = (B c x B + S c x S + P c x P) 8.34 V u 
Where: 
C s = Surcharge for wastewater exceeding the strength of normal wastewater expressed in dollars per billing period. 
B c = Operation, maintenance and repair cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (five-day) expressed in dollars per pound. 
B = Concentration of BOD 5 (biochemical oxygen demand - 5-day) from a user above the base level of 300 mg/l expressed in mg/l. 
S c = Operation, maintenance and repair costs for treatment of a unit of suspended solids expressed in dollars per pound. 
S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above the base level of 300 mg/l, expressed in mg/l. 
P c = Operation, maintenance and repair costs for treatment of a unit of any pollutant which the publicly owned treatment works is committed to treat by virtue of an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or other regulatory requirement, expressed in dollars per pound. 
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level. Base levels for pollutants subject to surcharge will be established by the director of public works. 
V u = Volume contribution of a user per billing period in million gallons based on a 24-hour average for a billing period. 
The values of parameters used to determine user charges may vary from time to time. Therefore, the publicly owned treatment works is authorized to modify any parameter or value as often as is necessary. Review of all parameters and values shall be undertaken at least annually. 
(4)  Commercial, industrial and pretreatment program charges. All commercial and industrial users shall pay all regular charges and a surcharge equal to 43 percent of the standard charges. Industrial users, veterinary and animal care establishments, food preparation business and others suspected of generating waste water with contaminants per liter exceeding the normal contaminants per liter for a single-family home shall be required to pay a separate pretreatment program charge for evaluation of their waste water and pretreatment inspection if necessary. This charge will be based on the user's proportional share of the costs of administering the publicly owned treatment works pretreatment program, which includes costs incurred by the publicly owned treatment works for verification monitoring, analysis, and reporting. Each user's share of the pretreatment program costs will be computed by the following formula: 
u = 	C t 	(V u ) 
	V t 	
 
C u = User's charge for publicly owned treatment works pretreatment program per unit time. 
C t = Total publicly owned treatment works pretreatment program costs per unit time. 
V t = Total volume contribution of permitted industrial users per unit of time. 
V u = Volume contribution from a permitted industrial user per unit of time. 
In cases where a user would otherwise qualify as a residential user but is metered for water service on a meter measuring multi-family dwellings, the director of public works may require, as a prerequisite for extending residential rates, an agreement from all users and or a hold harmless agreement from the owner of the meter to pay the billing collectively from one meter without recourse and may require that any improvements to or alterations of the sanitary sewer service lines for the real property be made in compliance with standards of the City of Mt. Juliet and at the expense of the property owner. 
(5)  Review of operation, maintenance and repair charges. Mt. Juliet shall review at least annually the wastewater contribution by users, the total costs of operation, maintenance and repair of the treatment works, and its approved user charge system. The publicly owned treatment works shall revise the user charges to accomplish the following: 
a.  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation, maintenance and repair costs among users or classes of users. 
b.  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation, maintenance and repair costs of the treatment works. 
c.  Apply any excess revenues collected to the costs of operation, maintenance and repair for the next year and adjust rates accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-367. - Outside city customers. 
(a)  All users who are located outside the city shall pay all regular charges and a surcharge of 25 percent additional for all fees including tap, connection, pretreatment and user fees. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to refuse sewer service to any area outside the city. 
(c)  Any developer or land owner who anticipates undertaking any project outside the city limits of the city which would require a connection to the city sewer system shall first obtain the approval of the city planning commission and the city commission prior to any engineering design work concerning the sewer system. Out of city sewer service application and fee shall be submitted to the public works department prior to any request for service being heard by the city planning commission and city commission. 
(d)  After receiving approvals necessary for the connection, final approval will be granted by the public works director or his/her designee. The developer and the developer's engineer shall work closely with the engineer for the city sewer system during the design, construction and inspection stages of the development. Such systems shall also have the approval of the engineer for the city regarding the as-built system prior to connection. 
(e)  Any developer who fails to obtain such prior approval shall not be allowed to connect to the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013; Ord. No. 2017-53, § 1, 9-11-2017)  
Sec. 30-368. - New accounts and sureties. 
All applicants for sewer services shall open an account with the finance department on 2365 N. Mt. Juliet Road. Applicants with no former account with Mt. Juliet shall pay an administrative charge of $25.00 at the time they fill out the application. People who start to use the system without filling out an application shall be charged an administrative charge of $125.00 with their first bill. 
All persons renting or leasing property shall also present a surety agreement from their landlord in substantially the form of Schedule A [which is available in the office of the city clerk]. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-369. - Waiving sign-up fee for sewer activation fee for active duty military personnel. 
(a)  The director of finance hereby has authority to waive the sewer activation fee of $25.00 for an active duty member of the United States Military or National Guard. 
(b)  The person applying for the waiver of the fee must reside at the location that the sewer hookup is being applied for. 
(c)  The person applying must present proper identification and documents as required by the director of finance to verify they are on active duty at the time the hook up is required. 
(d)  The activation fee of $25.00 to hook onto the sewer system is waived. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-370. - Processing fee and other charges for utility customers paying with credit or debit cards. 
(a)  The City of Mt. Juliet is hereby empowered to contract with a third party vendor or will arrange for city sewer service credit or debit cards as the method of payment for monthly and other utility charges. 
(b)  In the event that the credit or debit card company issuing the card does not honor payment of the charge, the city shall collect the same fee that is normally charged for returned checks, and this fee shall be in addition to the normal fee for using a credit or debit card for payment of utility bills. 
(c)  The third party vendor may establish the convenience fee not to exceed 3.5 percent of the payment. 
(d)  Compliance, if required, with TCA 47-10-119, shall be completed prior to implementation and a post implementation review shall be provided in compliance with TCA § 47-10-119. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Secs. 30-371—30-394. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2013, deleted the former Div. 12, §§ 30-356—30-368, and enacted a new Div. 12 as set out herein. The former Div. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1997, § 13-1-13(a), (b); Ord. No. 2010-51, § 5, adopted Nov. 9, 2009; and Ord. No. 2012-75, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2012. 
 
Sec. 30-395. - Wastewater hearing authority board. 
(a)  There is established a board of three members to be known as the wastewater hearing authority board. Board members should not be a consultant, contractor, or have any other work with the city, department or any non-domestic user in Mt. Juliet that would cause a conflict of interest. 
(b)  Composition and length of term. The board shall be composed of the following, to be recommended by the department and approved by a majority vote of the board of commissioners, and shall constitute the voting members of the board: 
Representative Group 	Length of 
Term (years) 
1. Technical/Science or Academia (1 chairperson) 	3 
2. Technical/Science, Academia, or Financial (1 person) 	3 
3. Private citizenry (1 person) 	3 
 
(c)  Members may be removed from the board by a majority vote of the board of commissioners, for continued absence from meetings, or other just cause. 
In addition to any other duty or responsibility otherwise conferred upon the board by this article, the board shall have the duty and power as follows: 
(1)  To grant exceptions pursuant to the provisions of subsections (7) and (8), and to determine such issues of law and fact as are necessary to perform this duty. 
(2)  To hold hearings upon appeals from orders of actions of the public works director as may be provided under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  To hold hearings related to the suspension, revocation, or modification of a wastewater discharge permit and issue appropriate orders relating hereto. 
(4)  To hold other hearings that may be required in the administration of this article and to make determinations and issue orders necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(5)  The board, acting through its chairperson, shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring attendance, the testimony of witnesses, and the production of documentary evidence relevant to any matter properly heard by the board. 
(6)  The chairperson shall be authorized to administer oaths to people giving testimony. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-396. - Public works director. 
(a)  Director of public works and staff. The director of public works and staff shall be responsible for the administration of the parts of this section, as defined herein. 
(b)  Authority of the director of public works. The director of public works shall have the authority to enforce all sections of this article as defined herein. The director of public works shall be responsible and have the authority to maintain and operate the various treatment works, sewer lines, pump stations, and other appurtenances of the publicly owned treatment works. The director of public works shall be responsible for preparation of operating budgets subject to the normal budgetary processes of the city. 
(c)  Records. The director of public works shall keep in his office or at an appropriate storage facility all applications required under this article a complete record thereof, including a record of all wastewater discharge permits. 
(d)  Notice of national pretreatment standard. The director of public works shall notify users identified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403.8(f)(2) of any applicable pretreatment standards or other applicable requirements promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 204(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1284), Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345), or under the provisions of Sections 3001, 3304, or 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act. Failure of the director of public works to notify users shall not relieve the users from the responsibility of complying with these regulations. 
(e)  Public participation notice and significant non-compliance notice. The director of public works shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 425 in the enforcement of National Pretreatment Standards. The director of public works shall at least annually provide public notification in the largest local newspaper of all significant industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-compliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements, as defined at sections [30-298 and 30-300]. 
(f)  Regulations and standards. The director of public works may promulgate rules, regulations, and design criteria not inconsistent with this article and have them printed for distribution. These rules may include requirements for performing wastewater characterizations, analysis, and other measurements by standard methods approved by the director of public works. 
(g)  Sewer credits. The director of public works shall approve secondary meters and determine other kinds of sewer use charge credits. 
(h)  Approves new construction. The director of public works shall give approval in acceptance of newly constructed sanitary sewer lines, pump stations, and other appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-397. - Director of finance. 
If a sewer user can prove to the satisfaction of the director of finance that a specific amount of water is not going to the system, and is not adjusted, the director of finance is authorized, subject to approval of the city manager, to adjust the bill. If such adjustments are recurring the director of finance may require the user to obtain a separate meter and system, for measuring water not going to the sewer system, as a requirement to consideration of further adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, §§ 1, 2, 1-28-2013)  
PART III - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Click here to access Mt. Juliet, Tennessee Land Development Code. 


LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Linda C. Elam 
Mayor 
____________ 
Will Sellers 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
James Bradshaw 
Winston "Ted" Floyd 
Ed Hagerty 
City Commission 
____________ 
Randy Robertson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jason Holleman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sheila Luckett 
City Recorder 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MT. JULIET, TENNESSEE 
Ed Hagerty Sheila S. Luckett, MMC Mayor Deputy City Manager / 
City Recorder ____________ ____________ James Hambrick James Maness, Vice Mayor Chief of Police Brian Abston Ray Justice ____________ Art Giles Board of Commissioners Jessica Gore Public Works Director ____________ ____________ Kenneth D. Martin Roger "Rocky" Lee City Manager Parks Director ____________ ____________ L. Gino Marchetti, Jr. John Rossmaier City Attorney Finance Director  
PREFACE 
    This Land Development Code constitutes a republication of the subdivision and zoning regulations of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the republication were the subdivision regulations, as updated through 5-20-2010, and zoning regulations, as updated through the Ord. No. 2011-36, 7-11-2011. The source of each new section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is part of the original publication. 
    The chapters of this Land Development Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Land Development Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Jason Holleman, City Attorney, and Sheila Luckett, City Recorder, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a republication of this Land Development Code which will make the active law of the City of Mt. Juliet readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 2011. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2009-42  7-27-2009 Include 1 2011-01(Res.)  4-21-2011 Include 1 2011-19  4-25-2011 Include 1 Amend. of  7-21-2011 Include 1 2011-70 12-12-2011 Include 1 Amend. of 12-15-2011 Include 1 2012-22  4- 9-2012 Include 2 2012-35  6-11-2012 Include 2 2012-44  7-23-2012 Include 2 2012-45  7-23-2012 Include 2 2012-59  9-24-2012 Include 2 Memo. of 12-20-2012 Include 2 2013-3  1-14-2013 Include 2 2013-04  1-14-2013 Include 2 2013-14  2-11-2013 Include 2 2013-17  2-11-2013 Include 2 Memo. of  3-18-2013 Include 2 2013-34  3-25-2013 Include 3 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Include 3 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Include 3 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Include 3 2013-26  2-25-2013 Include 4 2013-27  2-25-2013 Include 4 2013-53  7- 8-2013 Include 4 2013-54  7- 8-2013 Include 4 2013-70 10-14-2013 Include 4 2013-49  6-10-2013 Include 4 2013-82 11-25-2013 Omit 4 2013-83 11-25-2013 Omit 4 2014-08  2-10-2014 Include 4 2014-21  3-24-2014 Include 4 2014-24  4-14-2014 Include 4 2014-31  4-14-2014 Include 4 2014-38  5-12-2014 Include 4 2013-81 11-25-2013 Include 5 2014-9  2-10-2014 Include 5 Amend. of  [7- 2-2014] Include 5 2014-42  6- 9-2014 Include 6 2014-43  6- 9-2014 Include 6 2014-50  7-14-2014 Omit 6 2014-58  8-11-2014 Include 6 2014-66 10-27-2014 Include 7 2014-67 10-27-2014 Include 7 2014-68 10-27-2014 Include 7 2015-4  1-12-2015 Include 7 2015-23  6- 8-2015 Include 7 2015-28  7-13-2015 Include 7 2015-34  8-24-2015 Include 7 2015-41  9-14-2015 Include 7 2015-43 11-23-2015 Include 7 2015-44 11-23-2015 Include 7 16-2286 10-15-2015 Include 8 2016-5  2- 8-2016 Include 8 Res. of  3-17-2016 Include 8 2016-13  3-28-2016 Include 8 2016-24  4-25-2016 Include 8 2016-28  5-23-2016 Include 8 2016-30  6-13-2016 Include 8 2016-36  7-11-2016 Include 8 2016-40  8- 8-2016 Include 8 2017-01  1- 9-2017 Include 8 2017-03  1- 9-2017 Include 8 2017-21  3-27-2017 Include 8 2017-27  5- 8-2017 Include 8 2017-28  5- 8-2017 Include 8 2017-29  5- 8-2017 Include 8 2017-34  6-12-2017 Include 8 2017-43  7-10-2017 Include 9 2017-55  9-25-2017 Omit 9 2017-61 10-23-2017 Include 9 2017-62 10-23-2017 Include 9 2017-66 12-11-2017 Include 9 2018-26  7- 9-2018 Include 9 2018-28  8-13-2018 Include 9  
Part A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the base Subdivision Ordinance from February 20, 1997, as supplemented though May 20, 2010. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform. Capitalization and expression of numbers have been made consistent throughout the Land Development Code. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-101. - Title. 
    These regulations shall hereinafter be known and cited as the Subdivision Regulations of the Mt. Juliet Planning Region as established by resolution of the Local Government Planning Advisory Committee. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-102. - Authority. 
    These subdivision regulations are adopted by the Mt. Juliet Municipal-Regional Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as "Planning Commission"), in pursuance of the authority and powers granted by sections 13-3-401 through 13-3-411 and 13-4-301 through 13-4-309, Tennessee Code. Having adopted a major street or road plan for the jurisdictional area, and filed a certified copy of the plan with the Wilson County Register of Deeds (hereinafter referred to as "county register"), as required by sections 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code, and having held a public hearing as indicated in subsection 1-107.1 of these regulations, the Planning Commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in state law as prerequisites to the adoption of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-103. - Jurisdiction. 
    These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions, as herein defined, located within the City of Mt. Juliet, and its extraterritorial region as established by resolution of the Local Government Planning Advisory Committee. No land shall be subdivided within the jurisdictional area until the subdivider submits a plat as required by these regulations, obtains Planning Commission approval of the plat, and files the approved plat with the county register. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-103) 
Sec. 1-104. - Policy and purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Planning Commission to consider subdivision of land and development of a subdivision plat as subject to control of the adopted land use or community development plan (hereinafter referred to as "land development plan") of the jurisdictional area for orderly, planned, and efficient physical and economical development. 
    Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger of fire, flood, or other menace. 
    Land shall not be subdivided until proper provisions have been made for drainage, water, sewerage, other public utilities, roadways, sidewalks, signage and for other required public improvements and services. The existing and proposed public improvements shall generally conform to and be properly related to proposals shown in the land development plan. 
    The regulations herein shall supplement and facilitate enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee (hereinafter referred to as "zoning ordinance"). 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the jurisdictional area. 
B.  To guide development of the jurisdictional area in accordance with the land development plan, considering the suitability of nonresidential and public areas and having regard for the most beneficial land use in such areas. 
C.  To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population. 
D.  To enhance the character and economic stability and encourage the orderly, beneficial development of the jurisdictional area. 
E.  To conserve the value of land, buildings, and improvements throughout the City and to minimize detrimental conflicts among the uses of land and structures. 
F.  To guide public and private policy and action providing for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational areas, and other public requirements and facilities. 
G.  To provide for the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the efficient movement of traffic throughout the jurisdictional area. 
H.  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions; to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of land. 
I.  To insure that public facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
J.  To prevent pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to preserve the integrity, stability, beauty, and value of land within the jurisdictional area. 
K.  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the jurisdictional area, and to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
L.  To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of the land, including use of average density to provide for reductions in minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as established in the zoning ordinance. 
M.  To encourage subdivision design which would maximize conservation of all forms of energy. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-105. - Interpretation, conflict, and severability. 
    1-105.1. Interpretation. These regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for promotion of health, safety, and general welfare. 
    1-105.2. Conflict with public and private provisions. 
1-105.201. Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control, as determined by the enforcing officer. 
1-105.202. Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction; provided, that where these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where any private provision exceeds the standards set forth herein, such shall be considered a private contract between the parties of interest, and, as such, is beyond the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission. 
    1-105.3. Severability. If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy where such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Planning Commission hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations without any such part, provision, or application. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-106. - Saving provision. 
    These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of prior subdivision regulations; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue; or as affecting the liability of any person; or as waiving any right of the governing body under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations; or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the governing body, except as expressly provided otherwise in these regulations. 
    1-106.1. Previously approved subdivisions. 
1-106.101. Unexpired preliminary approval. The approval granted on any plat prior to the effective date of these regulations shall remain in force and effect for the time period stipulated by the regulations under which the approval was first granted. 
1-106.102. Expired preliminary approval. In any instance where the period of preliminary approval shall have expired with some portion of the subdivision not having received final approval, and the applicant wishes an extension of the preliminary approval, the Planning Commission may: 
(1)  Permit the remaining portion of the subdivision to be constructed and to receive approval under provisions set forth in the regulations whereby preliminary approval was originally granted, or 
(2)  Stipulate that the plat is null and void and that a new plat be presented subject to all laws and provisions of these regulations that are in effect at the time such action is considered. 
In making this determination, the Planning Commission shall consider all pertinent facts available to it. The current state and active pursuit of construction and development activities within the subdivision shall be given due consideration in the course of the Planning Commission's deliberation on this question. 
    1-106.2. Failure to file approved plats. All previously approved final plats shall be filed with the county register's office within one year following adoption of these subdivision regulations. In the event the owner fails to file a plat within the time period stipulated herein the approval shall become void and no building permit may be issued for any lot located therein until action is taken to reinstate the plat. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-107. - Amendments. 
    1-107.1. Enactment. For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare the Planning Commission may from time to time amend these regulations. Before the adoption of any amendment to these regulations, a public hearing thereon shall be held by the Planning Commission, as required by Chapters 3 and 4, Title 13, Tennessee Code. 
    1-107.2. Codification and distribution. Subsequent to adoption of any amendment to these regulations, such amendment shall be incorporated into the text of these regulations in the following manner: 
1.  Replacement pages shall be prepared incorporating the new or changed language. Each such new or replacement page shall have the amendment number and shall be dated so as to indicate the date of last revision of the page. 
2.  In Article VII of these regulations, each adopted amendment shall be numbered consecutively and printed on pages separate from any other amendment and in a manner that fully states any language deleted from these regulations and any language added and the place in the text of each such change. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-108. - Resubdivision of land, modifications after approval. 
    1-108.1. Amendments to an approved/recorded plat. 
(1)  Major. Changes to an approved or recorded subdivision plat that would affect the layout of any public street, alley, or road (hereinafter referred to as public way) shown on such plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or if it would affect any map, plan, or plat legally recorded before adoption of any subdivision regulations, such amendment shall be approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision. 
(2)  Minor. Changes to an approved or recorded subdivision plat, including but not limited to, adjusting lots and lot lines, utility easements, shifting of open space and common areas, and other changes considered by the Enforcing Officer to be minor in nature and that do not create any additional lots may be approved administratively by staff, so long as open space and amenities are not reduced or made less effective, and the overall result is not a substantially new design. The submission of official plats for signing, recording, and for the department record shall be followed as required in this ordinance. 
    1-108.2. Resubdivision of land where future division is foreseen. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land or double the minimum required area for any zoning district in which the lot is located, and the Planning Commission has reason to believe that any such lot(s) will be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the Planning Commission may require that the subdivision and development of such parcel of land allow for the future opening of public ways and the ultimate extension of adjacent public ways or that such lots be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement. The Planning Commission may also require that dedications providing for future opening and extension of such public ways be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-109. - Conditions. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision are exercises of valid police power delegated by the state to the Planning Commission. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions imposed by the Planning Commission for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land so as to provide for physical and economical development of the jurisdictional area and for the safety and general welfare of future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-109) 
Sec. 1-110. - Vacation of plats. 
    Any recorded final plat or any part of any recorded final plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before sale of any lot described therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the plat or part of the plat to be vacated. In approving the vacation of plats the Planning Commission shall follow the same procedure for approval of plats. The governing body may reject any such instrument, that abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, or public ways. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved, and duly recorded or filed; the instrument shall operate to void the recorded plat and divest all public rights in the public ways and public grounds and all dedications described in such plat. When any lot or lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided only if all of the owners of all lots in such platted area join in the execution of such writing. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-110) 
Sec. 1-111. - Variances. 
    1-111.1. General. If the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, a variance from these regulations may be granted; provided, such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the general intent and purpose of these regulations and provided, further, that the Planning Commission shall not recommend variations unless it shall make findings based upon written evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
1.  Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or be injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood where the property is located; 
2.  Conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
3.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the specific property involved, a particular hardship (not self-imposed) to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out; and 
4.  The variance will not in any manner alter provisions of the land development plan, the major street or road plan, or the zoning ordinance. 
Where the Planning Commission concludes that the purpose of these regulations may be specifically served to an equal or greater extent by an alternative proposal, condition, or circumstance, it may approve other variations to these regulations. 
    1-111.2. Procedures. Each and every variance or modification of these subdivision regulations sought by a subdivider shall be specifically applied for in the numerical order of the subdivision regulations, in writing by the subdivider. A separate form provided by the Enforcing Officer shall be utilized to list any variance being requested. This form shall accompany the preliminary plat. Any condition shown on the plat, which would require a variance or modification, shall constitute grounds for disapproval of the plat unless such special application for modification or variance is made. In approving any variation from these regulations the Planning Commission shall state fully in the minutes the grounds for the variation and all of the facts upon which the decision is made. 
    1-111.3. Conditions. In approving variations, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as in its judgment will secure substantially the objectives, standards, and requirements of the regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-111) 
Sec. 1-112. - Exceptions to residential design standards. 
    The Regional Planning Commission in its sole discretion may approve requests for exceptions to section 4-114, Residential design standards, when they find that the request is not contrary to the below criteria. Exceptions approved by the Regional Planning Commission: 
1.  Will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or be injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood where the property is located; 
2.  Promote an alternative design approach that creates a unique theme for the development, while maintaining the intent and purpose of the original requirements; 
3.  Propose the use of comparable materials that meet or exceed the quality of construction required by section 4-114; 
4.  Shall not violate any requirement of the Zoning Ordinance; 
5.  Shall not be approved solely due to financial considerations. 
    All requested exceptions shall be clearly enumerated, and supporting documentation, graphics, material samples, necessary for the Regional Planning Commission to consider the request shall be submitted as required by the RPC. The Regional Planning Commission may adopt procedures requiring an applicant to notify affected property owners of the requested action. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-112; Res. No. 2011-01, § 2, 4-21-2011) 
Sec. 1-113. - Enforcement, violation, and penalties. 
    1-113.1. General. 
1-113.101. Authority. The enforcement of these regulations and the penalties for violations are provided pursuant to Title 13, Tennessee Code. 
1-113.102. Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty of the City Planner (hereinafter referred to as "the enforcing officer)" or his/her designee, to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of legal counsel any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
1-113.103. Recording of plats. Pursuant to Sections 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code, no plat of a subdivision of land within the jurisdictional area shall be received or recorded by the county register until the plat has received final approval of the planning commission in accordance with these regulations, and such approval has been endorsed in writing on the plat by the planning commission secretary in the manner prescribed by Section 2-105, of these regulations. 
1-113.104. Use of unapproved plats. Pursuant to Sections 13-3-410 and 13-4-306, Tennessee Code, no owner or agent of the owner of any land shall convey such land contrary to the provisions stated herein. 
1-113.105. Public ways and utilities. Pursuant to Sections 13-3-406 and 13-4-307, Tennessee Code, the governing body shall not nor shall any public authority accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any public way, lay or authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, or construct or authorize the construction of other facilities or utilities in any public way located within the jurisdictional area unless such way shall have been accepted, opened, or otherwise received the legal status of a public way prior to the attachment of the planning commission's jurisdiction, or unless such way corresponds in its location and lines to a way shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a public way plat made by the planning commission. 
However, the governing body may override the planning commission as provided in Title 13, Tennessee Code. In case of any state highway constructed or to be constructed within the jurisdictional area with state funds as a part of the state highway system, the submission to the planning commission shall be by the Tennessee Commissioner of Transportation, who shall have the power to overrule disapproval of the planning commission. 
1-113.106. Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of any provision of these regulations. Any individual requesting a building permit for a lot located within an established subdivision shall provide evidence that the plat of subdivision wherein such lot is located has been approved and appropriately recorded. 
1-113.107. Access to lots by public way or private easement. Pursuant to Sections 13-3-411 and 13-4-308, Tennessee Code, no building permit shall be issued and no building or structure shall be erected on any lot within the jurisdictional area, unless the public way giving access to the lot upon which the building or structure is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public way prior to that time or unless such way corresponds in its location and lines with a way shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission, or on a street plat made and adopted by the commission. 
    1-113.2. Penalties for violations. 
1-113.201. Recording of unapproved plats. No county register shall receive, file, or record a plat of subdivision within the city without the approval of the planning commission as required in Sections 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code, and any county register so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. 
1-113.202. Use of unapproved plats. Section 13-3-410 and 13-4-306, Tennessee Code, provides that whoever being the owner or agent of the owner of any land transfers, or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having submitted a plat of such subdivision to the planning commission and obtained its approval as required before such plat be recorded in the office of the appropriate county register, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city through its city attorney may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action of injunction. 
1-113.203. Illegal buildings. Any building or structure erected or to be erected in violation of the subdivision regulations shall be deemed an unlawful building or structure; and the city manager or other official designated by the chief legislative body may bring action or enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed as provided in Sections 13-3-411 and 13-4-308, Tennessee Code. 
    1-113.3. Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premise; these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in Subsection 1-112.2, of these regulations. 
(Memo. of 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 1-114. - Repeal of previous regulations. 
    Upon the adoption and effective date of these regulations, the Subdivision Regulations, of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, adopted February 20, 1997, as amended, are, hereby, repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-113; Memo. of 3-18-2013) 
Editor's note- At the instruction of the city, per Memo. of Mar. 18, 2013, § 1-113 was renumbered as § 1-114. 
Sec. 1-115. - Fees for plat review. 
    Any individual who is seeking to subdivide property within the jurisdictional area where these regulations are applicable shall pay such filing and review fees as are required by the City. These fees shall be paid prior to the item being placed on an agenda for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
    This fee is to be utilized for purposes of enabling the City to hire professional consultants to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 1-114; Memo. of 3-18-2013) 
Editor's note- At the instruction of the city, per Memo. of Mar. 18, 2013, § 1-114 was renumbered as § 1-115. 
Secs. 1-116-1-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 2-101. - General procedure. 
    2-101.1. Plat approval requirements. Before any contract is executed for sale of any parcel of land located within a site that is proposed to be subdivided and before any permit for erection of any structure in a proposed subdivision shall be granted, the owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure the Planning Commission's approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures of this article. 
    2-101.2. Classification of subdivisions. The Planning Commission shall classify each subdivision proposal as either major or minor as defined herein. (See article VI, for definitions.) 
2-101.201. Review procedure. The subdivider shall follow the procedure described below in order to secure plat approval. 
a.  Minor subdivision. 
(i)  Preapplication conference with the enforcing officer including submittal of a scale drawing or survey of the proposed subdivision for preliminary discussion and review. 
(ii)  Submittal of a final plat, prepared, in accordance with the specifications in section 5-104, herein, for approval by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Major subdivision. 
(i)  Preapplication conference on the subdivision with the enforcing officer. 
(ii)  Submittal of a conceptual plat, prepared in accordance with section 5-101, herein for Planning Commission approval. 
(iii)  Submittal of the preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with section 5-102, herein, for Planning Commission approval. 
(iv)  Submittal of construction plans, prepared in accordance with section 5-103, herein for approval. 
(v)  Submittal of the final subdivision plat, prepared in accordance with section 5-104, herein for Planning Commission approval. 
c.  Two-lot subdivision (or partition). 
(i)  Preapplication conference with the enforcing officer including submittal of a scale drawing or survey of the proposed subdivision for preliminary discussion and review. 
(ii)  Submittal of a final plat, prepared, in accordance with the specifications in section 5-104, herein, for review and approval by the enforcing officer. 
(iii)  Two-lot divisions that would create lots significantly different (i.e. size, shape, width, orientation) from the established theme of other lots in the subdivision and that in the opinion of staff would have an adverse impact on the established or intended character of the subdivision, may be referred to the Planning Commission for consideration. 
    2-101.3. Official submission date. For the purpose of these regulations, for both major and minor subdivisions, the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the public hearing on the final subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat at which the statutory period required in section 13-4-304, Tennessee Code, for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence. 
    2-101.4. Policy on floodprone areas. In determining the appropriateness of land subdivision at any site containing a floodprone area, the Planning Commission, in reviewing any plat, shall consider the policy and purpose set forth in section 1-104 of these regulations and, additionally: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities, either potential or actual, caused by subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses; 
2.  The danger that intended uses or improvements may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
3.  The adequacy of the proposed water supply, sanitation, and drainage systems, and the ability of these systems to function under flood conditions; 
4.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage upon the individual owner; 
5.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community at large; 
6.  The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location; 
7.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed subdivision and land uses; 
8.  The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development or development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
9.  The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the land development plan and the floodplain management program for the area; 
10.  The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times of flood; 
11.  The expected heights, duration, velocity, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; 
12.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, public ways, and bridges; and 
13.  The effect of the proposed subdivision upon the governing body's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, if such governing body is, or elects to be, in the program. 
    No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved by the Planning Commission if proposed levees, fills, structures, or other features within the subdivision will individually or collectively, increase flood flows, heights, duration, or damages. The regulatory limits (the 100-year flood level) shall be determined from the latest approved flood study for the jurisdictional area, and any subsequent revisions thereto. If deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, specific engineering studies are to be formulated by the developer in those areas where flood data are not currently available. 
    In any instance where the Planning Commission determines that a proposed subdivision may affect the flood height, velocity, or duration in any floodprone area outside its jurisdiction, the commission shall take all actions necessary and proper to ensure the coordinated review of the development with the appropriate governmental agencies of the affected area. 
    In approving plans for subdivision of land containing floodprone areas, the Planning Commission shall ensure that development will proceed in such a way that property lying within any floodway, as defined by these regulations, will be maintained in a manner as prescribed by the zoning ordinance and that such commission shall also ensure that development within any floodway fringe area of the floodplain (within the 100-year flood level) will be protected adequately against potential flood hazards by the methods prescribed in Article IV of these regulations. 
The Planning Commission shall disapprove the subdivision of any land containing a floodprone area when the commission determines that subdivision plans are not consistent with the policy stated in this section or that proper safeguards and improvements to these areas have not been proposed. 
    2-101.5. Special provisions governing unit ownership (condominium) subdivisions. 
2-101.501. General provisions. 
a.  Intent. This section is intended to augment the general legislation of sections 66-27-101 through 66-27-123, Tennessee Code, entitled "Horizontal Property Act," by providing supplemental rules and regulations for the implementation of the act, as specifically authorized in section 66-27-121, Tennessee Code. 
b.  Applicability. Whenever a developer, the sole owner, or the co-owners of a building or buildings expressly declare through submission of a master deed, lease, or plat their desire to submit their property to a regime, as established and provided by sections 66-27-101 through 66-27-123, Tennessee Code, wherein there is established a horizontal property regime, each such condominium or horizontal property regime created under the authority of these provisions for the purpose of sale or transfer of real property is subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
2-101.502. Submission of plat required. Prior to sale or transfer of any portion of the land or buildings incorporated in the property regime, the developer, sole owner, or co-owners of such property shall submit to the Planning Commission a subdivision plat of such property in the manner prescribed by this article; such plat, if approved, shall be filed with the county register in the manner prescribed by this article. 
2-101.503. Determination of subdivision type. Condominium subdivisions shall be classified by the Planning Commission during the plat review process as either a horizontal condominium or a vertical condominium as defined in Article VI of these regulations. ;1; 2-101.504. Procedure. An applicant seeking approval of a condominium subdivision shall proceed through the normal procedure for subdivision approval, as set forth in this article. 
2-101.505. Contents of plans and documents. The plats, plans, and documents submitted by an applicant seeking approval of condominium subdivision shall conform to the specifications set forth in Article V of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-102. - Conceptual plan (major subdivisions only). 
    2-102.1. Purpose of conceptual plan. After the preapplication conference, a conceptual plan shall be submitted for all "major subdivisions," (as defined by these regulations). As used in these regulations, the term "Conceptual Plan" refers to a group of preliminarily engineered conceptual documents drawn to illustrate initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for greenery lands, house sites, and street alignments. A major element of this plan is documentation and evaluation of environmental conditions found upon a site. This is the stage where drawings are tentatively illustrated, before significant engineering costs are incurred in the detailed design of any proposed subdivision layout. The objective of this process is to manage each development site in a fashion that will accommodate reasonable use consistent with applicable zoning law while simultaneously protecting, preserving and enhancing the natural environment. 
    The Conceptual Plan shall be prepared by a design team that includes a landscape architect and civil engineer. Such plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the enforcing officer who will then submit it to the Planning Commission for review for the purpose of securing early agreement on the overall pattern of streets, house lots, conservation areas, and potential trail linkages (where applicable), prior to any significant expenditures on engineering costs in the design of streets, stormwater management, or the accurate delineation of internal lot boundaries. 
    2-102.2. Conceptual plan requirements (major subdivisions). The conceptual plan shall include the information set forth in section 5-101. 
    2-102.3. Approval of conceptual plan. When a conceptual plan is submitted for Planning Commission approval, the number of copies required and timing of the submission shall be as for a preliminary plat. Within 60 days of receiving the conceptual plan, the Planning Commission shall approve it, disapprove it, or approve it with conditions, stating its reasons in writing. Approval of the conceptual plan shall constitute authorization to prepare and present a preliminary plat and detailed construction drawings, plans and specifications for the proposed development. 
    2-102.4. Expiration of approval. The approval of the conceptual plan shall expire within one year unless a preliminary plat is filed for all or a portion of the land included within the approved conceptual plan. A one-year extension may be granted if application is made no less than 60 days prior to the expiration date. In the event the conceptual plan expires, such plan shall become null and void and be [of] no further effect. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-103. - Preliminary plat (major subdivisions only). 
    2-103.1. Purpose of preliminary plat. The preliminary plat is a detailed engineering document. Such plat will reflect results of design decisions that have been made in the process of adapting the general concepts contained within the conceptual plan to the engineering realities required by conditions of the site. Prior to final approval of a preliminary plat and construction drawings, no clearing of trees (with the exception of those required to facilitate surveying activities) or site grading in any form shall be undertaken. 
    2-103.2. Application procedure and requirements. The applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a preliminary plat. Failure of the applicant to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with section 5-102, and: 
1.  Be presented at the office of the enforcing officer on or before the scheduled deadline as established by the City of Mt. Juliet for consideration at a regular (officially opened) meeting of the Planning Commission. 
2.  Include the entire subdivision, or, when phasing has been approved, section thereof, for which preliminary approval is sought and all land immediately adjacent, extending 200 feet therefrom, or of that directly opposite thereto, extending 200 feet from the public way frontage of such opposite land. The lot pattern of surrounding development shall be shown within that area located within 200 feet of the proposed development; and 
3.  Be accompanied by a minimum of 20 copies of the preliminary plat as described herein. 
    2-103.3. Plat preparation and content. A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor. As a minimum such plat shall contain the information contained in section 5-102 of these regulations. 
    2-103.4. Preliminary design certification. A "Preliminary Design Certification" shall accompany any preliminary plat submitted under authority of these regulations. Such certification shall indicate that the preliminary plat complies with the City's zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations, with such exceptions as are specifically listed upon the face of the plat. This certification requirement is meant to provide the City with assurance that the proposed plan can be accomplished within the current regulations of the City. 
    2-103.5. Administrative review. An administrative review meeting shall be conducted on the preliminary plat and any exhibits submitted in conformance with these regulations. This review shall include the enforcing officer and any other appropriate governmental representative(s). The findings of the review committee shall be presented to the Planning Commission along with the preliminary plat. 
    2-103.6. Notice of hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing as required by Chapter 4, of Title 13, Tennessee Code, on each preliminary plat brought before it. 
    2-103.7. Tentative approval. After the Planning Commission has reviewed the preliminary plat, exhibits, and the results of administrative review, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes. The Planning Commission shall tentatively approve (subject to approval of construction plans), conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the hearing on preliminary approval, including adjourned date thereof, is closed. No action of the Planning Commission approving a preliminary plat shall become final until construction plans meeting the specifications appearing in section 5-103 of these regulations, have been approved. 
    2-103.8. Certificate of preliminary approval. Upon approval of construction plans the Planning Commission may act to finally approve the preliminary plat and issue a certificate of preliminary approval. The applicant may proceed to apply for final subdivision plat approval in the manner prescribed by section 2-105 of these regulations. When the secretary of the Planning Commission has signed the certificate of preliminary approval, one copy of the preliminary plat and construction plans with the date of approval noted thereon shall be returned to the developer. If a preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Commission shall state specific reasons for disapproval which shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting wherein such action was taken. 
    2-103.9. Infrastructure Improvements Public and Private. Prior to initiating grading within any major subdivision (or portion thereof) or installation of any infrastructure improvements a "certificate of preliminary approval" as required by subsection 2-103.8, shall have been obtained for that portion of the development. The Planning Commission shall require that all infrastructure improvements be installed and dedicated prior to submittal of the Final Plat for consideration by the Regional Planning Commission. The application for the Final Plat shall be accompanied by Development and/or Sanitary Sewer Letters of Credit or other appropriate surety per the City of Mt. Juliet requirements, amounts of which shall be noted on the Final Plat. The form of such surety shall be established by the Planning Commission based upon recommendations of the City attorney and the enforcing officer. Evidence shall be provided that the performance agreement has been executed and the surety established prior to issuance of the "certificate of preliminary approval." The Planning Commission shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all public ways and improvements to be dedicated; all districts for water, fire, and utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended; and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in order for the subdivision plat to conform to the major street or road plan and the land development plan for the jurisdictional area. 
    2-103.10. Validity of preliminary plat approval. 
(1)  General. Except as provided in [subsection] (2) below, preliminary plan approval shall be valid for two years as authorizing the submittal of applications for construction plan approval and final plat approval for the subdivision (if not phased), or first approved phases thereof (if phased), and for five years as (a) authorizing the submittal of applications for construction plan approval and final plat approval for all remaining phases of a phased development, and (b) insulating development of the subdivision from any subsequent changes to these regulations. Preliminary plan approval shall automatically become void if complete applications for both construction plan approval and final plat approval for the subdivision (if not phased), or first approved phases thereof (if phased), have not been submitted to Planning Commission staff within the shorter time period. If applications for construction plan approval and final plat approval are submitted for only part of the approved subdivision within the longer time period, preliminary plan approval for those remaining parts of the subdivision shall automatically become void and applications for construction plan approval or final plat approval for development of the remaining parts of the subdivision site may be submitted only pursuant to a new preliminary plan approval granted in accord with this section. 
(2)  Extension of preliminary plat approval validity. On request by the applicant or owner of the parcel proposed to be subdivided, the Planning Commission may extend the date on which preliminary plan approval would otherwise expire up to 12 months on determining that: 
(a)  The preliminary plan approval has not yet expired; 
(b)  The applicant or owner of the parcel proposed to be subdivided has proceeded with due diligence and good faith to prepare a construction plan and final plat for the subdivision, or approved phases thereof; and 
(c)  Conditions or applicable regulations have not changed so substantially as to warrant reconsideration of the proposed subdivision with respect to public health, safety, and general welfare. 
    2-103.11. Application of changes within land use regulations to approved preliminary plats. Every plat shall conform to all existing zoning provisions and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of proposed final approval, except that any final plat contained within the bounds of a preliminary plat the approval of which remains in effect shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to such zoning ordinance or these regulations that may render the plat nonconforming as to bulk, use, or development standards. No final plat, shall be approved unless the preliminary plat of the development or affected portion thereof is obtained within the effective period of preliminary approval set forth in subsection 2-103.10, (Validity of preliminary plat approval). 
    2-103.12. Phasing of major subdivisions. A subdivision may be developed in phases provided that: 
(1)  Each phase contains at least six lots, unless shown on a phasing plan approved by the Planning Commission as part of the preliminary subdivision plat after expressly determining that the proposed phasing makes it unlikely that a subdivider would willingly abandon a final phase that contains a required extension of a road or other infrastructure; 
(2)  A phasing plan showing the phases of development and the requirements of these regulations that will be satisfied in each phase is either approved as part of the preliminary subdivision plat; 
(3)  The number of lots and amount of any required open space in the phase and any previously approved phases is at least proportional to the portion of the subdivision site area within the phase(s); and 
(4)  The degree and extent of road, water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and other required improvements in the phase and previously approved phases is sufficient to serve or handle all development within the phase(s). 
    The Planning Commission shall determine as part of the tentative preliminary approval of a phased subdivision the extent of the phases and/or other infrastructure/improvements, which require submittals of applications for construction plans and final plat within the two-year validity period for first approved phases of a subdivision per section 2-103.10. The certified preliminary plat shall describe in detail the area and or infrastructure/improvements having two-year valid preliminary approval. 
    The Planning Commission shall require that appropriate development agreements and surety instruments guaranteeing the performance of such agreements, be in such amount as is commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may defer the remaining required principal amount of such surety until the remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing. 
    2-103.13. Effective date of preliminary approval. The effective date of final preliminary plat approval shall be the date of the public hearing on the plat where approval or approval with conditions was granted by the Planning Commission. In the case of conditional approval, all conditions of approval must be met within ten days of the date of the hearing. If all conditions are not met within ten days of the date of the hearing or other time limit as determined by the Planning Commission, the conditional approval shall be deemed in default, and the final preliminary plat shall be resubmitted to the Planning Commission for reinstatement of approval. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-103; Amend. of 5-16-2013) 
Sec. 2-104. - Construction plans (major subdivisions only). 
    2-104.1. Application procedure and requirements. Construction plans may be prepared and presented, at any point in time concurrent with or following tentative approval of a preliminary plat. In no instance, however, shall the approval of a preliminary plat become final until construction plans are approved. Construction plans shall contain the information required by and be prepared in accordance with section 5-103, and: 
1.  Be presented at the office of the enforcing officer; 
2.  Include the entire subdivision, or, (when phasing has been approved in the tentative preliminary plat), the entire section which shall correspond to the territory incorporated within the preliminary plat; and 
3.  Be accompanied by a minimum of four copies of the construction plans as described, herein. 
    2-104.2. Construction plan preparation and content. Construction plans shall be prepared and submitted by a Tennessee licensed engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering. As a minimum such plat shall contained in section 5-103 of these regulations. 
    2-104.3. Plan review and approval. A plan review meeting shall be conducted for the purpose of assuring a coordinated review of construction plans. This meeting shall include the enforcing officer, City Engineer and any other appropriate governmental representative(s). It shall be the responsibility of this committee to assure that the construction plans are in compliance with the provisions of these regulations, other appropriate City ordinances and sound engineering practice. The committee shall approve or disapprove the construction plans. The plan review committee shall notify the Planning Commission in writing of all actions on plans submitted. In any case where revisions may be required for unconditional approval, such revisions shall be made prior to such notice being forwarded to the Planning Commission. In the event of plan disapproval the committee shall provide notice, thereof, to the submitter in writing. Such notice shall include specific provisions of these regulations and/or other ordinances with which such plans do not comply. 
    2-104.4. Preparation of infrastructure cost estimate. Following approval of the construction plans, an infrastructure cost estimate prepared in a form acceptable to the Public Works Department shall be submitted by the developer to the Director of Public Works. The cost estimate shall be approved by the Director of Public Works and the City Engineer, and shall be the basis for and surety which may be required. 
    2-104.5. Dispute resolution. In the event that a dispute should arise concerning interpretation or application of these regulations to the information contained within construction plans, the Planning Commission shall act to resolve such dispute. The enforcing officer shall present written recommendations and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to present supporting data and information with regard to the specific disputed issue. The Planning Commission shall act to decide the issue and its action shall be final, subject to legal review. 
    2-104.6. Changes to approved construction plans. As a result of unforeseen conditions associated with a particular site, changes may be required in approved construction plans. No change shall be implemented and no construction associated therewith shall be initiated until revised construction plans have been submitted to the office of the enforcing officer and approved so as to reflect the proposed change. The enforcing officer, upon written recommendation of the City Engineer, may approve changes that involve minor revisions in the location of utilities, roadways, etc. Changes involving the following conditions shall only be made upon approval of revised construction plans and a revised preliminary plat: 
1.  Any increase in the number of building sites; 
2.  Any addition or removal of a public way; 
3.  Any "significant change" (as determined by the City Engineer) in the approved drainage design for the subdivision; 
4.  Any "significant change" (as determined by the City Engineer) in the approved design of utilities; and 
5.  Any other change determined as significant by the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-105. - Final subdivision plat (minor and major subdivision). 
    2-105.1. Purpose of final plat. The purpose of a final subdivision plat is twofold. First, such plat provides the legal instrument whereby ownership of lots may be accomplished. Secondly, final plats constitute a means whereby the person subdividing property may offer streets and other infrastructure for acceptance and maintenance by the public. 
    2-105.2. Application procedure and requirements. A subdivider shall file with the Planning Commission a final plat. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with section 5-104; and: 
1.  Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof, for which final approval is sought; (Note: In any instance where a final plat involves only a portion of the land contained within an approved preliminary plat such sectionalization shall have been approved with the preliminary plat); 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of 20 copies of the final subdivision plat as described herein; 
3.  In the case of major subdivisions, correspond with the approved construction drawings and preliminary plat; 
4.  Be presented at the office of the enforcing officer on or before the scheduled deadline as established by the City of Mt. Juliet for consideration at a regular (officially opened) meeting of the Planning Commission; 
5.  Be accompanied by formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all public ways and uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by legal counsel, as applicable. (The subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as shown in Article V, section 5-105, "Form of dedication offer" of these regulations); 
6.  Be accompanied by development agreements and appropriate surety instruments guaranteeing performance of such agreements, if required, in a form satisfactory to legal counsel and in an amount specified in subsection 2-103.9, "Public improvements." The bond shall include provisions that the principal of the bond shall comply with all the terms of the resolution of final subdivision plat approval, as determined by the Planning Commission, including, but without limitations, the performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offers of dedication shall be dedicated to the governing body free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises; 
7.  Be accompanied by written assurance from any utility companies serving the area of the subdivision that necessary utilities will be installed and by proof that the applicant has submitted petitions in writing for the creation or extension of any utility districts as required by the Planning Commission upon preliminary plat approval; and 
8.  Be accompanied, if the final plat contains jointly held open space, recreational facilities, or any portion of the site that is held in common ownership, by the following documentation for approval by the Planning Commission: 
(a)  Plans for improvement and maintenance of the open space or facilities located thereon; 
(b)  Articles of incorporation and bylaws of the co-owners association or other legal entity (where open space or facilities are to be deeded to a co-owners association or similar organization acting on behalf of the joint owners of said property) charged with improving or maintaining the open space or facilities, and declaration of covenants and restrictions pertaining to each and every property within the subdivision; and 
(c)  Declaration of covenants and restrictions pertaining to open space and facilities which assure the continued use of said facilities for the purpose intended, where open space or facilities are to be retained by the developer. 
    2-105.3. Endorsement of notations. The notations and certifications required by subsection 5-104.3 of these regulations, to appear upon the final plat shall be endorsed by appropriate officials and other persons prior to application for final subdivision plat approval, except that the certificate of Planning Commission approval shall be signed at the time specified in section 2-106 of these regulations. 
    2-105.4. Hearing and decision on final plat. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing as required by section 13-4-304, Tennessee Code, on each final plat brought before it. The Planning Commission shall, within 60 days, after submission of the plat, approve, modify, or disapprove the final subdivision plat by resolution, which shall set forth in detail any conditions to which such approval is subject, or reasons for disapproval. In no event shall the period of time stipulated by the Planning Commission for completion of required improvements exceed two years from the date of final resolution. 
    Failure of the Planning Commission to act upon a plat within the prescribed time shall be deemed approval of the plat, and in such event, a certificate of approval, entitling the subdivider to proceed shall be issued, upon demand, by the secretary of the Planning Commission. The applicant, however, may agree to an extension of the time for Planning Commission review. One copy of the final subdivision plat shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval noted thereon. 
    2-105.5. Vested rights. No vested rights shall accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until actual signing of the final plat by the secretary of the Planning Commission. All requirements, conditions, or regulations adopted by the Planning Commission, applicable to the particular subdivision or to all subdivisions generally, shall be deemed a condition of approval for any subdivision prior to the time of the signing of such final plat. Where the Planning Commission has required the installation of improvements prior to the signing of the final plat, the Planning Commission shall not modify unreasonably the conditions set forth in the resolution of final approval. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-106. - Signing and recording of subdivision plat. 
    2-106.1. Signing of plat. 
1.  When a surety instrument is required, the secretary of the Planning Commission shall endorse approval on the plat after the Planning Commission has approved the development agreement and accompanying surety instrument and after all conditions of the resolution pertaining to the plat have been satisfied. 
2.  When installation of improvements is required, the secretary of the Planning Commission shall endorse approval on the plat after all conditions of the resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the accepting body as shown on certifications by the appropriate governmental representative(s) and that necessary land dedications and improvements have been accomplished. 
3.  When the conditions of this section are satisfied, the secretary may sign the permanent reproducible original of the subdivision plat. 
    2-106.2. Recording of plat. It shall be the responsibility of the enforcing officer to file the approved plat with the county register's office within ten working days following the date of final signature. The owner of the property or his authorized agent shall pay the appropriate filing fee. Any individual requesting a building permit for a lot located within an established subdivision shall provide evidence that the plat of subdivision wherein such lot is located has been approved and appropriately recorded. 
    2-106.3. Expiration of final plat approval. No rights shall be vested in a final plat approval unless the final plat has been recorded with the Wilson County Register of Deeds within one year following the public hearing whereby the Planning Commission granted approval or approval with conditions on the final plat. If the plat has not been recorded within one year of the public hearing the approval shall be considered in default and the final plat must be resubmitted to the Planning Commission to be reinstated. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 2-106) 
Secs. 2-107-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 3-101. - Improvements and surety instruments. 
    3-101.1. Completion of improvements. Before the final subdivision plat is considered for approval by the Regional Planning Commission and subsequently signed by the Planning Commission officer specified in subsection 2-106.1, (Signing of plat) of these regulations, all applicants shall complete, in accordance with the Planning Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the appropriate governmental representative, all public way, sanitary sewer, water, stormwater and other improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations and approved by the Planning Commission, and shall offer for dedication such improvements to the governing body free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. 
    3-101.2. Performance Surety. 
a.  Infrastructure. The secretary of the Planning Commission shall not certify any plat for recording until the required sureties are posted. No building permit will be issued for any lot unless the Final Plat is recorded. The amount and form of a performance surety shall in all regards be sufficient to guarantee to the governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, satisfactory repair and/or replacement of infrastructure damaged during building construction and final pavement topping of all streets when site building meets the requirements of section 4-101.7. Such performance surety shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to legal counsel as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in these regulations. For the purpose of these regulations, performance surety shall mean two documents, these being a performance agreement for Development and for Sanitary Sewer and an accompanying irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check for each. The performance agreement will stipulate the work to be performed by general categories and the estimated value or cost of each category. All letters of credit issued to the City of Mt. Juliet to secure the completion of subdivision repair, replacements or improvements must have an initial term of not less than two years and shall renew automatically for an additional term of one year, unless the City of Mt. Juliet gives notice to the issuing bank that such letter of credit will not be renewed. All such irrevocable letters of credit, or cashier's check must be issued by a financial institution having an office in the City of Mt. Juliet and must permit the City to draw upon the letter of credit by presenting a draft at such office. All cashier's checks must be nonexpiring. 
b.  Non-public infrastructure. Infrastructure Plans including but not limited to grading and drainage plans submitted to the Planning Commission as part of a site development plan or to city public works staff as part of infrastructure drawings in support of a plan of development shall be subject to the performance surety requirements contained herein including the temporary storage of dirt and/or rock on a portion of the site to support later phases of site development. The amount of the infrastructure surety shall comply with Sec. 3-101.2(a). The amount of the surety for the temporary storage of dirt and/or rock shall be determined by the calculated volume of the temporary storage and the most current unit prices for loading and hauling of said material as determined by the Tennessee Department of Transportation. The purpose of the surety is to insure removal of the material from the site in the event of contractual default by the developer. 
    3-101.3. Temporary improvements. The applicant shall build and pay all costs of temporary improvements required by the Planning Commission, and shall maintain these improvements to a reasonable satisfaction for the period specified by the Planning Commission. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a separate suitable surety instrument for temporary facilities, which shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
    3-101.4. Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his expense. Any provisions for reimbursement by the governing body or any other agency shall be stipulated clearly in the provisions of any development agreements. 
    3-101.5. Governmental units. Governmental units to which these surety instruments and development agreement provisions apply may file, in lieu of said agreement or surety, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
    3-101.6. Failure to complete improvements. In those cases where a performance surety has been posted and required improvements have not been repaired, replaced, or installed within the terms of such agreements, the Planning Commission thereupon may declare such agreement and the accompanying surety to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default. In all subdivisions for which development agreements have been executed and surety instruments guaranteeing performance of such agreements posted, if the improvements are not completed no additional building permits shall be issued for any lot or portion of such property unless and until such facilities are either completed, in accordance with the Planning Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, or new agreements and surety instruments guaranteeing the construction thereof are executed. 
    3-101.7. Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of offers of dedication of public ways, easements, and parks shall be by formal action of the governing body or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities. Such action shall be in the form of a resolution recommended by the Planning Commission to the accepting body. Approval by the Planning Commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply an acceptance by the local government, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, of any public way, easement, or other ground shown on the plat. The Planning Commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-101; Amend. of 7-21-2011; Amend. of 5-16-2013) 
Sec. 3-102. - Inspection of improvements. 
    3-102.1. General procedure. The City may provide for inspection of required improvements during construction. If the appropriate governmental representative finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the accepting body's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing such improvements to the required standards. Whenever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance bond the applicant and the financial institution issuing the surety instruments shall be liable severally and jointly for completing said improvements according to specifications. 
    3-102.2. Release or reduction of performance bond. 
3-102.201. Certificate of satisfactory completion. The governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, shall not accept dedication of required public improvements nor release nor reduce any performance bonds guaranteeing construction of same until the appropriate governmental representative submits a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. No such certificate shall be issued until a registered engineer provides the accepting authority certification that the improvements are built in compliance with the approved construction plans. Such certification may include a report provided by an independent testing laboratory as to the compliance of paving with the requirements of these regulations. This report shall include subgrade soil compaction density, mineral aggregate base stone type and depth, asphaltic binder type and depth and asphaltic wearing surface type and depth. Upon such approvals and recommendations, the governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, thereafter, may accept the dedicated improvements in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 3-101.7, (Acceptance of dedication offers) of these regulations. 
3-102.202. Reduction of performance bonds. A performance bond may be reduced upon actual dedication and acceptance of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. Only one reduction may be made during the effective period of any bond. In no event shall the surety be reduced below 25 percent of the principal amount prior to final acceptance of all items covered under such instruments. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-102) 
Sec. 3-103. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements, including all lot improvements and drainage systems until acceptance of such improvements by the appropriate governmental body. The applicant may be required to file a maintenance bond or other form of surety with the governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the appropriate governmental representative and in a form satisfactory to legal counsel in order to assure satisfactory condition of the required improvements, including all lot improvements, for a determined period after the date of the acceptance of the public improvements. In no event will the maintenance bond be set below an amount equal to 25 percent of the performance bond. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-103) 
Sec. 3-104. - Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
    The Planning Commission may defer or waive at the time of final plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate, because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities. Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to defer construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or other reasons, the developer shall either pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the governing body prior to signing of the final subdivision plat or post a bond or other surety instrument ensuring completion of said improvements upon demand of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-104) 
Sec. 3-105. - Escrow deposits for improvements. 
    3-105.1. Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any improvements required by these regulations cannot be performed, the enforcing officer nevertheless may issue a certificate of occupancy upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the appropriate governmental representative for the cost of such improvements; provided, there otherwise is no danger to the health, safety, or general welfare. The surety instruments covering such improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
    3-105.2. Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which escrow moneys have been accepted by the enforcing officer at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the developer within a period of nine months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. In the event that the improvements have not been installed properly at the end of the time period, the enforcing officer shall provide written notice of two weeks to the developer requiring him to install the improvements, and in the event such improvements are not installed properly, in the judgment of the enforcing officer, he may request the governing body to proceed to install or to contract for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow moneys are being deposited, the applicant shall obtain and file with the enforcing officer, prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy, a notarized statement from the purchaser(s) of the premises authorizing the enforcing officer to install the improvements at the end of the nine-month period in the event the improvements have not been installed properly by the developer. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-105) 
Sec. 3-106. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    Where performance bonds have been required for a subdivision, or any section of a subdivision, and such are determined to be in default, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building in the subdivision or any affected section thereof prior to completion and dedication of the improvements to the appropriate governmental unit, as required in the Planning Commission's resolution of final approval of the subdivision plat. 
    The extent of public way improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent is less than two lots, for the final two lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the Planning Commission's resolution of final plat approval have been fully completed, dedicated, and accepted by the governmental body. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-106) 
Sec. 3-107. - Expiration of bond. 
    Should the bond (or surety) lapse or expire for any reason prior to completion of all required improvements no additional building permits shall be issued and the enforcing officer shall take any or all legal action necessary to assure completion of improvements. Only after completion of improvements or posting of a new bond, will building permits again be issued. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 3-107) 
Secs. 3-108-3-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGNS 

Sec. 4-101. - General requirements. 
    4-101.1. Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations, including, but not limited to: 
1.  All applicable provisions of Tennessee Law, regulations, or policy; 
2.  Any zoning ordinance, any building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws or policies of the governing body; 
3.  The adopted general plan and major road or street (public way) plan; 
4.  The rules of the County Health Department and the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation; 
5.  The rules, as applicable, of the Federal Highway Administration or Tennessee Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a nonlocal highway; and 
6.  The standards and regulations adopted by all other boards, commissions, and agencies of the governing body, where applicable. 
Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above rules or with provisions set forth in section 1-104 (Policy and purpose) of these regulations. 
    4-101.2. Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be recorded with the county register on a separate form, along with the final subdivision plat. 
    4-101.3. Monuments. Permanent reference monuments of nondegradable material shall be placed in all subdivisions where new streets are to be constructed. All monumentation shall be placed on property corners or referenced to property lines or road alignments. Certification by a licensed surveyor of placement of monuments shall be required. Monuments will generally not be required within minor subdivisions (as defined by these regulations) when the subdivision occurs along existing streets. The Planning Commission retains the right, however, to require monuments within minor subdivisions where flooding or other extraordinary conditions are found to exist. Monuments shall be placed only after all street construction is complete and curbs have been backfilled or drainage ditches cut. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
1.  Control monuments. At the discretion of the enforcing officer, a minimum of three permanent control monuments, containing both vertical and horizontal data, shall be located within each subdivision where new roads are to be constructed. Such monuments shall be constructed of concrete not less than 30 inches in length; nor less than four inches square or five inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded and shall have horizontal coordinates and vertical elevations shown on the final plat. Reference notes (field ties) defining magnetic bearings and distances to the nearest established street line or official benchmark shall be accurately described on the plat. All control monuments shall be located within dedicated right-of-way along curve points or lot lines and within line of sight of one another. All vertical data shall be referenced to the 1929, datum established by the USGS. These monuments are to be placed near the entrance to the subdivision and, if possible within a nonfill area or be affixed to natural rock outcrops. The location of all control monuments shall be described on the final plat with words and symbols that facilitate locating them at the site. 
2.  Internal monuments and lot pins. One monument, for each four lots or fraction thereof located within the subdivision, shall be placed within line of sight of one another. Such monuments shall be placed within dedicated right-of-way, when possible, and shall be located within nonfill areas or affixed to rock natural outcrops. In all subdivisions, lot corners and all lot line breaks shall be staked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter. 
3.  Along rivers and streams. The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 18 inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not more than 40 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. At the discretion of the Planning Commission a control monument meeting the specifications of subpart [subsection] (1) above may be required upon any lot affected by the 100-year floodplain of any stream. 
    4-101.4. Character of the land. 
4-101.401. Land unsuitable for development. Land which the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which would be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall be designated as "conservation lands" and may be utilized as provided in subpart [subsection] 4-101.402, (Use of conservation lands). Land included within this category shall be as specified below: 
(1)  Wetlands and land that is generally inundated (land under ponds, lakes, creeks, etc.); 
(2)  All of the floodway and floodway fringe area within the 100-year floodplain, as shown on official FEMA maps; 
(3)  Land with slopes exceeding 20 percent, or soils subject to slumping; 
(4)  Land situated within sink holes and other karst areas; 
(5)  Land under permanent easement prohibiting future development (including easements for drainage, access, and utilities). 
4-101.402. Use of conservation lands. The areas indicated in subsection 4-101.401 (Land unsuitable for development) shall generally be designated as undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land management standards. However, within subdivisions where the gross density is one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet (or lower) the required open space may be included within individual lots. 
All undivided open space shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. Any lot capable of further subdivision may be restricted so as to prohibit such action. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be located within these areas as may land within the rights-of-way for underground pipelines. 
4-101.403. Protection against flood damage. Where protection against flood damage is necessary, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, flood damage protection techniques may include, as deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission: 
1.  Imposition of any surety and deed restrictions enforceable by the Planning Commission to regulate the future type and design of uses within the floodprone areas; and 
2.  Flood protection measures designed so as not to increase, either individually or collectively, flood flow, height, intensity, duration, or damages, and so as not to infringe upon the regulatory floodplain; 
3.  Installation of flood warning systems; 
4.  The use of fill, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; 
5.  The use of floodproofing measures, which may include: 
(a)  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement; 
(b)  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, shutters, or other similar methods of closure; 
(c)  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures; 
(d)  Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage through walls; 
(e)  Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation; 
(f)  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures; 
(g)  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of or contamination of floodwaters; 
(h)  Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface drainage systems to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures; 
(i)  Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris; 
(j)  Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and stormwater into buildings or structures; 
(k)  Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits, and appliances so that they are protected from inundation by the regulatory flood; 
(l)  Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant material, flammable liquids, or other toxic materials which would be hazardous to public health, safety, and welfare at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, or design of such facilities to prevent flotation of storage containers or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials. 
The acceptability of any flood protection methods formulated by the subdivider or his agent shall be determined by the Planning Commission, which shall be guided by the policies set forth in section 1-104 and subsection 2-101.4 of these regulations. 
    4-101.5. Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically the name of any other subdivision within Wilson County. The Planning Commission shall have authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at conceptual or preliminary plat approval. 
    4-101.6. Authorization to construct improvements. Construction may proceed upon approval of the preliminary plat, construction plans and the development agreement. 
    4-101.7. Maintenance of improvements. Generally, the final paving course shall not be applied until 75 percent of the structures within a subdivision, or portion thereof encompassed by an approved preliminary plat, are complete. However, when an undue hardship is created by disallowing the final paving of a street prior to construction of 75 percent, but not less than 50 percent, of the structures within a subdivision, the enforcing officer may permit final paving to occur and the City may allow the subsequent release of the performance bond provided a maintenance bond is substituted therefor. The City may permit the maintenance bond to be renewed if additional time is needed to complete further buildout of the subdivision. The maintenance bond may be released after a period of one year or when at least 75 percent of the subdivision lots have been satisfactorily completed, inspected and released by the inspecting departments. The maintenance bond shall be in an amount and for a term as recommended by the enforcing officer and shall be posted in conformance with the procedures presented in Article III of these regulations. Under no circumstances shall final paving occur until all utility installations, including service lines to individual lots are complete. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-101) 
Sec. 4-102. - Lot requirements. 
    4-102.1. Lot arrangement. 
4-102.101. General. Each lot shall contain a sufficient "building site" (See definition) such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography, slope/foundation stability, flood hazards, or other conditions in locating the structures upon such lot. Building sites shall have dimensions and area sufficient to ensure that the building setbacks and yards are in compliance with any zoning ordinance. No "building site" may include any land defined as "unsuitable for development" by the provisions of subsection 4-101.401 (above). 
4-102.102. Evaluation criteria. In evaluating the layout of lots and open space the following criteria will be considered by the Planning Commission as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposes of these regulations. Diversity and originality in lot layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and conservation areas. Accordingly, the Planning Commission shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed plan: 
1.  Protects and preserves all floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction (except as may be approved by the City for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities). 
2.  Preserves and maintains mature woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. For example, locating house lots and driveways within wooded areas is generally recommended, with two exceptions. The first involves significant wildlife habitat or mature woodlands that raise an equal or greater preservation concern, as described in Items No. [subsections] 5 and No. 8, below. The second involves predominantly agricultural areas, where remnant tree groups provide the only natural areas for wildlife habitat. 
3.  If development must be located on open fields or pastures because of greater constraints in all other parts of the site, dwellings should be sited on the least prime agricultural soils, or in locations at the far edge of a field, as seen from existing public roads. Other considerations include whether the development will be visually buffered from existing public roads, such as by a planting screen consisting of a variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs, and wildflowers (specifications for which should be based upon a close examination of the distribution and frequency of those species found in a typical nearby roadside verge or hedgerow). 
4.  Maintains and/or creates watershed and drainageway buffers of natural native species vegetation adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds as follows: 
(a)  100-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be created and/or maintained around bodies of water supply impoundments, measured perpendicular to the shoreline of the water supply impoundment. Watershed buffers shall extend 100 feet from the flood pool elevation of the water supply impoundment, inside the watershed draining to the impoundment. 
(b)  50-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be created and/or maintained around water impoundments, other than water supply impoundments, with a drainage area of 25 or more acres. Watershed buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the shoreline and shall extend 50 feet from the normal pool elevation of the water impoundment, inside the watershed draining into that impoundment. 
(c)  30-foot-wide watershed buffers shall be created and/or maintained around water impoundments draining at least five acres, but less than 25 acres. Buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the shoreline and shall extend 30 feet from the normal pool elevation of the water impoundment, inside the watershed draining into that impoundment. 
(d)  Drainageway buffers shall be created and/or maintained on each side of a stream that is shown as a perennial stream on the most recent version of the USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or has a drainage area of 40 or more acres. The width of the drainageway buffer shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide for flat lying areas. The drainageway buffer shall be increased two feet in width for every one percent of slope increase (measured along a line perpendicular to the stream bank. 
(e)  Drainageway buffers shall be created and/or maintained along each side of a watercourse, channel, ditch or similar physiographic feature. The width of said buffer shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  30 feet in width if the area of the watercourse, channel, ditch or similar physiographic feature is at least 25 acres, but less than 40 acres. 
(ii)  The drainageway buffer shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide if the drainage area of the watercourse, channel, ditch or similar physiographic feature is at least five acres, but less than 25 acres. 
5.  Designs around existing hedgerows and treelines between fields or meadows, and minimizes impacts on large woodlands, (greater than five acres), especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat, or those not degraded by invasive plants. Also, woodlands of any size on highly erodible soils with slopes greater than ten percent should be avoided. However, woodlands in poor condition with limited management potential can provide suitable locations for residential development. When any woodland is developed, great care shall be taken to design all disturbed areas (for building, roads, yards, septic disposal fields, etc.) in locations where there are no large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the fullest extent that is practicable. 
6.  Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public thoroughfares. For example, in open agrarian landscapes, a deep "no-build, no-plant" buffer is recommended along the public thoroughfare where those views or vistas are prominent or locally significant. The concept of "foreground meadows," with homes facing the public thoroughfare across a broad grassy expanse (as illustrated in Figure 5-5, of Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks) is strongly preferred to mere buffer strips, with or without berms or vegetative screening. In wooded areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep "no-build, no-cut" buffer should be respected, to preserve existing vegetation. 
7.  Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
8.  Designs around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, and their environs, insofar as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls, spring houses, barn foundations, cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds. 
9.  Protects rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads. Establishes buffer zones along the scenic corridor of rural roads with historic buildings, stone walls, hedgerows, etc. 
10.  Landscapes common areas (such as community greens), cul-de-sac islands, and both sides of new streets with native specie shade trees and flowering shrubs with high wildlife conservation value. These trees shall generally be located between the sidewalk or footpath and the edge of the street, within a planting strip not less than five feet in width. 
11.  Provides active recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby house lots. 
12.  Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to assure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails, which in turn should link with potential open space on adjoining undeveloped parcels (or with existing open space on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable). 
13.  Provides open space that is reasonably contiguous, and whose configuration is in accordance with the guidelines contained in the Design and Management Handbook for Preservation Areas, produced by the Natural Lands Trust. To the greatest extent practicable this land shall be designed as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation land shall be avoided, unless the conservation feature is linear or unless such configuration is necessary to connect with other streams or trails. The open space shall generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent parcels (such as in other subdivisions, public parks, or properties owned by or leased to private land conservation organizations). Such subdivision open space shall be designed as part of large contiguous and integrated greenway systems, as per the policies in the open space, recreation, and environmental resources element of the City's comprehensive plan. 
4-102.103. Lots subject to flood. No portion of a "building site" (see definition) associated with any residential structure may be located in any floodprone area. However, portions of lots occupied by residential structures that are located beyond a "building site" may contain land subject to flooding. In any instance where the lot is served by subsurface sewage disposal the area of the disposal fields shall not lie within any floodprone area. Adding fill material within the 100-year flood boundary area will not be permitted unless approved by the Planning Commission. In the event that filling within the flood boundary is approved, the fill shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, or other methods deemed acceptable by the Planning Commission. On nonresidential building sites outside a 100-year flood boundary the use of structural floodproofing methods specified in subsection 4-101.403, (Protection against flood damage) of these regulations, as an alternative to fill material, may be approved by the Planning Commission, as provided in subsection 2-101.4 of these regulations. 
4-102.104. Lots with building sites located on steep slopes. Due to the potential threat to health and safety posed by development located on lands with slopes in excess of 15 percent, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Site development plan required. No building permit may be issued for a building or any lot where the proposed building site lies on natural slopes of 20 percent or greater. For any lot where the proposed building site has slopes of less than 20 percent but 15 percent or greater a site plan meeting the following requirements must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit. Said site plan shall show: 
(i)  The exact size, shape, and location of the lot; 
(ii)  The proposed location of all buildings, driveways, drainageways, and utilities; 
(iii)  Proposed contours at vertical intervals of no more than five feet; 
(iv)  The extent of natural tree cover and vegetation; 
(v)  The location of any on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems; 
(vi)  The type and location of erosion control facilities; 
(vii)  The stamp of the Tennessee registered engineer who prepared the plan; 
(viii)  Certification by a Tennessee registered civil or geotechnical engineer as to the stability of the structures and compliance with sound construction methods for areas with steep slopes and landslide problems. 
b.  Site development standards. The following standards shall be used as a guide in determining the suitability of the construction proposed for the particular site in question. The engineer's certification required in subsection 4-102.103a(viii), above, shall address these standards. 
(i)  Natural vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible; 
(ii)  Natural drainageways and systems shall be maintained, except that surface water may be diverted around a house or slope area to a natural drain using acceptable construction techniques; 
(iii)  Operations that increase loads, reduce slope support, and cause instability of the slope shall be prohibited to the maximum extent possible. These methods include filling, irrigation systems, accessory buildings, and on-site soil absorption sewage disposal systems; 
(iv)  Where sanitary sewers are not available all on-site sewage disposal systems shall be shown on the site plan and located to avoid slide-prone areas. Said system shall be approved by the county health department taking into account these requirements; 
(v)  Erosion control measures shall be employed to prevent soil from leaving the site. Additionally, soil from excavation on the site shall not be deposited as fill on a potential slide area; 
(vi)  No construction that would cut the toe of the slope shall be permitted. This shall apply as well to subdivision roads constructed in compliance with these regulations. 
4-102.105. Design requirements for flag lots. Flag lots may be approved in single-family zoned areas following consideration by the approving authority for the City of Mt. Juliet. Flag lots shall comply with the following design requirements: 
(1)  The "pole" may at no point along its length be less than the minimum lot width required for the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  The "front" setback for the flag lot shall be measured from the property line existing in front of the proposed dwelling on the flag lot (the rear line of the lot with frontage on the public street) and shall be the lesser of twice the normal front setback for the zoning district or 75 feet, but in no case less than 75 feet. 
(3)  Flag lots are discouraged for any parcel less than four acres in area. Lot divisions creating a flag lot shall not result in the creation of any lot of less than two acres. The area of the "pole" may be included in the gross area of the site, but shall not be included in calculations for building coverage or setbacks. 
(4)  Depending on the size of the original parcel, a lot split should result in a division that produces two equitably sized lots, avoids 90-degree angles and preferably connects the street with the rear lot line. 
(5)  Buildable area (area excluding required setbacks) on the flag lot and/or front lot, may be required to exceed the minimum setback requirements of the zoning ordinance to provide visibility of dwellings from the street and to avoid "stacking." 
(6)  Flag lots may not be used as a means of avoiding the requirement for extending new public roads or utilities to home sites/lots. 
(7)  An "all-weather" surface, a minimum of 12 feet in width, shall be provided on a flag lot granting access to within 150 feet of the dwelling. The maximum width of a driveway shall be 20 feet. 
(8)  A mailbox, or other structure, shall be required along the right-of-way of a flag lot which clearly displays the address to the public road. No other improvements or structures, other than landscaping shall be permitted within the "flag" area. 
(9)  Compliance with the above requirements shall not guarantee the approval of a requested division of land. Requests meeting the criteria in this policy shall only be allowed at the full discretion of the Planning Commission, or staff when allowed by administrative review. 
    4-102.2. Lot dimensions. Except as provided in subsection 4-102.3 (Special building separation) minimum dimensions of lots shall comply with the standards of the zoning ordinance. All building setbacks shall be indicated for each lot shown on the plat. Where lots are more than double the minimum area required by the zoning ordinance, the Planning Commission may require that such lots be restricted to prevent further resubdivision or be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future public ways where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback requirements from both public way rights-of-way. The minimum lot frontage on a public way shall be 50 feet, except for the radius of a cul-de-sac that shall be 35 feet. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated as established in the zoning ordinance. 
    4-102.3. Special building separation. In all instances where fire flows are inadequate to meet the requirements of these regulations or no fire hydrant is located within sufficient distance to meet the fire protection standards established herein, the minimum separation of principal buildings shall at all points be 50 feet. 
    4-102.4. Building setbacks from high voltage electric lines. In the case of electric transmission lines where easement widths are not definitely established, a minimum building setback line from the center of the transmission line shall be established as follows: 
Voltage of Line Building Setback 7.2 KV 15 feet 13 KV 25 feet 46 KV 371/2 feet 69 KV 50 feet 161 KV 75 feet  
    4-102.5. Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
4-102.501. Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
4-102.502. Access from arterial or collector public ways. The Planning Commission may require that lots shall not derive access exclusively from arterial or collector public ways. Where driveway access from such public ways may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the commission may require that the lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards. Driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back onto arterial or collector streets. 
4-102.503. Minimum clearance. The minimum corner clearance between proposed new driveways and arterial or collector routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan shall be 50 feet. In order to ensure adequate storage space for vehicles stopped at a signalized intersection, the Planning Commission may require that the nearside corner clearance shall be at least 100 feet. Corner clearances and design of driveway connections to arterial and collector roads shall be as defined in the Rules and Regulations for Constructing Driveways on State Highway Rights-of-Way, adopted by the Tennessee Department of Highways April 3, 1967, including all subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. The distance between a frontage property line and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of each nonresidential driveway, measured along the edge of the public way, shall be at least 15 feet. 
4-102.504. Design standards for nonresidential driveways. For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 35 mph or less, all nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with a minimum return radius of 15 feet and a minimum horizontal width of 25 feet. All drives serving nonresidential property shall be paved with concrete or an asphaltic surface. 
For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 40 mph, nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with: 
a.  A minimum return radius of 15 feet and a minimum driveway width of 35 feet; or 
b.  A minimum return radius of 20 feet and a minimum driveway width of 30 feet; or 
c.  A minimum return radius of 25 feet and a minimum driveway width of 25 feet. 
For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 45 mph, nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with a right-turn deceleration lane and: 
a.  A minimum return radius of 25 feet and a minimum driveway width of 40 feet; or 
b.  A minimum return radius of 30 feet and a minimum driveway width of 30 feet. 
The Planning Commission will review proposed driveway designs for access to other thoroughfares on a case-by-case basis. The centerline of every nonresidential two way driveway shall intersect the centerline of the public way at an angle between 75 and 90 degrees. For other nonresidential driveways, the intersection angle shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. 
4-102.505. Design standards for residential driveways. Where permitted, residential driveways fronting collector and arterial routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan shall be designed so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back onto these highways. 
4-102.506. Relationship to state standards. Where the driveway design and location standards listed above are not in conformance with the standards of the Tennessee Department of Transportation, the Planning Commission may require conformance with whichever standard is more restrictive. 
    4-102.6. Soil preservation, grading, erosion control, and seeding. 
4-102.601. Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved construction plan. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide cover on the lots. Permanent or temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization shall also be applied within 15 days to denuded areas that may not be at final grade. 
4-102.602. Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings. Drainage of individual lots shall be coordinated with the existing or proposed general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of stormwater from each lot to adjacent lots, except within drainage easements or street rights-of-way. Surface water drainage patterns for each and every lot shall be shown on the road and drainage plans. Drainage flow and conveyance arrows shall be indicated on the topographic grading and drainage plan. It shall be the responsibility of the builder of any building or other structure to design and construct a suitable drainage scheme that will convey surface water, without ponding on the lot or under the building, to the drainage system constructed within the subdivision. The Planning Commission reserves the right to require that the developer set minimum elevations on all floors, patios, and building equipment. This prerogative to establish elevation exists in addition to any ordinances or provision of these regulations that refer to floodplain elevation requirements. This provision is intended to give the Planning Commission summary review powers over any calculated or historical evidence of stormwater presence in overland or channel conditions. All finished floor elevations, driveways, sidewalks and roadways shall be at an elevation at least two feet above the 100-year regulatory flood elevation when located within a floodplain area. The subdivision developer will insure that all artesian groundwaters of a permanent or temporary nature encountered within the right-of-way will be intercepted and carried away to primary drainage conduits along swale ditches or in underground pipes located on property line easements. Regardless of the location of property lines, intercept will be allowed at the point of artesian surfacing. Any sinkhole or natural channel which serves or has served as a means of moving or storing groundwater, including all designated floodways, shall be designated conservation easements and no structures, fill or development activity shall be permitted thereon. 
4-102.603. Erosion and sediment control. There shall be a minimization of changes in the rate of natural erosion and sedimentation that result from the development process. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be presented with the construction plans submitted in conformance with section 5-103 of these regulations. Such plans shall incorporate the following principles: 
a.  Clearing and grading shall be integrated with layout design; 
b.  Clearing shall be minimized and existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum feasible degree; 
c.  Grading shall be strictly limited to those areas located within the "building site" (see definition) along with the driveway of the lot; 
d.  Disturbed areas shall be protected and stabilized as provided in subsection 4-102.601; 
e.  Structural and vegetative measures to control the velocity and volume of runoff shall be required; 
f.  Sediment basins and traps shall be required as necessary; 
g.  Adequate maintenance of all planting and structural measures shall be assured. 
All properties adjacent to the site of land disturbance shall be protected from sediment disposition. This may be accomplished by preserving a well-vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land disturbance; by installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers, filters, dikes or sediment basins; or by a combination of such measures. 
    4-102.7. Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, construction debris, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land left on any lot or deposited in any natural drainageway (such as sinkholes, underground streams or channels, or wet weather streambeds or floodways) or public way at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the lot, and removal of such waste shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy. Neither shall any such waste be left nor deposited in any area of the subdivision at any time. Debris dumpsters shall be required for construction debris disposal. Such dumpsters shall be of adequate size and shall be removed in a timely manner. No debris burning of any type shall be allowed within the subdivision. 
    4-102.8. Fencing. Each subdivider or developer shall be required to furnish and install all fences wherever the Planning Commission determines that a hazardous condition exists. Such fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the Planning Commission, as appropriate, and shall be noted on the final plat as to height and required materials. 
    4-102.9. Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, such area shall be within jointly held open space. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a governmental responsibility. 
    No portion of the minimum area of a lot required under any zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates a buildable area of a lot from the public way to which such lot has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert of adequate overflow size or other structure approved by the Planning Commission. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a structure on such a lot until the installation is completed and approved by the Planning Commission and/or the appropriate governmental representative. 
    4-102.10. Blocks. 
a.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Exceptions to this prescribed block width may be permitted in blocks adjacent to major public ways, railroads, or waterways. 
b.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(i)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(ii)  Any zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(iii)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
(iv)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
c.  Block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,200 feet, except as the Planning Commission deems necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the public way pattern. Wherever practicable, blocks along arterial or collector routes shall not be less than 800 feet in length. 
d.  Blocks designed for industrial or commercial uses shall be of such length and width as may be deemed suitable by the Planning Commission. 
e.  In any long block, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage, facilities, and/or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-102) 
Sec. 4-103. - Streets and pedestrian ways. 
    4-103.1. Pedestrian ways. 
4-103.101. Sidewalks along new streets. Sidewalks shall be required along all "urban" streets (see table 1) [in subsection 4-104.4] constructed in all subdivisions except those proposed for industrial use. Sidewalks may not be required along streets designated as "rural" when all lots fronting such streets are 40,000 square feet or larger in size and have average road frontage of 150 feet or more. 
4-103.102. Sidewalks along existing streets. Sidewalks may be required along an existing public street when sidewalks presently exist upon property that directly adjoins the proposed subdivision, are included within a plan for pedestrian ways or the reconstruction of the existing street is required by an approved traffic impact study. 
4-103.103. Location of sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets designated as "residential access lanes or urban residential access streets." Along streets designated as "urban residential collector or community collector streets" sidewalks shall be required along both sides. Transition of sidewalks from one side of a street to another may be permitted when topography makes continuation along the same side of the street impractical. Transitions shall only be made at street intersections. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nontrafficway portion of the right-of-way of all public ways. Concrete curbs are required for all public ways where sidewalks are to be constructed. A median strip of grassed or landscaped area at least two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs, except within ten feet of intersections no grass strip will be required. No sidewalk shall be constructed closer than one foot from any lot line. Sidewalk construction details shall be shown in appendix B of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 16-2286, 10-15-2015) 
4-103.104. Sidewalk width. The width of sidewalks shall be as follows. Width shall be exclusive of encroachments such as utility poles, fire hydrants, parking meters, sign standards, street furniture, etc. 
Sidewalk Width Street Classification Land Use Classification Residential Commercial Industrial Access lane 5 feet N/A N/A Access street 5 feet 5 feet N/A Residential collector 5 feet N/A N/A Community collector 5 feet 6 feet 6 feet Arterial public way 5 feet 6 feet 6 feet  
4-103.105. Alternative pedestrian ways. Within PUD districts and developments approved under section 5-104.3, Variable lot residential developments, cluster subdivisions, of the zoning ordinance, the Planning Commission may approve pedestrian walkways at locations other than along the rights-of-way of streets. Within these developments a system of pedestrian walkways may be located within commonly held open space. 
4-103.106. Pedestrian accesses. Where necessary, pedestrian accessways may be required from a public way to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby public ways. To accomplish this purpose, the Planning Commission may require perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. 
    4-103.2. Street standards. The following standards shall apply to all streets, both public and private: 
4-103.201. Frontage on improved public ways. No subdivision shall be approved, unless the area to be subdivided shall meet the access requirements set forth in subsection 1-112.107, (Access to lots by public way or private easement) of these regulations. If any new street construction is proposed, all construction shall be in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and accompanying appendices. 
4-103.202. Grading and improvement plan. No clearing, grading or construction of streets shall begin until construction plans have been prepared in accordance with the specifications required herein and approved. Following approval of such plans, public ways shall be graded and improved to conform to the approved construction plans. 
4-103.203. Improvements in floodable areas. The finished elevation of proposed public ways subject to flood shall be no less than two feet above the regulatory flood protection elevation. To determine compliance with this requirement the Planning Commission shall require profiles and elevations of public ways subject to flood. All drainage structures shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without increasing flood height. Where fill is approved by the Planning Commission to bring the finished elevation of any public way to the required elevation, such fill shall not encroach upon a floodway, and the fill shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover, or other methods deemed acceptable by the Planning Commission. 
4-103.204. Topography and arrangement. 
a.  All public ways shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above the grades of the public ways. Grades of public ways shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall not be permitted. 
b.  All public ways shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of public ways and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the major road plan or the land development plan. 
c.  All public ways shall be properly related to special traffic generators, such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping areas or centers; of population density; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land use. 
d.  In commercial and industrial developments, public ways and other access routes shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, pedestrian walks and parking areas, so as to minimize conflict of movement among the various types of traffic, including pedestrian traffic. 
4-103.205. Access to arterial and collector routes. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, the Planning Commission may require that access to such public way be limited by: 
a.  The configuration of subdivision lots so that such lots derive vehicular access from streets other than the arterial or collector route; 
b.  A series of cul-de-sac, "U" shaped public ways, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel public way; or 
c.  A marginal access or service public way, separated from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points; 
d.  Dual points of access in subdivisions. Two points of access to an arterial or collector street shall be required for all residential developments consisting of 100 or more lots and units. The second point of access may connect to adjacent developments as long as the adjacent development has direct access to an arterial or collector street. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement if site conditions tied to the land prohibit a second point of access, provided that a traffic impact study is supplied by the applicant that demonstrates that an adequate and safe level of service can be met. All traffic studies are subject to review by staff and/or an independent professional to determine if recommendations are consistent with the City of Mt. Juliet's transportation programs and needs. 
4-103.206. Traffic impact study. Any subdivision containing lots for 100 or more dwelling units shall be required to prepare at the expense of the developer or individual proposing the subdivision a traffic impact study. At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, any subdivision may be required to prepare a traffic impact study. A Tennessee licensed traffic engineer shall prepare such study in accordance with standard practices and procedures. The traffic study is intended to provide information as to current and proposed or projected traffic levels along all streets touching, immediately abutting or directly impacted by the subdivision. Prior to development of the study, the applicant and/or the individual selected by the developer to prepare the study shall meet with the Director of Public Works for purposes of establishing scope and design parameters to be used in preparing such study. Any improvements proposed to offset the traffic impact of the subdivision shall be indicated. 
4-103.207. Reserve strips. Creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed public way in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such public way shall generally not be permitted. However, where in the opinion of the Planning Commission the use of a reserve strip would protect the public safety by providing a safer roadway configuration or other element of design that is clearly in the public interest, this prohibition may be waived. In any instance where a waiver to this provision is granted the grounds, for and extent of such waiver shall be noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting where such waiver is approved. 
4-103.208. Street name, regulatory and warning signs. 
a.  Public streets. Within all subdivisions the developer shall purchase and install street name and traffic control signs. All signage shall conform to the current edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the United States Department of Transportation. Temporary signs may be installed and maintained in lieu of permanent signs until curbs are installed and backfilled. Such signs shall meet the same standards for height, size and legibility as permanent signs but may be mounted on temporary structures. The Director of Public Works shall verify the installation of temporary street name signs prior to issuance of any building permit. 
b.  Note to appear on plat. All subdivision plats which require street name signs shall have a note located thereon stating: "No building permit shall be issued for any lot until street name, regulatory and warning signs are installed and verified by the department of public works on all streets on which such lot depends for access." 
    4-103.3. Private streets. No property shall be subdivided which does not obtain access from a public way, street or road. Private streets are not allowed. 
    4-103.4. Requirements for dedications, reservations, or improvements. Where a proposed subdivision adjoins or encompasses either a substandard street, or a route depicted upon the major thoroughfare plan, that is to be opened, widened or realigned, the following shall apply: 
4-103.401. Undeveloped property. 
a.  Substandard streets. Substandard streets encompassed by or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be improved by the developer in accordance with the minimum standards set forth in subsection 4-104.4, tables 1 and 2, for the portion of such street that is located within the boundaries of the subdivision or the abutting street half. 
b.  Planned routing. When applicable, the layout of a street(s) within a subdivision shall conform to the routing depicted upon the major thoroughfare plan. The amount of right-of-way for the type of street required shall be dedicated up to a maximum of that required for construction of "community collector" routes. Where any street so depicted requires a right-of-way greater than that required for construction of a community collector, the developer shall show on the face of the plat an additional area "reserved for future right-of-way" and any required yard area shall be measured from such reservation line. 
Regardless of the proposed width or functional character of the planned street adjacent to or encompassed by a proposed subdivision, the developer will not be required, (except as may be necessitated as a result of an approved traffic impact study), to improve or construct any street greater than that of a "community collector street" as [that term is] defined and depicted in these regulations. 
4-103.402. Developed property. When property containing existing structures is being divided simply to place each structure on a separate lot and the future right-of-way will fall within the footprint of an existing structure, then the subdivider shall be required to note on the face of the plat as, "reserved for future right-of-way" any additional area necessary for compliance with the major thoroughfare plan. The plat shall also contain a note stating, when any existing structure is demolished, the setback requirements for any new structure shall be measured from the reservation line. 
4-103.403. Required improvements or dedications. All on-site traffic improvements identified as being required in a traffic study prepared in accordance with the requirements of subsection 4-103.206, shall be made by the developer upon land which the developer controls. Any off-site improvements identified in such study shall be made on a pro rata basis to the extent the subdivision contributes to the requirement for such improvement(s). The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for calculating the extent of participation required in off-site improvements. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-103) 
Sec. 4-104. - Functional design criteria. 
    4-104.1. Purpose. The public way design standards set forth in this section are hereby required in order to provide public ways of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, sanitation, and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate public ways so as to compose a convenient and safe system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties. These provisions are intended to establish appropriate standards for the design of streets in residential subdivisions that will: 
1.  Promote the safety and convenience of vehicular traffic, 
2.  Protect the safety of neighborhood residents, 
3.  Minimize crime in residential areas, 
4.  Protect the residential qualities of neighborhoods by limiting traffic volume, traffic speed, noise and fumes, 
5.  Encourage the efficient use of land, 
6.  Minimize the cost of street construction and thereby restrain the rising cost of housing, and 
7.  Minimize the construction of impervious surface thereby protecting the quantity and quality of the community's water resources. 
    4-104.2. Design hierarchy. There is, hereby, established a design hierarchy according to street function. The purpose of the hierarchy is to establish clear functional guidelines and limitations to be utilized in the design of streets. 
4-104.201. New streets. Each proposed street shall be classified and designed for its entire length to meet or exceed the minimum standards for one of the following street types: 
a.  Residential access lane. 
b.  Residential access street. 
(1)  Rural residential access street. 
(2)  Urban residential access street. 
c.  Residential collector street. 
(1)  Rural residential collector street. 
(2)  Urban residential collector street. 
d.  Community collector street. 
e.  Arterial street. 
4-104.202. Existing streets. During the plan review process each street abutting or affecting the design of a subdivision or land development that is not already classified on the major thoroughfare plan shall be classified according to its function, design and use by the Planning Commission at the request of the applicant. The classification of existing streets shall include the hierarchy of subsection 4-104.201, above, and may also include classifications of higher order as determined by the adopted major thoroughfare plan. 
4-104.203. Traffic volume calculations. 
a.  Trip generation rates. The following chart shall be used to determine the anticipated average daily traffic level of proposed residential development: 
Average Weekday Trip Generation 
Rates Housing Type ADT Per Dwelling Unit Single-family detached dwellings 8 trips Cluster or townhouses 7 trips Garden apartments (1-4 stories) 6 trips Retirement complex 3.5 trips  
b.  Volume calculations. Calculation of traffic volumes shall be accomplished by using the following formula: 
(Factor for dwelling type) x (Number of units receiving access from street) = Design ADT 
    4-104.3. Residential street design criteria and service restrictions. The material contained within this segment is intended to provide information as to the intended function, design capacity and service limitations of the various street types presented in subsection 4-104.2, above. The order of presentation proceeds from smallest capacity street to the greatest. For each street identified within the hierarchy, the following design elements are presented: 
(1)  Street function. 
(2)  Design capacity and service restrictions. 
(3)  Street access criteria. 
4-104.301. Residential access lane. 
a.  Street function. A residential access lane is a frontage street that provides access to abutting properties; it shall be designed to carry no more traffic than that generated by those properties that gain direct access from the street. 
b.  Design capacity and service restriction. Each residential access lane shall be designed so that no section of the street conveys an average daily traffic (ADT) volume greater than 200 or serves more than 25 single-family dwellings. Each half [of] a loop street may be regarded as a single local access street and the total traffic volume generated on a loop street shall not exceed 400 ADT. 
c.  Street access. Residential access lanes may intersect or take access from any street type. Both ends of a loop street, however, must intersect the same collecting street and be laid out to discourage through traffic. 
4-104.302. Residential access street. 
a.  Street function. Residential access streets are designed to provide access to individual properties as well as access to the higher classification street network. The residential access street provides for neighborhood circulation and may carry neighborhood traffic and through movements. Residential access streets differ in design depending upon the location of such streets. The rural residential street is intended to maintain the rural character of the area or neighborhood. It is designed as a curbless paved street section, with gravel shoulders for emergency parking and open roadside ditches for drainage. The urban residential street performs the same function as the rural residential street except within an urban environment. The urban residential street is designed as a curb street. 
b.  Design capacity and service restriction. The residential access street is designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) volume in the range of 500 to 1,000. 
c.  Street access. If the total design traffic exceeds 500 ADT, a residential access street shall be provided with no fewer than two access intersections to streets of higher classification in the street hierarchy. For residential access streets with less than 500 ADT, one access intersection to a street of higher order is allowed. 
4-104.303. Residential collector street. 
a.  Street function. The residential collector street provides access to individual properties and collects and distributes neighborhood traffic from residential streets to community collector and arterial streets. 
b.  Design capacity and service restriction. The residential collector street is intended to serve anticipated traffic volumes ranging from 1,000 to 2,500 trips per day. Whenever possible, residential collector streets shall be designed to have no residential lots fronting directly on them. When this is not possible, the amount of residential frontage shall not exceed the limits set forth in the accompanying chart. In addition, only lots having frontages of 100 feet or more may front on collector streets and space shall be provided on these lots for turnaround so that vehicles will not have to back onto collector streets. 
Percent of the Total Length of Residential Collector Streets, Which May Have Residential Lots Fronting on and Taking Access from the Collector Street ADT Level 1,000-1,999 1,200-1,599 1,600-1,999 2,000+ Percent of 
allowable access frontage 20% 10% 5% 0%  
4-104.304. Community collector street. 
a.  Street function. Community collector streets collect and distribute traffic from residential collector and other residential streets to the arterial transportation systems. 
b.  Design capacity and service restriction. The community collector street is designed for anticipated traffic volumes ranging from 2,500 to 6,000 trips per day. Community collector streets shall be designed to have no residential lots fronting directly on them. 
    4-104.4. General design. The general design of all public ways shall conform to the standards in tables 1 and 2, that follow, hereafter. 
4-104.401. Rights-of-way and pavement width. Minimum rights-of-way and pavement width shall be provided as required to meet the design standards for the various classifications of streets set out in tables 1 and 2. 
a.  Reduction in right-of-way width. The City may reduce the required right-of-way width for residential streets under the following conditions: 
(i)  The site is located within a planned unit development or a variable lot size residential development under applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(ii)  The potential for future development will alter neither the street classification nor the design standards proposed. As a condition for varying the right-of-way requirements, the City may require binding agreements to insure no additional access to or use of the street. 
(iii)  In no instance shall a right-of-way be less than 30 feet. In granting the reduced right-of-way width, it shall be determined that sufficient width will be available to provide for all the following (unless separate right-of-way for them is being provided elsewhere to the satisfaction of the City, or they are clearly not required by the proposed development): 
Pavement. 
Curbs. 
Shoulders. 
Utility easements. 
Drainage swales. 
Pedestrian and/or bicycle paths. 
Street trees or other planting strips. 
Turning lanes. 
Cut or fill slopes (the right-of-way shall extend five feet beyond the crest or toe of these slopes). 
Table 1. Minimum Right-of-Way or Easement And Pavement Width by Street Type and Intensity of Development (in feet) 
Street Type Residential Service Nonresidential Low-density Medium-density High-density Up to 2 DUPA a 3 to 8 DUPA a 9 or more DUPA a ROW Pavement ROW Pavement ROW Pavement ROW Pavement Access lane Urban;sup\sup; 40 c 20 40 c 20 40 c 26 N/A N/A Rural;sup\sup; 40 c 18 40 c 18 40 c 26 N/A N/A Access street Urban 40 22 40 22 50 36 50 36 Rural 40 20 40 20 N/A N/A N/A N/A Residential Collector Urban 2,000 or less ADT 50 22 50 22 60 38 N/A N/A More than 2,000 ADT 50 24 50 24 60 40 N/A N/A Rural 2,000 or less ADT 50 20 50 20 N/A N/A N/A N/A More than 2,000 ADT 50 22 50 22 N/A N/A N/A N/A Community Collector Urban 60 38 60 38 70 48 70 48 Rural 50 24 50 24 N/A N/A N/A N/A Notes: a DUPA. Dwelling units per acre. ;sup\sup; Urban streets. All streets classified as urban are curbed streets. These street sections are to be utilized on all properties located within the City regardless of size of lots and on all lots smaller than one acre in size located within the unincorporated portion of the planning jurisdiction. 
Rural streets. Streets classified as rural may be utilized only to serve lots 40,000 square feet or larger in size c The Planning Commission may permit a right-of-way of 30 feet minimum width when the subdivision is within a planned unit development district or is developed as a variable lot residential development.  
Table 2. General Design Standards For Streets 
Residential Street Nonresidential Street Design speed (mph) Access lane 25 N/A Access street 30 30 Residential collector 35 N/A Community collector 40 40 Maximum percentage grade Access lane 12 percent N/A Access street 10 percent 7 percent Residential collector 7 percent N/A Community collector 7 percent 7 percent Minimum percentage grade All streets 1 percent 1 percent Horizontal curvature> Vehicle curves are to be designed as per AASHTO standards for various design speeds and slopes Maximum superelevation (foot) 0.08 0.08 Minimum tangent between reverse curves Vehicle curves are to be designed as per AASHTO standards for various design speeds and slopes Minimum stopping sight distances (in feet) Access lane 150 N/A Access street 200 250 Residential collector 250 N/A Community collector 300 300 Minimum radius of return at intersections Applies where a deflection angle of 15 degrees or more in the alignment of pavement occurs. At right-of-way 25 ft. 30 ft. At pavement 30 ft. 50 ft. Minimum sight distance (in feet) The sight distance is measured from a point 41/2 feet above the centerline of the roadway surface to a point 4 inches above the centerline of the roadway surface. Access lane 100 N/A Access street 150 200 Residential collector 200 N/A Community collector 250 250 Intersection Across corners 75 ft. back Across corners 75 ft. back Maximum grade at intersections Access lane (w/in 50 ft.) 5 percent N/A Access street (w/in 50 ft.) 5 percent 3 percent Residential collector 3 percent N/A Community collector (w/in 100 ft.) 3 percent 3 percent Pavement crown The paved surface shall slope downward from the centerline of the street outward to the edge of the paved surface on each side two-fifths of an inch per foot. Note. Turnaround standard (no outlet streets) A 40-foot pavement radius for a cul-de-sac or a "Y" or "T" turnaround with 60-foot length, 20-foot width shall be provided at the terminus of all permanent dead end access streets serving residential property. The turnaround, including sidewalk where required, shall be within the right-of-way. The maximum length of permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be 700 feet and shall serve no more than 14 dwelling units. Temporary cul-de-sac streets may be a maximum of 1,000 feet in length.  
Increase in right-of-way width. The City may increase the required right-of-way width for residential streets under the following conditions: 
(i)  If proposed lots are large enough for further subdivision that may change the street classification in the future to a higher order street, the City may require that the right-of-way width for the higher order street be provided. 
(ii)  In unusual circumstances, the provision of the elements listed in subpart [subsection] a(iii) of this section may require right-of-way width in excess of that established in table 1 (above). 
4-104.402. Intersections. 
a.  Pavement shall intersect as nearly as possible to a 90-degree angle for a minimum of 50 feet from the intersection. A proposed intersection of two new public ways at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be permitted. Not more than two public ways shall intersect at any one point, unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Centerline off-sets of less than 150 feet between T-type intersections within public ways shall not be permitted, except where the intersected public ways have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where public ways intersect arterial or collector routes, the alignment of such streets shall be continuous. Intersections of arterial or community collector streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curb or edge of pavement radius shall be determined according to the specifications for the street of higher classification in the street system hierarchy, as specified below: This minimum should not be confused as the right-of-way return radius but is the curb edge of pavement. 
Minimum Radius of Returns At Street Intersections Street Classification Minimum Return Radius* Residential access lane 10 feet Residential access street 10 feet Residential collector 15 feet Community collector 30 feet Higher order street As determined by the City Engineer *This is the minimum. The actual spacing shall be determined by the City Engineer based upon the traffic characteristics of the higher order street.  
Legend for Vision Clearance Area Illustration Y = Corner sight distance, measured from point "c" and "c" to "d." b = Eye level from a car stopped at the intersection on the minor road; for this regulation "b" is situated 3.75 feet above the higher order street. a and d = A point 4.5 feet above the centerline of the higher order street. c = Approximate center of intersection. The entire area of the clear sight triangle described by points "a," "b," "c," shall be designed to provide an unobstructed view across it from point "b" to all points 4.5 feet above the roadway along the centerline from point "a" to point "d."  
Vision Clearance Area 

Street of Lower Order Minimum Corner Sight Distance Minimum Corner Sight Distance "Y" Major Road Type Design Speed Y (in feet) Higher order street 50 mph 500 Higher order street 40 mph 400 Community collector 40 mph 400 Residential collector 35 mph 350 Residential access street 30 mph 300 Residential access lane 25 mph 250  
d.  Whenever a proposed street intersects an existing or proposed street of higher order in the street hierarchy, the street of lower order shall be made a stop street. The street of lower order shall also be designed to provide a minimum corner sight distance as specified in table 1. 
e.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two-percent grade for a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting public way. 
f.  The cross-slope on all public ways, including intersections, shall be three percent or less. 
4-104.403. Acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
a.  Deceleration or turning lanes may be required by the City along existing and proposed streets as determined by a traffic impact study required by subsection 4-103.206, or where the City can justify the need. 
b.  Deceleration lanes shall be designed to the following standards: 
(i)  The lane width shall be the same as the required width of the roadway moving lanes. 
(ii)  The lane shall provide the full required lane width for its full length. It shall not be tapered. 
(iii)  The minimum lane length shall be as follows: 
Design Speed of Road Minimum Deceleration Lane Length 30 mph 165 feet 40 mph 230 feet 50 mph 310 feet  
c.  Acceleration lanes are only required when indicated as needed by a traffic impact study. The design shall be as per the recommendation of the Director of Public Works. As necessary, a paved taper shall be provided for right turns. 
4-104.404. Marginal access and one-way streets. 
a.  Classification and design of marginal access streets. Marginal access streets may be utilized as an alternative to stripping off lots along existing or proposed collector or higher order streets. Marginal access streets shall be classified and designed to conform to the design standards and service restrictions of either residential access lanes or residential access streets as anticipated daily traffic may dictate. 
(i)  Intersection spacing. The minimum distance between intersections of the marginal access street with residential collectors shall be 300 feet. Minimum distances with higher order streets shall be determined by the Director of Public Works based upon the traffic characteristics of the higher order street. 
(ii)  Distance between travelways. A minimum distance of 30 feet shall be provided between the paved portion of the marginal access street and the paved portion of the higher order street. This area shall be used to provide a visual screen between the roadways by landscaping and/or use of a berm. 
b.  Utilization and design of one-way streets. One-way streets may be permitted as loop streets or marginal access streets where there is need to separate the directional lanes to preserve natural features to avoid excessive grading for street construction on steep slopes. Pavement and curb transitions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards provided by the Director of Public Works. 
4-104.405. Arrangement of dead-end streets. 
a.  Temporary stub streets. 
(i)  Residential access lane and residential access street stub streets. Residential access lanes and access street stub streets may be permitted only within subsections of phased development for which the proposed street extension in its entirety has been approved as part of a preliminary plat. 
(ii)  Collector stub streets. Stub streets may be permitted or required by the City on collector streets provided that the future extension of the street is deemed desirable by the City and conforms to the adopted major thoroughfare plan. 
(iii)  Temporary turnarounds. All stub streets shall be provided with a turnaround paved to an outside radius of 35 feet. No turnaround is required if the stub street provides access to four or less lots or housing units. In the later case, a sign indicating a dead-end street shall be posted. 
b.  Permanent dead-end public ways. 
(i)  General design standards. Where a public way does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 150 feet. However, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnabout shall be provided at the end of a dead-end public way in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end public ways shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
(ii)  Design of turnarounds. The type of turnaround required shall be determined by the Planning Commission based upon recommendation of the Director of Public Works. In general the design standards presented in table 2 [in subsection 4-104.4], shall apply. The Planning Commission will consider alternative terminations when the street is located upon steep slopes and excessive cut or fill will be required to meet the design standards of the typical sections. 
4-104.406. Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad right-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
b.  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest public way extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial usage. 
c.  Public ways parallel to a railroad, when intersecting a public way which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
4-104.407. Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the governing body. The sharing of expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be fixed by special agreement between the governing body and the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-104) 
Sec. 4-105. - Road construction specifications. 
    The road construction specifications are included in these regulations as appendix B, and are adopted as a part hereof. These specifications shall be the minimum standards for any subdivision within the jurisdictional area. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-105) 
Sec. 4-106. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
    4-106.1. General requirements. All plats shall make adequate provisions for stormwater or floodwater run-off channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent from any sanitary sewer system. Each lot shall have a five-foot dedicated drainage easement on each lot line. The following notation regarding the use of these easements shall be made upon all plats: 
    "Public utility and drainage easements where shown hereon are intended to indicate an easement for construction operation and maintenance of public utilities and drainage structures; including but not limited to sanitary sewers, water lines, telephone signal conduits, electric conductors, drainage pipes and natural gas lines." 
    4-106.2. Nature of stormwater facilities. 
4-106.201. Stormwater design and construction specifications. The stormwater design and construction specifications included in these regulations as appendix C, and are adopted as a part thereof. These specifications shall be the minimum standards for any subdivision within the jurisdictional area. 
4-106.202. Location. The subdivider may be required to transport by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist prior to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the public right-of-way, wherever feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width. These facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the construction specifications contained in these regulations. 
4-106.203. Accessibility to public storm sewers. Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the developer shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater, subject to the specifications contained herein. 
4-106.204. Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. Necessary facilities shall be sized based on the construction specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential development within the watershed. 
4-106.205. Effect on downstream drainage areas. The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Director of Public Works a study of the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream properties and drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Pre-development and post-development runoff rates, volumes and velocities along with associated calculations and maps shall be submitted with a stormwater drainage report prepared by a Tennessee registered engineer. If increased runoff rate or total volume impacts downstream drainage structures, then these structures shall be improved. Where it is anticipated that drainage and/or runoff from a development will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission shall withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for adequate improvement of such drainage facilities. The subdivider shall be required to construct adequate downstream facilities or contribute his pro rata share toward the construction of adequate downstream facilities, and install on-site stormwater detention to mitigate the downstream impacts. On-site stormwater detention proposed to reduce the peak rate of discharge to off-site drainage systems downstream shall not cause increased peak flows or velocities detrimental to downstream properties or facilities. When detention facilities are utilized, the peak rate of discharge after development shall not exceed the predevelopment peak rate. Controlled releases of discharge from a detention basin shall include V-notch, rectangular or other weir configurations which prevent increased discharge (above pre-development conditions) for storm events of five-, ten- and 25-year occurrences. Detention facilities shall be platted as perpetual drainage easements and shall be maintained by the property owner or the owners' association, as applicable. The City will in no way be responsible for maintenance of drainage facilities on private property. Estimated increases in discharge velocity shall be mitigated by energy dissipation devices where required to prevent erosion. The drainage system shall be designed to honor natural drainage divides, where practical. Surface waters shall not be concentrated and discharged onto adjoining property at rates and/or velocities exceeding predevelopment conditions, unless an easement expressly authorizing such discharge has been granted by the owner of the affected land or unless the discharge is into an adequate natural watercourse or drainage system. 
4-106.206. Areas of poor drainage. In general, areas of poor drainage shall be classified as land unsuitable for development (see subsection 4-101.401) and shall not be included in streets and lots. In any instance where it may be necessary to locate a roadway in an area subject to flooding that is not located within the 100-year regulatory flood boundary, the Planning Commission may approve such subdivision; provided, the applicant fills the affected flood area of said subdivision to place public way elevations no lower than two feet above the known flood elevation. The plat of such subdivision shall provide for a floodway along the bank of any stream or watercourse of width sufficient to contain or move the water of the 100-year regulatory flood, and no fill shall be placed in the floodplain; neither shall any building nor flood-restrictive structure be erected or placed therein. The boundaries of the flood area and floodplain, and the 100-year regulatory flood elevation, shall be determined by the Planning Commission based upon the review specified in subsection 2-103.2 of these regulations, and the submission of flood data in construction plans as specified in section 5-103 of these regulations. As general policy sinkholes shall be classified as land unsuitable for development (see subsection 4-101.401) and shall not be included in streets and lots. In any instance where it is unavoidable, the Director of Public Works and Planning Commission shall approve any alteration of a sinkhole or the drainage pattern. (See subsection 4-102.602, Lot drainage.) 
4-106.207. Floodplain areas. The Planning Commission shall prohibit the inclusion of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course within the "building site" (see definition) of any residential lot. In all instances the regulatory floodway shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps. Any subdivision that contains floodprone land shall be subject to the special provisions set forth in subsections 2-101.4 and 4-101.4; section 4-104; and subsection 4-102.602 (Lot drainage) of these regulations. 
4-106.208. Stormwater detention and discharge control. The general policy of the City is to provide detention for the increased volume of water generated by a development. The major factors in evaluating drainage designs will be the effect of increased runoff rates on downstream water levels and the proximity of any structures. Any drainage system that discharges without some form of detention shall route its water along a designated public drainage easement. A drainage system can be allowed to discharge along an existing but nonrecorded (prescriptive) easement if the following are true: 
a.  Post-development flow is less than or equal to the pre-development flow at the same location. (See subsection 4-106.205, Effect on downstream drainage areas.) 
b.  In order to prevent erosion at all outlet points, the subdivider's engineer will be required to design and submit for approval an outlet system that approximates the width and velocity of the flow that existed prior to development. 
    4-106.3. Dedication of drainage easements. 
4-106.301. General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of the 100-year flood elevation of such watercourse and of such width and construction as will be adequate. Where new open drainageways are utilized they shall be designed for the 25-year frequency flood. 
4-106.302. Drainage easements. 
a.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impracticable inclusion of drainage facilities within a public way right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width for such facilities shall be provided across property outside the public way lines and with satisfactory access to public ways. Easements shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats. Drainage easements shall be carried from the public way to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.  When downstream drainage improvements are proposed that will require additional easements across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage easements must be secured by the developer and indicated on a plat amendment for that property. 
c.  The applicant shall dedicate, when required by the Planning Commission, either in fee, or by drainage or conservation easement, the land on both sides of an existing watercourse for a distance to be determined by the Director of Public Works. 
4-106.303. Ditching, concrete ditch paving, and culverts and storm drains. The design and construction details of drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. The Director of Public Works shall approve the design and construction details of all such facilities. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-106) 
Sec. 4-107. - Water facilities. 
    4.107.1. General requirements. 
1.  Necessary action shall be taken by the developer to extend a water supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
2.  Where required for fire protection, water mains shall be the greater of six inches in diameter or as required to provide required fire flow. The minimum size of any proposed water line shall be six inches in diameter. 
3.  All water systems, whether public or private, located in a floodprone area shall be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation. All water supply facilities located below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the water supply system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
4.  All water systems, whether public or private, shall be constructed utilizing materials that comply with all state and local materials specifications. 
    4-107.2. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required in all subdivisions; they shall be located no more than 700 feet apart and be within 400 feet of any residential, commercial, or industrial lot. The Planning Commission may require closer spacing where physical conditions or types of structures so warrant. To eliminate future public way cuttings or openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a public way shown on the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-107) 
Sec. 4-108. - Sewage facilities. 
    4-108.1. General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the regulations of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation and by any other applicable standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, specifications, and standards, of any applicable governmental agency or appropriate unit thereof. 
    4-108.2. Mandatory connection to public sewer system. 
1.  When public sanitary sewers are accessible to the subdivision, as determined by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall provide such facilities to each lot therein and shall connect the facilities to the public system. The subdivider shall provide sewers that meet standards set forth in the regulations of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
2.  All sanitary sewer facilities located in a flood hazard area shall be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation. All sewer facilities located below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the sewer system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
3.  All public sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed utilizing materials that are ASTM and/or AWWA approved. 
    4-108.3. Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, the individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tank and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device shall be approved by the county health department. The entire individual disposal system, including all drainage fields associated therewith, shall be located on the lot with the principal structure such system is to serve. The Planning Commission may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high groundwater, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics. The Planning Commission may require that the subdivider note on the face of the plat and any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated areas. 
    4-108.4. Design criteria for sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed for the ultimate tributary population and shall be gravity flow systems where possible. Due consideration shall be given to any current zoning regulations and approved planning reports, where applicable. Sewer capacities shall be adequate to accommodate the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial wastes, together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. Sewer connections to dwellings shall not be less than six inches in diameter, short laterals and all other lines shall be eight inches or larger in diameter, depending on anticipated flow. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-108; Ord. No. 2009-42, § 1, 7-27-2009) 
Sec. 4-109. - Utility easements. 
    4-109.1. Permanent easements. Perpetual unobstructed easements down all lot lines or additionally across lots, if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, shall be provided for utilities (private or public). Such easements shall be at least ten feet wide, except for across-lot easements that shall be at least 20 feet wide. The subdivider shall take such actions as are necessary to ensure the coordination and continuation of utility easements established on adjacent properties with those proposed within his development. All easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
    4-109.2. Temporary construction easements. Temporary construction easements exceeding the width of permanent easements may be required as necessary until completion of any one project. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-109) 
Sec. 4-110. - Public uses. 
    4-110.1. Plat to provide for public uses. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a school, recreation use, a portion of a major public way, or other public use, as indicated on the land development plan and/or major street or road plan, or any portion thereof, such tract shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his plat when first presented for review by the Planning Commission. After proper determination of its necessity by the Planning Commission and the appropriate governmental representative(s) involved in the acquisition and use of such site, and after a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into the plat prior to final approval by the Planning Commission and recording of the plat. 
    4-110.2. Referral to the governmental agency concerned. The Planning Commission shall refer any plat presented in accordance with subsection 4-110.1, to the governmental agency concerned with acquisition of the land. The Planning Commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the appropriate governmental agency 30 days for reply. Among the areas which the Planning Commission may propose for public acquisition, when the commission deems it appropriate and consistent with the policies and purposes set forth in these regulations, is any land within a floodway or floodway fringe determined according to the procedure outlined herein. The acquiring agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
    4-110.3. Notice to property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the Planning Commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on all plats any areas proposed to be acquired by any governmental agency. 
    4-110.4. Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a governmental agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 24 months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a plat of a proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the governmental agency to initiate acquisition of the property within the prescribed 24 months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-110) 
Sec. 4-111. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
    Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the area as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision, as required by the Planning Commission. No change of grade of the land shall be undertaken nor shall any natural features (including trees) be removed or relocated until the Planning Commission has approved a preliminary subdivision plat. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-111) 
Sec. 4-112. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
    4-112.1. General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for a commercial or industrial purpose, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the Planning Commission may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations; as well as such additional standards as set forth by the Planning Commission. 
    4-112.2. Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the public way, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
1.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of nonresidential development anticipated; 
2.  Special requirements may be imposed by the governing body with respect to any public way, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction specifications; 
3.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisances from the proposed nonresidential subdivision, including provision of extra depth in parcels backing on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips, when necessary; and 
4.  Public ways carrying nonresidential traffic, especially trucks, normally shall not be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-112) 
Sec. 4-113. - Handicap accessible design for streets, roads and sidewalks. 
    The construction and maintenance of all required streets, roads and sidewalks shall be in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Justice Department's Standards on Accessible Design (JDSAD), originally codified at 28 CFR, part 36, app. A. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 4-113) 
Sec. 4-114. - Residential design standards for multifamily development. 
    Purpose: To establish criteria for quality and economic sustainability in new residential construction within the City of Mt. Juliet, while providing freedom of architectural design, to encourage a more attractive, functional, and economical building form. For single-family development, see Section 5-104.4 of the Zoning Code. 
    Applicability: Any project submitted to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission (RPC) for preliminary plat approval of a major subdivision (outside of a PUD) or preliminary master development plan approval (within a PUD) after April 21, 2011 shall be subject to the following design requirements: 
    Development standards: For the purposes of these regulations, approved "Primary Wall Materials" shall refer to: brick and stone. Approved "Secondary Wall Materials" shall refer to: wood; hard coat stucco; and cement fiber board. 
1.  The front façade and any other facade shall contain 100 percent primary wall materials. All percentages are calculated based on the wall surface area and do not include areas used for windows, doors, and fascias. The use of alternate materials or secondary wall materials allowed herein in differing quantities may be authorized at the sole discretion of the Regional Planning Commission. 
2.  Trim, eaves, and soffits may incorporate the use of vinyl, aluminum and other materials approved by the International Residential Code as adopted. 
3.  Approved roof materials include three-dimensional architectural asphalt shingles, and shall be fungus resistant. 
4.  No wall or window mounted air conditioning or heating units may be installed or placed in any window. 
5.  All decking material shall be stained or painted if not constructed of metal or vinyl materials. 
6.  Mechanical equipment shall not be roof mounted, but may be on the ground, within attic space or other location screened from public view. This includes electrical panels/meters, HVAC equipment and phone/cable connections. No satellite dishes may be placed on any deck, balcony or roof anywhere within the complex. 
7.  Where approved, one car garages shall be a minimum dimension of 14 feet (wide) by 20 feet (deep). No stairs, water heaters or other fixed items may encroach into this space. 
8.  A bike rack must be provided at the amenity center with a minimum of ten bike parking spaces. All bike racks shall be of the wave-type style. 
9.  A bike rack must be provided at each residential building with a minimum of five bike parking spaces. All bike racks shall be of the wave-type style. 
(Res. No. 2011-01, § 1, 4-21-2011; Ord. No. 2015-34, § 1(Att.), 8-24-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-34, § 1(Att.), adopted Aug. 24, 2015, changed the title of § 4-114 from "Residential design standards" to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 4-115-4-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED 

Sec. 5-101. - Conceptual plan. 
    5-101.1. Site analysis. Conceptual plans submitted to the Planning Commission are intended to provide an analysis of each site's special features and the designers response to those features. Such plans are required for all major subdivisions, as these plans form the basis of the design process for greenway lands, house locations, street alignments, and lots lines. A site analysis shall accompany each conceptual plan. As a minimum, the site analysis must include: 
1.  A contour base map at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; 
2.  The location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes (over 20 percent, wetlands, karst features, watercourses, intermittent streams and 100-year floodplains, and all existing rights-of-way and easements; 
3.  Soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service medium-intensity maps; and 
4.  The location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from the property, watershed divides and drainageways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and trails. 
    5-101.2. Features of conceptual plans. The site analysis shall form the basis for the conceptual plan, which shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and greenway lands in new residential subdivisions. The conceptual plan shall, as a minimum show: 
1.  A scale drawing of the property indicating the size of the original tract(s) being subdivided and the names of the owners of adjoining property; 
2.  Notation of any existing legal rights-of-way, easements, or other encumbrances affecting the property; 
3.  A contour base map at least on topographical maps published by the USGS, with contours shown at intervals no greater than five feet, extended into adjacent properties; 
4.  The location of all "Land unsuitable for development" as specified in subsection 4-101.401 of these regulations; 
5.  The location of (and proposed protective measures for) all watercourses and intermittent streams; 
6.  The general location of proposed streets to include proposed classification of each street and designation of construction routes as required by section 4-103.209 (Designation of construction routes); 
7.  The approximate size and general location of proposed building lots; 
8  In any instance where septic sewage disposal is anticipated, soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service medium-intensity maps; 
9.  The location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or meadows and scenic views; 
10.  Name of owner; name of plat designer; and zoning classification; 
11.  Vicinity map of property, date and approximate north point; 
12.  Proposed extension(s) of water and/or sanitary sewer service to the property along with the proposed routing of such within the subdivision; and 
13.  Preliminary storm drainage design noting approximate volumes, direction of flows and location of proposed detention or retention areas. 
    5-101.3.\ The four-step design process. Each conceptual plat shall follow a four-step design process, as described below. When the conceptual plat is submitted, applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the Planning Commission that these four design steps were followed by their site designers in determining the layout of their proposed streets, house lots, and greenway lands. 
1.  Designating conservation lands. During the first step, all conservation lands shall be identified, using the site analysis. Conservation areas consist of wetlands, floodplains, slopes over 20 percent, and all other portions of the site defined as "unsuitable for development" in subsection 4-101.401 (Land unsuitable for development). 
2.  Location of house sites. During the second step, potential house sites are tentatively located. Because the proposed location of houses within each lot represents a significant decision with potential impacts on the ability of the development to meet the evaluation criteria contained in subsection 4-102.102 (Evaluation criteria), subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the conceptual plan. House sites should generally be located no closer than 100 feet from conservation areas. 
3.  Street and lot layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economic way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in such a way as to avoid or at least minimize adverse impacts on conservation areas. To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15 percent shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the City and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property (or on adjoining parcels). Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with hammer-heads facilitating three-point turns. Cul-de-sacs serving more than six homes shall generally be designed with a central island containing indigenous trees and shrubs (either conserved or planted). The City generally encourages the creation of single-loaded residential access streets, in order that the maximum number of homes in new developments may enjoy views of open space. Note that in situations where more formal neo-traditional or village-type layouts are proposed, Steps Two and Three may be reversed, so that the location of house sites follows the location of streets and squares. 
4.  Lot lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the lot lines (where applicable). These are generally drawn midway between the house locations. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5-101) 
Sec. 5-102. - Preliminary plat. 
    5-102.1. General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor, landscape architect, architect, land planner, or engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering, at a convenient scale no smaller than 100 feet to an inch. The preliminary design certification required by section 2-103.4 (Preliminary design certification) shall appear upon the face of such plat. The plat shall be prepared in permanently reproducible form with the sheets numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used. 
    5-102.2. Features. The preliminary plat shall include: 
1.  The location of the property to be subdivided with respect to surrounding properties and public ways; 
2.  The names of all adjoining property owners of record, or the names of adjoining developments; 
3.  The names of adjoining public ways; 
4.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property, figured to the nearest 1/100 of a foot; 
5.  The location of existing public ways, easements, water bodies, wetlands, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges, as determined by the Planning Commission; 
6.  The location and width of all existing and proposed easements. alleys, and other public ways, and building setback lines; 
7.  The location, dimension, and area of all proposed or existing lots; 
8.  Within proposed condominium developments, the position of all existing or proposed buildings; 
9.  The location and dimension of all conservation lands and any other property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation; 
10.  The limits of floodway and floodplain and the associated regulatory flood elevation and regulatory flood protection elevation, as determined by the requirements of section 4-106.206 (Areas of poor drainage) and appendix C of these regulations; 
11.  The name and address of the owner(s) of land to be subdivided, the subdivider if other than the owner, and the land surveyor or other person preparing the plat; 
12.  The date of the plat, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the subdivision; 
13.  Sufficient data to determine readily the general location, bearing, and length of all lines necessary to reproduce such lines within the area to be subdivided; 
14.  Name of the subdivision and all new public ways, as approved by the Planning Commission; 
15.  The functional classification (See section 4-104 (Functional design criteria) of all proposed streets along with designation of construction routes as required by section 4-103.209 (Designation of construction routes); 
16.  The zoning classification of all lots, as well as an indication of all uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider; 
17.  The distance and bearing of one of the corners of the boundary of the subdivision to the nearest intersection of an existing public street and to the original corner of the original survey of which it is a part; 
18.  Key map showing relation of the subdivision to all public ways, railroads, and watercourses in all directions to a distance of at least one-half mile (suggested scale: one inch to 1,000 feet); 
19.  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet where the proposed subdivision has an average slope of five percent or less, or at vertical intervals of not more than five feet where the average slope exceeds five percent (contours to be field surveyed or taken from map information acceptable to the Planning Commission); 
20.  Map parcel numbers as recorded on the land tax maps of the county; 
21.  The following notations: 
(a)  Explanation of drainage easements; 
(b)  Explanation of site easements; 
(c)  Explanation of reservations; and 
(d)  For any lot where public sewer or water systems are not available, the following: 
(i)  Areas to be used for sewage disposal and their percolation results, or if the Planning Commission desires, any other acceptable data to show that the site can be served effectively by septic tanks; 
(ii)  Water wells (existing and proposed); and 
(iii)  Rock outcroppings, marshes, springs, sinkholes, natural storm drains, and other outstanding topographical features; 
22.  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, to be imposed and designation of areas subject to special restrictions; and 
23.  Phasing plan (see section 2-103.12) if subdivision is proposed to be phased; 
24.  A form for endorsement of Planning Commission approval of the preliminary plat that shall read as follows: 
This preliminary plat was finally approved by the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission, with such exceptions or conditions as indicated in the minutes of the commission on. 
(date) ______________ 
Preliminary plat approval shall not constitute final approval for recording purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5-102) 
Sec. 5-103. - Construction plans. 
    5-103.1. General. Construction plans drawn at a scale of no more than 50 feet to an inch shall be prepared for all improvements required by these regulations. Approval of construction plans must precede any clearing, grading, or site construction and no action by the Planning Commission tentatively approving a preliminary plat shall become final until construction plans have been approved. All construction plans shall be prepared and stamped by a Tennessee licensed engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering. The territory included within construction plans shall correspond to that included within the preliminary plat. 
    5-103.2. Features. The following shall be shown on the construction plans. 
1.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines of all public ways. 
2.  Where a proposed road intersects an existing public way or ways, the elevation along the centerline of the existing public way within 100 feet of the intersection. 
3.  Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all public ways. 
4.  Stationing of all proposed public ways. Horizontal stationing shall be at 50 foot intervals and cross-sectional elevations shall be to an accuracy of one tenth foot vertical on a line at right angles to the centerline of the public way at the following points: the centerline of the public way, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line. 
5.  Plans and profiles indicating the locations and typical cross-section of public way pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-way, manholes, and catchbasins. 
6.  The location of public way signs. 
7.  The location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility system. 
8.  Location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures. 
9.  Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including but not limited to, existing public ways, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, buildings, and features noted on the land development plan or major street or road plan. 
10.  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such lakes or streams shall be shown. All elevations shall be referred to the USGS datum plane. 
11.  If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distance and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high-water mark of such waterways. 
12.  The developer shall submit a stormwater drainage report prepared by a Tennessee registered engineer. The developer shall also prepare for any portion of a subdivision containing a floodprone area, or an area known to be subject to flooding, information necessary for the Planning Commission to determine the suitability of the particular site for the proposed development, as follows: 
(a)  Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of any part of the subdivision within a floodprone area; existing or proposed structures or building sites, fill, storage of materials and floodproofing measures, as specified in these regulations; and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel, floodway, floodway fringe, the regulatory flood elevation, and the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
(b)  A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high-water information, if required by the Planning Commission; 
(c)  Surface-view plans showing elevations and contours of the ground; 
(d)  Pertinent structures, fill, or elevations of public ways; 
(e)  Water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types, and other pertinent information, as required by the Planning Commission; and 
(f)  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities. 
13.  Contours at the same vertical interval as the preliminary plat. 
14.  In addition to the other requirements of this section, construction plans for condominium subdivisions shall contain "as built" drawings of all underground utilities, regardless of proposed ownership, the construction design of all on-site stormwater management facilities and the construction design of all facilities which are proposed for dedication to the governing body. 
15.  A notation of construction plans approval by appropriate persons or governmental representatives. 
16.  Title, name, address, stamp and signature of engineer who prepared the plans. 
17.  Date of plans, including any revision dates. 
18.  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared for each development submitting construction plans. Such plan shall demonstrate the manner in which the general principals for erosion and sediment control set out in subsection 4-102.603 (Erosion and sediment control) are to be implemented on the site covered by the construction plans. 
    5-103.3. Development agreements to accompany construction plans. Drafts of proposed development agreements prepared on forms provided by the City shall accompany all submittals of construction plans. The development agreements shall reference the design incorporated within the approved construction plans and shall be sufficient in form to ensure that the methods and materials meet or exceed minimum standards established by the City. The development agreements shall sufficient to encompass the following: 
1.  All off-site improvements required to serve the development. 
2.  All on-site improvements located within the section of the project contained within the construction plans, including improvements that are required to serve future portions of the development not contained within the plans. 
3.  All improvements required to serve the lots shown on the plan that are not constructed and offered for public acceptance prior to or concurrently with submittal of final plats covering such lots. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5-103) 
Sec. 5-104. - Final subdivision plat. 
    5-104.1. General. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared on transparent drafting material at a scale no smaller than 50 feet to the inch on sheets of county register plat book size. The use of an appropriate smaller scale may be permitted for lots larger than two acres. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with the sheets numbered in sequence. 
    5-104.2. Features. The final plat shall include: 
1.  The location of the property to be subdivided with respect to surrounding property(s) and public ways. 
2.  The names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of adjoining developments. 
3.  The names of adjoining public ways. 
4.  The exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, showing angles to the nearest minute and distance to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. The adjusted accuracy of the survey shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Title 62, Chapter 18, of the Tennessee Code, for a Category II (Suburban subdivision). The survey shall be tied into the Tennessee Grid Coordinate System. A distance and bearing shall be provided which will link a point on the boundary of the subdivision to a monument in the right-of-way of the nearest prominent public way intersection. 
5.  The location of all public ways, easements, water bodies, streams or rivers, railroads, parks, and cemeteries. 
6.  The limits of floodway and floodway fringe areas and the regulatory flood elevation and regulatory flood protection elevation; as determined by the requirements of section 4-104.206 and appendix C of these regulations. 
7.  The location and width of all easements and rights-of-way for public ways, as well as the building setback lines on all lots. 
8.  The location, dimensions, and area of all lots. All dimensions shall be field run to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. Lot areas shall be shown to the nearest one-tenth of a square foot. 
9.  The location, area, and dimensions, to the accuracy set forth in Item [subsection] 8, above, of all property to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with a designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
10.  The final plat of a condominium subdivision shall contain, in addition to the other information required by this section: 
(a)  An as-built building location and boundary survey, to "American Land Title Association" or other similar standards, showing complete and accurate dimensions and angles of the boundary of the parcel(s) on which the condominium is located, together with exterior dimensions and locations relative to those boundaries of the building(s) which constitute the condominium subdivision; 
(b)  Some sort of datum plane or other suitable vertical location reference. In meeting these requirements, it is only necessary that the upper and lower limits of each level of each condominium unit be identified specifically in relation to the vertical reference, (e.g., an appropriate permanent monument or other acceptable reference datum or fixed known point). Elaborate exterior elevations and architectural detail are not necessary to satisfy this requirement; and 
(c)  Copies of deed covenants, the charter and bylaws of any homeowners' association established; and special information which the Planning Commission may require to protect the rights of future owners of the condominium or the public in general. 
11.  The name and address of the owner(s) of the land being subdivided. 
12.  The name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner. 
13.  The name and stamp of the land surveyor or other person preparing the plat. 
14.  The date of the plat, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the subdivision. 
15.  Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines necessary to reproduce such lines upon the ground. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent distance for the centerline of the curved public ways and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved public ways. The location of all monuments and pins shall be indicated on the plat. 
16.  The names of all public ways. 
17.  The zoning classification of all lots as well as an indication of uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider. 
18.  The total acreage within the subdivision. 
19.  Lot numbers and street numbers. 
20.  The line size and location of water and sewer facilities. 
21.  The location of all fire hydrants. 
22.  The diameter and width of all driveway culverts. 
23.  For any lot where a public sewer or water system is not available, the following shall be shown: 
(a)  Areas to be used for sewage disposal; and 
(b)  Water wells (existing and proposed). 
24.  Applicable certifications in the form reproduced in this section shall appear upon the final plat. All required certificates shall bear the signature of the approving or authorizing agent at the time of application for final plat approval, except that the form for endorsement of the Planning Commission's approval for recording shall appear unsigned at the time of application for approval. 
25.  Commitment notes may be printed or stamped on the final plat reflecting location and dimension of easements, or extent of other agreements or factual data, in lieu of drafted illustration, when applicable, and as approved by the Planning Commission. 
26.  For stormwater detention facilities: 
(a)  Show as a permanent drainage easement; and 
(b)  Provide a note of reference to the deed book and page reference in which the Stormwater Detention Maintenance Agreement is recorded. 
27.  Addressing of plat. All final subdivision plats shall receive approval of Subdivision and Street Names, and shall be addressed by the appropriate E-911 Agency. Lot addresses will be shown on the final subdivision plat prior to final plat approval. 
    5-104.3. Plat certificates. 
1.  Certification showing that the applicant is the landowner; that he offers for dedication public ways, rights-of-way, and any site for public use; and that he consents to the subdivision plan. 
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owners of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to public and private use as noted, along with all necessary easements for the construction of cut and fill slopes, cut and fill ramps, inlet and outlet ditches or channel changes beyond the right-of-way limits of the road. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Owner (Title if acting for partnership or corporation)  
2.  Certification by a registered land surveyor as to the accuracy of the land survey. 
Certificate of Accuracy I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey that satisfies the accuracy requirements of the Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, Municipal-Regional Planning Commission and the State Board of Examiners for Land Surveyors, and that monuments have been placed as shown hereon to the Board's specifications. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Registered Surveyor  
3.  Certification by appropriate governmental or quasi-governmental officials that sewage disposal and/or water systems have been installed. 
Certificate of Approval of Water Utility Systems I hereby certify that the Water Utility Systems outlined or indicated hereon have been installed in accordance with current local and/or state government requirements or that a surety as indicated below has been posted with the West Wilson Utility District, to assure completion of all required Water Utility System improvements in case of default. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Authorized Signature/Title LOC Amount: ____________ West Wilson Utility District  
  
Certificate of Approval of Sanitary Sewer Utility Systems I hereby certify that the following Sanitary Sewer Utility Systems outlined or indicated hereon have been installed in accordance with current City of Mt. Juliet and state government requirements and that a surety as indicated below has been posted with the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, to assure completion of all required Sanitary Sewer Utility System improvements in case of default. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Public Works Director LOC Amount: ____________ City of Mt. Juliet Authorized Signature  
Certificate of General Approval for Installation of Subsurface Sewage 
Disposal with Restrictions General approval is hereby granted for the proposed subdivision hereon as being suitable for subsurface sewage disposal with the listed and/or attached restrictions. Before the initiation of construction, the local health authority shall approve the location of the house or other structure and plans for the subsurface sewage disposal system. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Local Health Authority Lot(s) # ____________ shall not have a residence with more than ____________ , bedrooms, unless otherwise approved by the local health authority.  
4.  Certification on the final plat by the appropriate governmental representative that the subdivider has complied with one of the following: 
(a)  Installation of all public way improvements in accordance with the requirements of these regulations; or 
(b)  In lieu of compliance with subdivision improvement requirements, certification that surety has been posted by the subdivider in an amount approved by the appropriate governmental representative to guarantee completion of all improvements. 
Certificate of Approval of Public Ways for Bond Posting I hereby certify that all designated public ways shown on this Final Subdivision Plat have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications of the City of Mt. Juliet Subdivision Regulations; and that a surety has been posted with the City of Mt. Juliet to guarantee Completion of all required improvements in case of default. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Director of Public Works  
5.  For a subdivision containing common open space or facilities, certification on the final plat of dedication of common areas in accordance with procedures established in these regulations. 
Certification of Common Areas Dedication In recording this plat has designated certain areas of land shown hereon as common areas intended for use by the homeowners within ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Name of Subdivision), for recreation and related activities. The above-described areas are not dedicated for use by the general public, but are dedicated to the common use of the homeowners within the named subdivision. "Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions," applicable to the above named subdivision, is hereby incorporated and made a part of this plat. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Owner  
6.  Certification on the final plat of Planning Commission approval for recording of the plat. 
Certificate for Approval for Recording I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations, for Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, except for variances, if any, as noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission and that it has been approved for recording in the Office of County Registrar. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Secretary, Planning Commission Void, unless recorded by: Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________  
7.  Notation of possible flooding. If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flooding as defined in these regulations, a notation shall be made on the plat that development or modification of the land within any 100-year floodplain boundary delineated within the plat is prohibited. Development within known flood areas delineated on the plat shall be done in such a manner that any structure shall be protected against flood damage to at least the two feet above the known flood elevation, which elevation shall be stated in the notation. Any additional restrictions imposed by the Planning Commission upon development within floodprone areas also shall be indicated on the plat. 
8.  Notation of health restrictions. Any modifications or limitations that may be imposed by the state or county health department shall be clearly indicated on the plat. 
9.  Notation of private restrictions. Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence shall be indicated on the plat. Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length as to make their lettering impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat or, if the restrictions and trusteeships are of record, the plat shall note where they are recorded. 
10.  Certificate of Approval: Public Works. 
Certificate of Approval: Public Works I hereby certify: (1) that the subdivision of property as shown on this final subdivision plat complies with the City of Mt. Juliet requirement for each lot to have public road frontage, and (2) the subdivision of property as shown on this final subdivision plat complies with the City of Mt. Juliet requirement for each lot to have on-site sanitary sewer availability. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date Director of Public Works  
11.  Certificate of approval from Wilson County Emergency Communications E-911 office attesting that proposed street names and property addresses conform to E-911 policies. This signature shall be received prior to submitting for final city approval and recording. 
Certificate of Property Numbers and Street Names I hereby certify that the property numbers assigned herein conform to Wilson County Emergency Communications District (E-911) policies and the street name(s) conform to the Inter-local Agreement for non-duplication. ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Wilson County Emergency Communication District (E-911) Date  
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5-104; Amd. of 12-15-2011; Memo. of 12-20-2012) 
Sec. 5-105. - Form of dedication offer. 
    The form of the offer of irrevocable dedication, required by Subpart 5 of subsection 2.105.2, "Application Procedure and Requirements," of these regulations, shall be as reproduced in this section and approved by the City attorney. The form may be modified as required by the City attorney. Copies of this form may be obtained at the office of the enforcing officer. 
Form for Offer of Irrevocable Dedication AGREEMENT made this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , by ____________ and between ____________ , a ____________ , having its office and place of business at ____________ , Tennessee, hereinafter designated as the "local government." WHEREAS, the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled, ____________ , dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , and made by ____________ ; and WHEREAS, said map designates certain public improvements consisting of ____________ to be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee free and clear of all encumbrances and liens, pursuant to the requirements of the Planning Commission and the local government; and WHEREAS, the developer, simultaneously herewith, shall post a performance bond with the City for the construction, maintenance, and dedication of said improvements, if required; WHEREAS, the developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said improvements and land to the City more particularly described in Schedule ____________ attached hereto; WHEREAS, the developer has delivered deeds of conveyance to the City for the said land and improvements as described herein; NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of $1.00 lawful money of the United States paid by the City to the developer and other good and valuable consideration, it is mutually AGREED as follows: A. The developer herewith delivers to the City deeds of conveyance for the premises described in Schedule ____________ attached hereto, said delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City until the acceptance or rejection of such offer of dedication by the City. B. The developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is irrevocable and can be accepted by the City at the time. C. The developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of the land and improvements pursuant to the performance bond and the requirements of the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission and any ordinances, regulations, requirements, covenants, and agreements that may be imposed by the City with respect thereto and, upon acceptance by the City of the offer of dedication, furnish to the City a sworn statement certifying that the premises are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and shall furnish to the City a check for all necessary fees and taxes to record the deeds heretofore delivered. D. The developer agrees he shall have no claim, direct or implied, in the title of ownership of the improvements specified in this agreement when the improvements are accepted by the CITY. E. The developer agrees to establish a maintenance bond as a warranty and to be responsible for construction failures and defects in the subdivision for a time period specified in this agreement and addendum attached hereto. F. That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with land and shall be binding on all assigns, guarantees, successors, or heirs of the developer. ____________ , 20 ____________ ____________ Date Developer (CORPORATE SEAL) ATTEST: ____________ FOR THE CITY OF: ____________ BY: ____________ ____________ , 20 ____________ ACKNOWLEDGMENT: COPARTNERSHIP STATE OF TENNESSEE (COUNTY OF WILSON) SS: On this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , before me personally appeared ____________ , to me known and known to me to be one of the firm ____________ , described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and he thereupon acknowledged to me that he executed such instrument as and for the act and deed of said firm. CORPORATE STATE OF TENNESSEE (COUNTY OF WILSON) SS: On this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , before me personally appeared ____________ , to me known, who, being by me first duly sworn, did depose and said that he resides in ____________ ; that he is the ____________ of ____________ , the corporate seal affixed to said instrument is such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by order and authority of the Board of Directors of said corporation, and that he signed his name thereto by like order and authority. INDIVIDUAL  
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 5-105) 
Secs. 5-106-5-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6-101. - Usage. 
A.  For the purpose of these regulations certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. 
B.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; and the word "regulations" means "these regulations." 
C.  A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an unincorporated association of persons, such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied," as applies to any land or building, shall be construed to include "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 6-101) 
Sec. 6-102. - Words and terms defined. 
    25-year flood means a flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in 25 years. 
    100-year flood means a flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in 100 years, although it may occur in any year. It is based on statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed and analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the watershed. 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his authorized representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
    Architect means an architect or landscape architect certified and registered by the State Board of Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Title 62, Chapter 2, Tennessee Code, to practice in Tennessee. 
    Arterial street or road means a major public way intended to move traffic to and from major industrial areas or a route for traffic between communities or large areas and which has an average daily traffic count in excess of 3,000. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by public ways or by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or shorelines or waterways or a combination of such. 
    Bond means an instrument with a sum of money fixed as a penalty, binding the party(s) to pay the same: conditioned, however, that the payment of the penalty may be avoided by the performance by some one or more of the parties of certain acts. The term "bond" may include a variety of financial instruments including insurance bonds, letters-of-credit, escrow accounts and similar sureties. The amount and form of such surety instruments shall in all regards be sufficient to guarantee to the governing body or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication, free and clear of any encumbrances, of the incomplete portion of required improvements. Such surety instruments shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to legal counsel as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in these regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the surety instrument(s) and shall not exceed two years from date of final plat approval. Such surety instruments shall be approved by the governing body or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities as to amount and conditions. The Planning Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the governing body or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities extension of the completion date set forth in such instrument for a maximum period of one additional year. The governing body, or other agency ultimately responsible for acceptance of the facilities, may accept at any time during the period of such surety instruments a substitution of principal. 
    Building means sny structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind; the term includes a manufactured home. 
    Building site means land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building and interrelated buildings, together with all open space required to meet the provisions of any applicable zoning ordinance, which is located on a lot that has been lawfully created and meets all criteria of the local government for the intended use. 
    Capital improvements program means a proposed schedule of future projects, listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of the physical assets of the community are included. 
    Collector street or road means a major public way intended to move traffic from local streets to arterial routes. Collector routes serve a neighborhood or large subdivision(s), and normally have an average daily traffic count ranging from 1,001 to 3,000. 
    Common elements means any portion of a condominium which is held in common ownership by owners of condominium units. These elements may be either general common elements or limited common elements, as defined below. 
(1)  General common elements means any of the common elements of a condominium which are held in joint ownership by all owners of the condominium. 
(2)  Limited common elements means any of the common elements of a condominium which are reserved for use by the owner of a particular condominium unit or group of units. 
    Conceptual plat means written and graphic documents that indicate in a conceptual form the proposed pattern of open spaces, streets and building lots within a subdivision preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final subdivision plat, in the case of minor subdivisions). 
    Condominium means a form of ownership of less than the whole of a building or system of buildings under the provisions of Title 66, Chapter 27, Tennessee Code, which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing and recordation of divided interests in real property, whether the division is vertical or horizontal. 
    Condominium subdivision means the subdivision of property through the establishment of a condominium or horizontal property regime. 
    Condominium unit means a space conveyed by separate title and located within a condominium structure. 
    Conservation land means any parcel or area of undeveloped land conserved in its natural state for perpetuity through deeds or other legal means. 
    Construction plan means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with requirements of the Planning Commission. 
    Contractor means an individual, firm, or corporation with whom an owner or authorized agent has executed a work agreement. 
    County environmentalist means an agent designated to administer local and/or state health regulations. 
    Cul-de-sac means a minor street having only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement; definition includes: dead-end, turn-around, or turn-about. 
    Design specifications means written descriptions of a technical nature of materials, equipment, construction systems, standards, and workmanship required for a project intended for local government ownership or maintenance. 
    Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his authorized representative. 
    Drainageway means any stream, watercourse, channel, ditch, or similar physiographic feature draining water from the land. 
    Drainageway buffer means an area adjacent to a drainageway that shall remain undisturbed except as may be necessary to accommodate: 
(1)  Roads, provided they cross at a horizontal angle of at least 60 degrees. 
(2)  Utilities and their easements. 
(3)  Greenways, pedestrian paths, and their easements. 
Drainageway buffers shall be measured perpendicular to the flow of the drainageway and from the edge of the drainageway banks, except when no drainageway banks exist, in which case the centerline of the drainageway swale shall be used. 
    Dwelling unit means a room, or rooms connected together constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease on a daily, weekly, monthly, or longer basis; physically separated from any other room(s) or dwelling units which may be in the same structure; and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    Enforcing officer means such person designated by the chief executive officer to be responsible for enforcing the provisions of these regulations. 
    Engineer means an engineer certified and registered by the State Board of Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Title 62, Chapter 2, Tennessee Code, to practice in Tennessee. 
    Equal degree of encroachment means the delineation of floodway limits so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. This is determined by considering the hydraulic conveyance of the floodplain along both sides of a stream for a significant reach. 
    Escrow means a fiduciary agreement with the local government in lieu of actual performance and intended to assure performance. An escrow account may be provided as a bond subject to agreement of the governing body. 
    External subdivision boundary means all points along the periphery of a subdivision. 
    Final subdivision plat means the final map or drawing and accompanying materials, described in these regulations, on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved by the commission, is recorded with the county register of deeds. 
    Flag lot generally includes any design layout that is includes any, but not necessarily all of the following, and possesses or is characterized by: 
(1)  A "squarish" or rectangular parcel of land whose primary access is via a long narrow strip leading from a main road and passing by other lots/dwellings. This access area is often, but not always, a common shared driveway; 
(2)  Almost always the "pole," is narrower than the minimum lot width required for the applicable zoning district. It is often only wide enough for individual vehicular access; 
(3)  Is a lot that sits behind lots which face directly onto a public street, that have direct street access. 
This layout gives the impression that dwellings on a flag lot are "stacked" behind a dwelling on the front lot, creating the unusual condition of the front of one house looking directly at the back of another house (see graphic illustration). In general, flag lots shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, except as otherwise noted in section 4-102.105 of these regulations. 

Flag Lot 
    Flood means a temporary rise in stream level that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Flood frequency means the statistically determined average for how often a specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood hazard or floodprone area means the maximum area of the floodplain that, on the average, is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of being flooded in any year). 
    Flood hazard boundary map means an official map on which the boundaries of the floodplain areas having special flood hazards have been delineated. 
    Floodplain means a land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, bay, or lake which is likely to be flooded. It is composed of a floodway and floodway fringe. 
    Floodplain management program means the overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, building code regulations, health regulations, zoning ordinance regulations, and these subdivision regulations. 
    Flood profile means a graph showing the water surface elevation or height or a particular flood event for any point along the longitudinal course of a stream. The flood profile is determined through the use of standard open-channel hydraulic calculations. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate potential flood damage to lands; water facilities, sanitary facilities, and other utilities; structures; and contents of buildings; and which prevent pollution of floodwaters from such natural or manmade sources. 
    Floodway means the stream channel and adjacent overbank areas required to carry and safely discharge the 100-year flood without increasing flood levels more than one foot above natural flood levels. 
    Floodway encroachment limits means the lines marking the limits of floodways on official federal, state, and local floodplain maps. 
    Floodway fringe means the area adjoining a watercourse which, although not lying within a floodway, has been or may hereafter be covered by a 100-year flood. 
    Frontage means that side of a lot abutting a public way ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. 
    General plan means the official statement of the Planning Commission which sets forth major policies concerning future development of the jurisdictional area and meeting the provisions set forth in sections 13-3-301, 13-3-302, and 13-4-102, Tennessee Code. 
    Governing body means the chief legislative body of any government. 
    Governmental agency means any public body other than the governing body. 
    Governmental representative means an outside person or designated local official or employee authorized to act on behalf of the governing body in making determinations regarding legal, public works, planning, community development, or other public business. 
    Grade means the slope of a public way specified in percentage terms. 
    Highway, limited access, means a freeway or expressway providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property(s) or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the trafficway, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway. 
    Horizontal property act means "The Tennessee Horizontal Property Act," as codified in Title 66, Chapter 2, Tennessee Code. 
    Impervious surface means a surface resulting from human activity that obstructs or prevents infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surface includes, but is not restricted to: buildings and rooftops; walkways, driveways, and parking areas that are paved or compacted by pedestrian or vehicular traffic; solid decks and patios; pavement; recreation facilities that are paved or compacted; and any other paved, compacted, or partially impervious surface. For purposes of calculating the percentage of impervious surface coverage, the area of the perimeter of the lot or parcel shall be regarded as the actual area of the lot or parcel. The water surface of a lake, pond, or swimming pool is not considered impervious. A wooden slatted deck is not considered impervious if the area below the deck is treated to prevent erosion and compacting of the soil below the deck. "Pervious" asphalt and "pervious" concrete are considered impervious if the surface's perviousness is expected to decrease under normal use or its subbase is compacted, as determined by the City Engineer. 
    Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the appropriate governmental representative. 
    Internal subdivision boundary means all points within a subdivision which do not constitute external boundaries. 
    Joint ownership means joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the same owner for the purpose of imposing subdivision regulations. 
    Jurisdictional area means planning boundary(s) established in keeping with sections 13-3-102, 13-3-201, and 13-3-301, Tennessee Code. 
    Karst feature means an area of irregular limestone in which erosion has produced fissures, sinkholes, underground streams, and caverns. 
    Land development plan means an element of the general plan that sets out a plan or scheme of future land usage. 
    Land surveyor means a land surveyor certified and registered by the State Board of Land Survey Examiners, pursuant to Title 62, Chapter 18, Tennessee Code, to practice in Tennessee. 
    Legal counsel means the person designated by the governing body to provide legal assistance for the administration of these and other regulations. 
    Lot means a tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or for building development. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two public ways. 
    Lot improvement means any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object or improvement of the land on which such items are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
    Major street or road means a public way that is classified as a collector or arterial pubic way according to these regulations or by the major street or road plan for the jurisdictional area. 
    Major street or road plan means the plan adopted by the Planning Commission, pursuant to section 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code, showing, among other things, "the general location, character, and extent of public ways.... (and) the removal, relocation, extension, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment or change of use of existing public ways...." 
    Minor street or road means a public way that is not classified as an arterial or collector. 
    National Flood Insurance Program means a program established by the U.S. Government in the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and expanded in the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, in order to provide flood insurance at rates made affordable through a federal subsidy in local political jurisdictions which adopt and enforce floodplain management programs meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. The program regulations are found at 24 CFR ch. X, subch. B. 
    Off site means any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the real property. 
    Performance bond. See Bond. 
    Perimeter street means any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts on only one side. 
    Planning commission means a public planning body established pursuant to Title 13, Chapters 2 or 5, Tennessee Code, to execute a partial or full planning program within authorized area limits. 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
    Premises means a tract of land together with any buildings or structures which may be located thereon. 
    Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which government responsibility is established. 
    Public way means any publicly owned street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way which provides for movement of pedestrians or vehicles. 
    Reach means a hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach generally includes the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a manmade area or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings typically would constitute a reach. 
    Regulatory flood means the 100-year flood. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation means the elevation of the regulatory flood, plus one foot of freeboard to provide a safety factor. 
    Resubdivision means a change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat altering the lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a public way crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer line, or for another similar use. The usage of the term "right-of-way," for land platting purposes, shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
    Sale or lease means any immediate or future transfer of ownership, including contract of sale or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, or other written instrument. 
    Same ownership means ownership by the same person, corporation, firm entity, partnership, or unincorporated association or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partner, associate, or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
    Setback means the distance between a building wall and the nearest public way right-of-way. 
    Special flood hazard map means the official map designated by the Federal Insurance Administrator to identify floodplain areas having special flood hazards. 
    Staff assistant to the Planning Commission means the person(s) employed by the local governing body to assist the Planning Commission in planning and land use regulation activities. 
    Start of construction means, for purposes of subdivision control, any alteration of the original surface area of the land, from and after the date of adoption of these regulations. 
    Structure means anything constructed above or below ground. 
    Subdivider means any person who: 
(1)  Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plot in a subdivision; 
(3)  Engages, directly or indirectly, or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plot in a subdivision; or 
(4)  Is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other divisions requiring new street or utility construction, or any division of less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of resubdividing or to the land or area subdivided. (See sections 13-3-401 and 13-4-301, Tennessee Code.) 
    Subdivision, major subdivision, means all subdivisions not classified as minor or two-lot subdivisions, including but not limited to, subdivisions of seven or more lots, or subdivisions of any size requiring any new or improved road, the extension of government facilities, or the creation of any public improvements, or containing any floodprone area. 
    Subdivision, minor subdivision, means any subdivision creating a maximum of six lots or less fronting on an existing public road which: 
(a)  Does not involve any new road to give access to interior lots or parcels; 
(b)  Does not involve the extension of public sewerage or water lines or the creation of new drainage easements; 
(c)  Will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or of adjoining property; 
(d)  Will not create any new or residual parcels which do not satisfy the requirements of this ordinance or other applicable local and state controls; and 
(e)  Is not entirely or substantially located in a flood hazard area as defined by section 2-101.4 of these subdivision regulations. 
    Subdivision, two-lot (or partition), means a subdivision of land into no more than two lots and meeting the criteria a through e for minor subdivisions shall be considered a two-lot subdivision and may be approved administratively by planning staff. Those subdivisions meeting these criteria may be endorsed in writing on the plat by the secretary of the Planning Commission or by another designee of the regional Planning Commission without the approval of the regional Planning Commission, upon certification by planning staff that the subdivision complies with local regulations governing the subdivision of land and provided further, that no request for variance from such regulations has been requested. A two-lot subdivision shall not require the extension of any street or public utilities. Two-lot subdivisions that require a variance or waiver from these regulations shall be deemed to be a minor or a major subdivision. 
    Subdivision agent means any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or developer in selling, leasing, or developing or offering to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or plot in a subdivision, except in an instance where only legal counsel is provided. 
    Temporary improvement means any improvement built and maintained by a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the surety for completion of required improvements. 
    Water impoundment means any lake, pond, or other body of water, either natural or manmade. 
    Water supply means surface water used as a source of water for drinking, culinary or food processing purposes after treatment. 
    Water surface elevation means the heights in relation to mean-sea-level expected to be reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies at pertinent points in the floodplain. Also the level of natural flows or collectors or water which may be expected to be found above or below surface. 
    Watershed means the land area that drains runoff to a surface water body or watercourse. Also called a drainage basin, a watershed includes hills, lowlands, and the body of water into which the runoff drains. 
    Watershed buffer means an undisturbed area of natural vegetation adjacent to a drainageway, watercourse, or water impoundment within a watershed through which stormwater runoff is intended to flow in a diffuse manner so that it does not become channelized and infiltration of runoff and filtering of pollutants can take place. 
    Zoning ordinance or resolution means a statute, legally adopted pursuant to Title 13, Chapters 4 or 7, Tennessee Code, for the purpose of regulating by district, land development or use for a designated area. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1997, § 6-102) 
Part B - ZONING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ord. No. 2001-29, 10-8-2001. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform. Capitalization and expression of numbers have been made consistent throughout the Land Development Code. Additions made for clarity such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-101. - Title and purpose. 
    1-101.1 Long title. An ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by section 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code, to provide for the establishment of zoning districts within the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee: to regulate within such districts the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot occupancy, the size of open spaces, the density of population, and the uses of land, buildings, and other structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities and similar purposes to include special districts for areas subject to flooding and areas developed as a planned unit; to provide regulations governing nonconforming uses and structures; to provide for a Board of [Zoning] Appeals and for its powers and duties; to provide for permits; to establish and provide for the collection of fees; to provide for the administration of this ordinance and for the official whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions thereof; to provide penalties for the violation of this ordinance; and to provide for conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
    1-101.2 Short title. This ordinance may be cited as this zoning ordinance of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
    1-101.3 Repeal. The existing zoning regulations of the City of Mt. Juliet (Ordinance No. 86-21, as amended) are hereby repealed. The adoption of this ordinance, however, shall not affect nor prevent any pending or future prosecution of an action to abate any existing violation of said existing regulations, as amended, if the violation is also a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-102. - Legislative enactment. 
    Whereas, sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, of the Tennessee Code, empower the City to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment, and 
    Whereas, the Board of Commissioners deem it necessary, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City to enact such an ordinance, and 
    Whereas, the Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the provisions of section 13-7-202, of the Tennessee Code, has appointed a Planning Commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, and 
    Whereas, the Planning Commission has divided the City into zoning districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, and 
    Whereas, the Planning Commission has given reasonable consideration among other things, to the character of the zoning districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate uses for the land throughout the City, and 
    Whereas, the Planning Commission has submitted its final report to the Board of Commissioners, and 
    Whereas, the Board of Commissioners has given due public notice of hearings related to zoning districts, regulations, and restrictions, and has held public hearings, and 
    Whereas, all the requirements of sections 13-7-202 through 13-7-210, of the Tennessee Code, with regard to preparation of the report of the Planning Commission and subsequent action of the Board of Commissioners have been met; 
    Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee: 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-103. - Intent and purpose. 
    This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 13, of the Tennessee Code, for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the people; 
B.  To divide the City into zoning districts restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, business, commercial, manufacturing, and other specified uses; 
C.  To protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, business, commercial, and manufacturing areas within the City, and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas; 
D.  To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property; 
E.  To regulate the intensity of open spaces surrounding buildings that are necessary to provide adequate light and air and protect the public health; 
F.  To establish building lines and the location of buildings designated for residential, business, commercial, manufacturing, or other uses within such lines; 
G.  To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform; 
H.  To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures which are incompatible with the character of development or the permitted uses within specified zoning districts; 
I.  To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder; 
J.  To limit congestion in the public streets and so protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles; 
K.  To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety; comfort, and general welfare; 
L.  To prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures so far as is possible and appropriate in each zoning district by regulating the use and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them; 
M.  To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City; 
N.  To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses of land, buildings and structures which do not conform to the standards of the districts in which they are respectively located and which are adversely affecting the development and taxable value of property in each zoning district; 
O.  To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein; 
P.  To protect and in general allow for the beneficial uses of property in a like manner to that which was permitted under previous zoning ordinances; 
Q.  These general purposes include the specific purposes stated in the various articles throughout this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-103) 
Sec. 1-104. - Exceptions. 
    1-104.1 Previously issued permits. Building permits, certificates of occupancy, certifications of zoning compliance, use and occupancy permits, or other zoning permits lawfully issued before the effective date of the zoning ordinance or subsequent amendment shall remain in effect provided that such activity or building or other structure for which such certificate or permit was issued is substantially established or constructed within one year from the date of issuance of such certificate or permit. In the event that the activity or construction of such building or other structure is not substantially underway and being diligently pursued within the one year period following issuance of a certificate or permit, then such certificate or permit shall automatically lapse and the provisions of this ordinance shall apply. 
    1-104.2 Previously approved exceptions. Whenever the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the zoning ordinance [from which this ordinance is derived] has authorized any use that is not permitted as of right by issuing a variance, exception, or permit to locate in a district, such authorization may be continued, extended, enlarged, or structurally altered only as provided herein. 
1.  Renewals. Where no limitation as to duration of the use was imposed at the time of authorization, such use may be continued. Where such use was authorized subject to a term of years, such use may be continued until the expiration of the term, and thereafter, the agency or similarly constituted agency that originally authorized such use may, in appropriate cases, extend the period of continuance for one or more terms of not more than five years each. The agency may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to minimize adverse effects of such use on the character of the neighborhood. 
2.  Change of use. In no event shall any use that is not permitted as of right be changed, and no agency shall be empowered to permit such use to change, except to a conforming use or a nonconforming use as provided for in Article XIV, section 14-102.6, Change of Nonconforming Use. For the purposes of this section, a change of use is a change to another use either under the same activity type or any other activity type or major class of activity; however, a change in occupancy or ownership shall not, by itself, constitute a change in use. 
    1-104.3 Alteration of existing buildings and other structures. All structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings or structures occurring after the effective date of this ordinance and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this ordinance which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses, or land shall be located. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-105. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-106. - Relationship to other laws and private restrictions. 
A.  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height or bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or any other law, or ordinance, of any kind, the provisions which are more restrictive shall apply. 
B.  This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this ordinance to the extent that they are more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-107. - Ordinance provisions do not constitute permit. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed to be a consent, license, or permit to use any property or locate, construct, or maintain any building, structure, or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-108. - Provisions are cumulative. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are cumulative with any additional limitations imposed by all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter appearing in this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-109. - Separability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Commissioners of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, that the several provisions of this ordinance are separable in accordance with the following: 
A.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this ordinance invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment. 
B.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-109) 
Sec. 1-110. - Application of regulations. 
    No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed, maintained or razed and no land use commenced or continued within the City, except as specifically or by necessary implication, authorized by this ordinance. Conditional uses are allowed only on permit granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon finding that the specified conditions exist. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized, except as prohibited specifically or by necessary implication. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 1-109) 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2-101. - Rules for construction of language. 
    In the construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
A.  The particular shall control the general. 
B.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
C.  The word "may" is permissive. 
D.  The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" or "parcel." 
E.  The word "structure" includes all other structures, or parts thereof, of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
F.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control. 
G.  The word "permitted" or words "permitted as of right," means permitted without meeting the requirements for a conditional use permit. 
H.  The words "permitted with supplemental provisions" mean an activity, use or structure is permitted subject to a finding by the zoning administrator that the specific standards indicated for the use in question have been met. 
I.  The words "conditionally permitted" or "permitted by conditional use permit" mean permitted subject to the requirements for a conditional use by special permit pursuant to article XIV, section 14-106, Conditional use permits of this ordinance, and all other applicable provisions. 
J.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
K.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
"And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
"Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
L.  All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, 1-12-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-102. - General definitions. 
    2-102.1 Application. Except where definitions are specifically included in various articles and sections, words in the text or tables of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. Where words have not been defined, the standard dictionary definition shall prevail. 
    2-102.2 Terms Defined. 
    Abutting [means] having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way or easement. 
    Accessory [means] an activity or structure that is customarily associated with and is appropriate incidental and subordinate to a principal activity and/or structure and located on the same zone lot, except as provided for under the provisions for accessory off-street parking. 
    Accessory apartment [means] a temporary accessory dwelling unit located in a one-family residence that is subordinate to the principal one-family dwelling in terms of size and appearance and which apartment does not substantially alter the character and appearance of the residential structure or its conformity with the character of the neighborhood. All accessory apartments are subject to the specific standards set forth in article III, section 3-105.1. 
    Activity [means] the performance of a function or operation which constitutes the use of land. 
    Activity-principal. (See Principal activity .) 
    Actual construction [means] the excavation of a site and/or the placement of building materials in conjunction with the construction of a building or other structure. 
    Adult entertainment business [means] a commercial enterprise that offers as a substantial portion of its stock in trade sexually oriented material, devices, or paraphernalia or specified sexual activities or any combination or form thereof, whether printed, filmed, recorded or live and which restricts or purports to restrict admission to adults or to any class of adults; or a business establishment advertising and offering for sale and/or rental adult clothing, lingerie, toys, or novelty items; or any tattoo and/or body-piercing establishment. "Adult entertainment business" includes, but is not limited to: 
(A)  "Adult book stores" which means any corporation, partnership or business of any kind which has a substantial portion of its stock in trade; books, videos, movies, magazines or other periodicals and which offers, sells or rents for a fee: 
(1)  Any sexually oriented material which is available for viewing by patrons on the premises by means of the operation of movie machines, electronic and digital devices, or slide projectors; or 
(2)  Any sexually oriented material which has a substantial portion of its contents devoted to the pictorial depiction of sadism, masochism or bestiality; or 
(3)  Any sexually oriented material which has as its principal theme the depiction of sexual activity by, or lascivious exhibition of, the uncovered genitals, pubic region or buttocks of children who are or appear to be under 18 years of age; 
(B)  "Adult motion picture theaters" which means an enclosed building used for presenting films which are distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities for observation by patrons therein; and 
(C)  "Adult shows" or "adult peep shows" which includes all adult shows, exhibitions, performances or presentations which contain acts or depictions of specified sexual activities. 
(D)  "Adult stores" offering a substantial portion of their stock in trade, the sale of 'adult' clothing, lingerie, toys, or novelty items with a sexual theme or nature. 
(E)  "Tattoo and body piercing establishments" offering skin-penetrating adornment procedures as regulated by the State of Tennessee. 
(F)  "Adult club" includes establishments (regardless of whether the establishment identifies itself as a "private club," "adult club," "late night club," etc.) whose purpose is to allow for the viewing and/or engaging in of live sexual acts distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, including "adult entertainment" as defined in TCA § 7-51-1401. 
    Alley [means] a public way intended to provide only secondary vehicular access to abutting properties. 
    Apartment hotel. (See Lodginghouse .) 
    Attached [means] an enclosure having continuing walls, roof and floor. 
    Building [means] any structure which: 
(A)  Is permanently affixed to the land; 
(B)  Has a roof supported by columns or walls; 
(C)  Is intended for the shelter or enclosure of goods or persons; and 
(D)  Is bounded by either open area or the lot lines of a zone lot. 
A building shall not include such structures as billboards, fences, radio or TV towers, or structures not normally accessible for human use, such as gas storage tanks, smoke stacks, grain elevators, exposed industrial equipment (i.e., oil or chemical processing apparatus) or similar structures. 
    Building, principal. (See Principal building .) 
    Bulk describes the size of buildings or other structures, and their relationship to each other and to open areas and lot lines, and therefore includes: 
(A)  The size (including height and floor area) of buildings or other structures; 
(B)  The area of the zoning lot upon which a residential building is located, and the number of dwelling units within such buildings in relation to the area of the zoning lot; 
(C)  The location of exterior walls of buildings or other structures in relation to lot lines, other walls of the same building, legally required windows, or other structures; and 
(D)  All open areas relating to buildings or other structures and their relationship thereto. 
    Central sewage collection and treatment system [means] a wastewater collection and/or treatment system owned and operated by a public or quasi-public organization and approved by all appropriate licensing and oversight agencies. This term shall not be construed to include any type of privately owned and operated individual disposal system to include septic or other similar systems. 
    Child care [means] the provision of supplemental parental care and supervision: 
(A)  For a nonrelated child or children; 
(B)  On a regular basis; 
(C)  For less than 24 hours a day; and 
(D)  Under license issued by the Tennessee Department of Human Services. 
As used in this ordinance, the term is not intended to include babysitting services of a casual, nonrecurring nature or in a child's own home. Likewise, the term is not intended to include cooperative reciprocative child care by a group of parents, in their domiciles or the keeping of four or less preteenage children, which is an activity regulated as a minor home occupation by this ordinance and requires no licensing by the State of Tennessee. 
    Commercial complex [means] a commercial complex shall mean: 
(A)  Two or more buildings proposed for occupancy by commercial activities constructed or to be constructed upon one zone lot; or 
(B)  Two or more principal commercial uses or occupancies located upon one zone lot. 
    Common open space [means] a parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water within the site designated, designed and intended for use or enjoyment of the occupants of said development. "Common open space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the occupants of such development. 
    Completely enclosed refers to a building or other structure having a roof, and separated on all sides from the adjacent open area or from other buildings or other structures, by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows or entrance and exit doors normally provided for persons, goods or vehicles. 
    Conditional use [means] a conditional use is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning districts as conditional uses, only when specific provisions for such use is made in this ordinance. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance, conditional uses shall be construed as synonymous with special exceptions, as controlled by section 13-7-206, Tennessee Code. 
    Curb level [means] the mean of the elevations of the side lot lines extended to the street line. 
    Curbline [means] the line formed by a curb extending along its roadbed or street bed. 
    Density [means] the ratio of the number of dwelling units located on a lot to the horizontal area of the lot, expressed in units per acre. 
    Development [means] any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavating, or drilling operations. Agricultural activities such as plowing or cultivating and gardening activities are not included in this definition of development. 
    Development area (minimum) [means] the minimum amount of land area required for each dwelling unit located upon a zone lot. The minimum lot size provision shall apply to all lots within the district. However, the minimum development area provision may require a lot larger than the minimum lot size where the intended intensity of use would so require. 
    Dormitory [means] a facility providing group living quarters for a student body, or other group as an associated use to a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, or other similar use when not located on the same site as the principal associated use. Rooming units are not equipped with kitchen facilities, although one or more dwelling unit may be provided for occupancy by staff. This term is intended to include university dormitories as well as fraternity or sorority houses. 
    Dwelling [means] a building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including transient occupancy. 
    Dwelling unit [means] one or more rooms that are physically arranged, designed, used or intended to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family, and that include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof. 
    Easement [means] a grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for use by, the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
    Family [means] one of the following: 
(A)  An individual, or two or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single independent, nonprofit housekeeping unit, together with incidental domestic servants and temporary nonpaying guests. 
(B)  A group of not more than six unrelated persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
(C)  Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons, as defined by Title VIII, of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any family unit as defined herein. 
    Floods. (See article VIII, section 8-202, for all definitions pertaining to floods and floodplain provisions.) 
    Funeral homes/funeral parlors means an establishment that is primarily engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals (i.e. providing facilities for wakes, arranging transportation for the dead, selling caskets and related merchandise. Other services to include embalming and cremation. 
    Hazardous occupancy [means] the principal use of a building or structure, or any portion thereof, that involves the manufacture, use or storage of highly combustible, flammable or explosive materials or materials that constitute a high fire hazard and as further defined as a type "H" occupancy in section 407, Standard Building Code. 
    Home occupation [means] an occupation or business activity which results in a product or service and which: is conducted, in whole or in part, in either the dwelling or an accessory building normally associated with permitted uses; is conducted by at least one family member occupying the residence; and is clearly subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling and premises. Home occupations do not include garage sales, yard sales, Christmas bazaars, or home parties which are held for the purpose of the sale or distribution of goods or services. However, if such sales and/or parties are held more than six times in any calendar year; or operate in excess of 24 cumulative days in a calendar year, such sales and/or parties shall be considered a home occupation. 
    Incidental alterations [means] modifications to a building or structure that meet the following criteria: 
(A)  Changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in a nonconforming residential building, provided that no additional dwelling units are created; 
(2)  A minor addition to the exterior of a residential building, such as an open porch; 
(3)  Alterations of interior non-load-bearing partitions in all other types of buildings or other structures; or 
(4)  Replacement of, or minor changes in, capacity of utility pipes, ducts, or conduits. 
(B)  Changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or other structure, limited to the following examples or others of similar character or extent: 
(1)  Making windows or doors in exterior walls; 
(2)  Replacement of building facades having non-load-bearing capacity; or 
(3)  Strengthening the floor load-bearing capacity, in not more than ten percent of the total floor area, to permit the accommodation of specialized machinery or equipment. 
    Land with minor improvements [means] a tract of land that contains improvements including buildings or other structures having a total assessed valuation of $10,000.00 or less. 
    Landholder [means] the legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in a planned unit development. The holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than 50 years in duration, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest may be considered a "landholder" for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Livestock means cattle, sheep, swine, poultry and other animals or foul, which are being produced primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption or horses. 
    Lot [means] a tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Lot area [means] the horizontal area included within the boundary lines of a lot. 
    Lot, corner [means] a lot situated at the intersection of two streets. 
    Lot, interior [means] any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, through [means] any lot that adjoins two street lines opposite to each other and parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel to each other. Any portion of a through lot that is not or could not be bounded by two such opposite street lines and two straight lines intersecting such street lines shall be subject to the regulations for an interior lot. 
    Lot coverage [means] that portion of a zone lot which when viewed directly from above, could be covered by a building or any part of a building. 
    Lot frontage [means] the front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under yards. 
    Lot line [means] a boundary of a zone lot. 
    Lot line equivalent [means] a straight line established for the purpose of determining the location and depth or width of a required yard and which either: 
(A)  Joins points specified in these regulations; or 
(B)  Is an extension of a street line or lot line. 
    Lot measurements. 
(A)  Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(B)  Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines of each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided however that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac, where the 80 percent requirements shall not apply. 
    Lot of record [means] a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Manufactured home. (See Dwelling, manufactured home .) 
    Manufactured home space [means] a designated area within a manufactured home park for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single home. 
    Mixed-use development. In the context used in Table 6-102A, Section I Residential Activities, mixed-use development shall consist solely of both commercial uses and multi-family housing. The incorporation of single-family housing and/or other uses shall constitute a traditional PUD. 
    Modular home. (See Dwelling, prefabricated .) 
    Noncomplying [means]: 
(A)  Any lot of record which does not contain sufficient lot area to conform to the area requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located; 
(B)  Any lawful building or other structure which does not comply with any one or more of the applicable bulk regulations; or 
(C)  Any lawful use other than a nonconforming use, which does not comply with any part or any one or more of the applicable regulations pertaining to: 
(a)  Location along a district boundary; or 
(b)  Accessory off-street parking and loading either on the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of any subsequent amendment. 
    Nonconforming sign [means] a lawful sign existing at the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance that does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Nonconforming use [means] a lawful use of a building or other structure other than a sign or of a tract of land which does not conform to any one or more of the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of any subsequent amendment. 
    Occupant [means,] for the purposes of this ordinance, an occupant is a single legal entity who holds possession of a property, or portion thereof, and either an owner or a tenant. 
    Occupancy [means] the principal use of land for the performance of a function or operation by a person, firm, corporation, or association as a single legal entity. For the purposes of this ordinance there shall be only one principal use of land by any one person, firm, corporation, association or legal entity. 
    Party wall [means] a wall on an interior lot line, used or adopted for joint service between two buildings; such walls shall extend from the foundation to the underside of roof sheathing without openings which would permit the spread of fire from one building to another and shall fully comply with fire and all other provisions and standards established for such walls in the Standard Building Code. 
    Permanent access easement [means] a perpetual easement guaranteeing right of ingress and egress to and from the premises of a lot owner to a street appurtenant to the land of the owner. Any permanent access easement utilized as the sole means of providing legal access to two or more parcels of land shall be: 
(1)  So designed as to ensure continuing adequate ingress and egress for emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Ensured adequate continuing maintenance by an owners' association or similar organization; and 
(3)  Constructed such that the portion of the permanent access easement intended for ingress and egress complies with the standards of a public street as specified in the subdivision regulations. In any instance where a permanent access easement is located within a PUD district, the design standard shall be as approved in the development plans required therefor. 
    Person [means] an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
    Planned unit development [means] a relatively large, interrelated development adhering to a master development plan and located on a single tract of land, or on two or more tracts of land which may be separated only by a street or other right-of-way. 
    Prefabricated dwelling. (See Dwelling, prefabricated .) 
    Principal activity [means] an activity which fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity. 
    Principal building [means] a building which contains the principal activity or use of the zone lot on which the building is situated. 
    Rear yard [means] a yard extending the full width of the lot between the principal structure and the rear lot line. 
    Required yard. (See Yard, required .) 
    Residence [means] a building or part of a building containing one or more dwelling units or rooming units, including one-family or two-family houses, multiple dwellings, boarding or roominghouses, or apartment hotels; However, residences do not include: 
(A)  Such transient accommodations as transient hotels, motels, tourist homes, or similar establishments; 
(B)  Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, monasteries, or convents, or similar establishments containing group living or sleeping accommodations; 
(C)  Nurses' residences, sanitariums, nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, or other sleeping or living accommodations in community facility buildings or portions of buildings used for community facilities; or 
(D)  In a mixed building, that part of the building used for any nonresidential uses, except uses accessory to residential uses. 
    Residential [means] pertaining to a residence. 
    Residential building [means] any building utilized solely for residential activities and their accessory functions. 
    Right-of-way line [means the] right-of-way line is a line contiguous with a lot line dividing a lot from an abutting street. 
    Roominghouse. (See Lodginghouse .) 
    Rooming unit [means] one or more rooms that are arranged, designed, used or intended for occupancy by one or more persons, and that do not include lawful cooking space or lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof. 
    Setback line [means] a line which establishes the minimum distance the principal building must be setback from the street line. 
    Sexually oriented material means any book, article, magazine, publication or written matter of any kind, drawing, etching, painting, photograph, motion picture film or sound recording which depicts sexual activity, actual or simulated, involving human beings or animals, or which exhibits uncovered human genitals or pubic region in a lewd or lascivious manner or which exhibits male genitals in a discernibly turgid state if completely uncovered. 
    Single ownership means a proprietary interest of a landholder as defined herein. 
    Skin-penetrating body adornment procedure [means]: 
(1)  A process that involves piercing or entering the skin or the mucous membrane of an individual for the purpose of inserting pigmented patterns, jewelry or other forms of body decoration. 
(2)  "Skin-penetrating body adornment procedure" includes tattooing and body-piercing. 
(3)  "Skin-penetrating body adornment procedure" does not include piercing of an ear using a properly disinfected ear piercing gun and single use studs or clutches. 
    Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(A)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areole; or 
(B)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activity means activities, services or performances that include the following sexual activities and/or the exhibition of the following anatomical areas: 
(A)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(B)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy cunnilingus, fellatio or any excretory function or the representation thereof; 
(C)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; 
(D)  Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; 
(E)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(F)  Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(G)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or an irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in [subsections] (A) through (F) above. 
    Street [means] a publicly maintained right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line [means] a lot line dividing a lot from an abutting street. 
    Structure [means] any object constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Substantial portion [means]: 
(1)  At least 15 percent of the stock in the establishment or on display consists of matters or devices depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities; or 
(2)  At least 15 percent of the usable floor area is used for the display or storage of matters or devices depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities; or 
(3)  At least 15 percent of the establishment's gross retail sales or revenues are derived from the sale, lease or rental of matters or devices depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities. 
    Tattoo or body piercing establishment means any establishment where a skin-penetrating body adornment procedure is performed. 
    Use [means] the performance of a function or operation which constitutes the use of land. 
    Use and occupancy permit [means] a written permit issued by the Zoning Administrator required before occupying or commencing to use any building or other structure or any zone lot. 
    Vehicular use area [means] any group surface area, except public right-of-way, used by any type vehicle whether moving or at rest for the purpose of driving, parking, loading, storage or display (automotive sale lots). Also included are activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, filling stations and grocery stores. 
    Yard [means] an open space on the same lot with a building or building group lying between the front, rear, or side wall of a building and the nearest lot line, unoccupied except for projections and the specific minor uses or structures allowed in such open space under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Yard, diagram [means] the yard diagram set forth in illustration 2-102.2A can be found on file in the Planning Department shall be used in clarifying the meaning of the "line" and "yard" definitions of this ordinance. 
    Yard, front [means] a yard extending along the full length of a front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, a yard at least the full depth required for a front yard in these regulations, and extending along the full length of a street line shall be considered a front yard. At least one such yard shall be designated for each corner lot, at least two such yards shall be designated for each through lot, and each through corner lot. 
    Yard, required [means] that part of a zone lot extending open and unobstructed from the lowest level to the sky along the entire length of a lot line, and from a lot line equivalent for a depth of width set forth in the applicable regulations. Only such obstructions, projections and specific minor uses or structures allowed in such open space under the provisions of this ordinance may be permitted in any required yard. 

    Yard, side [means] a yard extending along a side lot line from the required front yard to the required rear yard. In the case of a corner lot, any yard which abuts a street line and which is not designated a front yard shall be considered a side yard. In the case of a through lot, side yards shall extend between the required front yards, except when such corner lots are required by these regulations specifically to have more than one front yard. A side yard abutting a street shall be at least one-half of the width of the front yard. 
    Zone or zoning lot [means,] for the purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of contiguous land which is or may be developed or utilized under one ownership as a unit site for a use or group of uses and which is of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
(A)  A single lot of record; 
(B)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(C)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of records; 
(D)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
For the purpose of this definition, the ownership of a zone lot shall be deemed to include a lease of not less than 50 years duration. 
    Zoning map [means] a map or series of maps and special overlays (the official copy being maintained by the City Recorder) showing districts and special districts that are established under the provisions of and, hereby, being a part of this ordinance. 
    Zoning permit [means] a general term referring to a permit required to construct, reconstruct, alter or use any building or other structure or any zone lot and including the following specific permits required by this ordinance: 
(A)  Building permit. 
(B)  Use and occupancy permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, 1-12-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 2-102; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 1, 1-14-2013; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 1, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2015-41, § 1, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-103. - Definition of land use activities. 
    The definitions within this section are applicable to specific land use activities appearing throughout this ordinance. 
2-103.1 Residential activities. 
1.  Permanent residential activities. 
    Dwelling, duplex [means] a building containing not more than two dwelling units located on one zone lot. 
    Dwelling manufactured home [means] a detached one-family dwelling with all the following characteristics: 
(a)  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(b)  Constructed as a single self-contained unit and mounted on a single chassis transportable after fabrication on its own wheels or detachable wheels. 
(c)  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location of foundation supports, connections to utilities and the like. 
Manufactured home dwellings do not include camping trailers, commercial mobile structures, motor homes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, truck campers or similar units designed to provide temporary living quarters. 
    Dwelling, multifamily [means] a building containing three or more dwelling units. The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, and the like. 
    Dwelling, prefabricated [means] a single detached dwelling constructed primarily off-site, designed to be transported on a flat-bed truck or trailer. As used in this ordinance the term "prefabricated dwelling" does not include "manufactured homes" constructed as a single self-contained unit and mounted on a single chassis and as further defined in section 68-126-202(4), (6) and (7), of the Tennessee Code. When such a structure meets the above stated definition of a prefabricated dwelling it shall qualify as a "single-family dwelling" as defined below. 
    Dwelling, single-family [means] a building containing not more than one dwelling unit located upon one zone lot. 
2.  Semi-transient residential activities. 
    Lodginghouse, this is a general term and includes all places of semi-transient residential occupancy (as herein defined). The term lodginghouse is intended to include dormitories, roominghouse[s], boardinghouses, apartment hotels, residential hotels and all similar facilities coming within the general definition of semi-transient residential activities. 
    Semi-transient residential establishment [means] an establishment where lodging is provided for compensation partly on a weekly or longer basis and partly for a shorter time period, but with less than 30 percent of the living units under the same ownership or management on the same zone lot being occupied on a less than monthly basis; but excluding institutional living arrangements involving the provision of specific kinds of forced residence, such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums, and prisons. 
2-103.2 Community facility activities. 
    Child care facility [means] a licensed establishment wherein an agency, person or persons regularly provides nonmedical care for a group of five or more children for periods of less than 24 hours a day. Child care facilities as herein defined do not include pre-schools, nursery schools, kindergartens, or other facilities the primary purpose of which is educational, recreational or medical. Child care facilities include the following: 
(a)  Family child care home [means] a licensed family dwelling of a person or persons who regularly provides direct care during part of a 24-hour day to five to seven children. 
(b)  Group child care home [means] a licensed, child care home or an agency that regularly provides care for eight to 12 children in either a family dwelling of the licensee/care provider or in a premises other than the family dwelling. The number of children being provided care may be increased to 15, if four or more of the children are of school age and if adequate space is available to accommodate the additional children as provided in Tennessee State law and this ordinance. 
(c)  Child care center [means] a licensed agency that provides for the care of 13 or more children. 
    Community assembly [means] an establishment providing meeting, recreational, or other social facilities for a private or nonprofit association, primarily for use by members and guests. 
    Essential public transport, communication and utility services [means] Public or quasi-public facilities necessary and incidental to the operation of transport, communication and utility services. These facilities operate primarily as distribution networks and do not include production, storage or processing facilities for the product or service being distributed. 
    Extensive impact facilities this is a diverse grouping of facilities that share the characteristic of potentially exerting high level impact upon surrounding properties. While the nature of the impact varies with the particular use, all the activities included within this grouping must be carefully managed if surrounding activities are to be adequately protected from adverse characteristics associated with the activities included within this grouping. 
    Health care facilities [means] establishments included within this grouping are principally involved in providing a broad range of health care, treatment and convalescent services to individuals suffering physical or emotional distress. Facilities within this grouping include the following: 
(a)  Center for observation and rehabilitation [means] a licensed medical facility wherein services more intensive than those required for room, board, personal services and general nursing care are provided to an in-patient population, but which involves no form of forced residency of the type required within drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities. 
(b)  Hospital [means] an institution that: 
(1)  Offers services more intensive than those required for room, board, personal services and general nursing care; 
(2)  Offers facilities and beds for use beyond 24 hours by individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease or pregnancy; and 
(3)  Regularly makes available clinical laboratory services, diagnostic services (including X-Ray, C-T Scan, etc.) and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical care or other definitive treatment. This activity may include offices for medical or dental personnel, central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical laboratories, and other related uses. 
(c)  Medical clinics [means] a public or private nonprofit institution providing a full range of the basic general medical designed to preserve the health, prevent disease and care for the common illnesses and disabilities of the population within a specified geographic area. 
    Intermediate impact facilities this classification includes a diverse listing of activities which share the characteristic of exerting a significant effect upon surrounding land uses due to their traffic generation characteristics, parking requirements, land requirements or potential nuisances associated with such uses. 
    Religious facilities [means] any structure or site such as a church, synagogue, chapel, sanctuary or cathedral used for purposes of individual or collective involvement with a religious activity, such as rites, rituals, ceremonies, prayers and discussions. 
    Special institutional care facilities this is a general term that is intended to include all facilities that involve forced residency, fulltime supervision and care for: 
(1)  Individuals legally confined due to violations of law; 
(2)  Individuals who are addicted to drugs and/or alcohol; and 
(3)  Individuals who are mentally ill, including the criminally dangerous or others who for their own protection or the protection of society must be confined. 
    Special personal and group care facilities this is a general term that is intended to include residential facilities for the care of elderly or infirm persons who may require special care and/or supervision. The term is intended to include facilities that are principally residential in nature but wherein long term medical or rehabilitative services are provided for the residents. This term is not intended to include facilities for the criminally dangerous or psychotic. Special personal and group care facilities include the following: 
(a)  Assisted living facilities for elderly or handicapped persons [means] a residential facility other than a dwelling unit (as defined above) intended for occupancy by unrelated individuals who are handicapped, aged, or disabled and wherein meals are prepared and served in a common dining facility and limited assistance is provided for daily activities. 
(b)  Convalescent homes. (See Nursing homes .) 
(c)  Family care facilities [means] a licensed facility wherein residential services are provided to eight or fewer unrelated individuals who are handicapped, aged, disabled or otherwise in need of adult supervision in accordance with their individual needs. This grouping does not include facilities providing residential services to delinquent minors, the criminally dangerous, the addicted, and/or mentally ill individuals. 
(d)  Group care facilities [means] a licensed facility wherein residential services are provided to nine or more unrelated individuals who are handicapped, aged, disabled or otherwise in need of adult supervision in accordance with their individual needs. This grouping does not include facilities providing residential services to delinquent minors, the criminally dangerous, the addicted, and/or mentally ill individuals. 
(e)  Day care facilities for elderly persons [means] a licensed establishment wherein an agency, person or persons regularly provides nonmedical care for a group of unrelated individuals who are handicapped, aged, disabled or otherwise in need of adult supervision in accordance with their individual needs for periods of less than 24 hours a day. 
(f)  Nursing homes [means] a general term used to describe a licensed establishment providing bed care and in patient services for individuals needing regular medical attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services or providing care for mental illness or communicable disease. Retirement or rest homes, and convalescent homes are included within this term. 
2-103.3 Commercial activities. 
    Adult entertainment activities [means] an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade the provision or sale of products or services defined by this ordinance as "Adult Entertainment." Adult Entertainment activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Adult book store [means] an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade books, videos, movies, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this article, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the display or sale of such material. 
(b)  Adult mini-motion picture theater [means] an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this article, for observation by patrons therein. 
(c)  Adult motion picture theater [means] an enclosed building with a capacity for 50 or more persons used for presenting material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this article, for observation by patrons therein. 
(d)  Adult store [means] an establishment offering a substantial portion of their stock in trade, as the sale of 'adult' clothing, toys, and novelty items with a sexual theme or nature. 
(e)  Tattoo and body piercing [means] establishments offering skin-penetrating adornment procedures as regulated by the State of Tennessee. 
    Convenience retail sales and services. An establishment not exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, or as otherwise specified in subsection 3-103.3 subparagraph 6, serving a limited market area and engaged in the retail sale of goods and/or services from the premises of frequently and recurrently needed items for personal consumption or household use. 
(Refer to article III, section 3-104.7(5), Provisions applicable to commercial activities convenience retail and services for supplemental conditions for fuel pumps in various zoned districts.) 
    Entertainment and amusement services-Limited [means] a recreational activity operated as a profit making enterprise, conducted entirely within an enclosed building and serving groups of less than 500 assembled spectators and/or participants. 
    General business and communications services [means] a commercial activity engaged in providing services to other commercial enterprises. 
    Payday lenders [means] title loan services and deferred presentment centers, as defined and regulated by Title 45, Chapter 15 and Chapter 17, respectively, of the Tennessee Code Annotated. 
    Pawnshops [means] those businesses as defined and regulation by Title 45, Chapter 2 of the Tennessee Code Annotated. 
    Professional services-Medical. This activity classification is intended to include establishments primarily engaged in providing therapeutic, preventative or correctional personal treatment services on an out-patient basis by physicians, dentists, and other medical practitioners, as well as the provision of testing and analysis services. This grouping is limited and does not include the broad ranging services provided at general health care facilities such as hospitals but does include limited outpatient services provided at offices of doctors, dentists outpatient clinics, and other health care providers, whether operated for profit or otherwise. 
    Restaurant, full-service [means] an establishment where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation consists of one or more of the following: 
(a)  A sitdown restaurant where customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are generally served food and beverages in nondisposable containers by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed; 
(b)  A cafeteria or cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are served in nondisposable containers and consumed within the restaurant; or 
(c)  Small specialty restaurants having floor area exclusively within a shopping center or office park, sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within such centers, and having access to a common interior pedestrian access way. 
This activity shall include the on-premise[s] sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory and secondary use, but excludes any service to a customer in a motor vehicle. 
    Self-service storage facilities [means] a structure or group of structures for the dead storage of customer's goods and wares where individual stalls or lockers are rented to different tenants for storage and removal of personal effects. 
    Waste transfer stations. This activity includes a convenience center for collection and mechanical compaction of domestic waste transported in from individual households. 
2-103.4 Manufacturing activities. 
    Manufacturing, basic industry [means] an establishment engaged in the basic processing, conversion and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive materials. or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions, other than those classified in the hazardous operations activity type. 
    Manufacturing, general. This grouping includes all manufacturing operations excepting those classified as basic industry or hazardous operations. 
    Manufacturing, hazardous operations [means] any establishment engaged in production and/or storage of materials that present serious hazards to human life and health. 
    Manufacturing, limited [means] an establishment primarily engaged in the on-site production of limited quantities of goods by hand manufacturing that generally involves the use of hand or small power tools, that may include the incidental direct sale of those goods to consumers. 
2-103.5 Agricultural and extractive activities. 
    Agriculture, general. This term is intended to include farms (and farm residences) that involve orchards, raising of livestock, dairy cattle, horses or poultry, and truck farming. 
    Agriculture, intensive. These agricultural uses include operations where animals are tightly confined in buildings or outdoor pens including operation of one or more of the following: 
(a)  Dairy farm means any place or premises where one or more cows are kept and from which a part or all of the milk or milk products is provided, sold or offered for sale to milk plant, transfer station or receiving station. 
(b)  Egg production house means any place or premises where chickens are kept for production of eggs for resale to processors, wholesalers or retailers. 
(c)  Feedlot means a lot, yard, corral or other area in which livestock are confined primarily for the purposes of feeding, growing, raising, or birthing prior to slaughter. Feedlot does not include areas which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation upon which livestock are allowed to graze or feed. 
    Agricultural services. This term is intended to encompass a wide variety of service activities that directly support production of crops and animals but are not in and of themselves agricultural activities. 
    Mining, quarrying and soil extraction. This term is intended to include all operations engaged in the removal by excavation, stripping, dredging or otherwise taking of soil, gravel and sand for off-site use. 
    Plant and forest nursery. This category includes nurseries with or without retail sales or accessory greenhouses. A minimum of 51 percent of all materials sold by a nursery must be grown on-site. (Nurseries containing a garden center are included within the "Outside material and equipment sales and repair yards" commercial classification.) 
2-103.6 Accessory activities. 
    Accessory apartment [means] an apartment shall be considered an accessory use to any single-family dwelling when such apartment is occupied by a family member and complies with the provisions of article III, subsection 3-105.1. 
    Bed and breakfast-homestay [means] a minor home occupation that provides one to three rooms for occasional paying guests on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with one daily meal being available on the premises. A bed and breakfast homestay is allowable only in a building originally constructed as a single-family residence. 
    Bed and breakfast inn [means] an operator or owner occupied residence that provides four to 12 rooms for paying guests on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with one daily meal being available on the premises. A bed and breakfast inn is allowable only in a building originally constructed as a residence. Bed and breakfast inns are subject to approval by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation in addition to all local requirements. 
    Country inn [means] a bed and breakfast inn that also has facilities for group and/or special event activities. A country inn is allowable only in a building constructed as a residential dwelling. Country inns are subject to approval by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, in addition to all local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2003-40, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2004-34, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2007-22, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 2009-01, 1-12-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 2-102; Ord. No. 2010-41, § 1, 8-9-2010; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 2, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-42, 6-9-2014) 
ARTICLE III. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-101. - Use classification. 
    The use regulations of the zoning districts are based on the following use classification system: 
3-101.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose of these provisions is to classify uses of land into a number of specially defined activity types on the basis of common functional characteristics and similar compatibility with other uses, thereby providing a basis for regulation of uses in accordance with criteria that are directly relevant to the public interest. These provisions shall apply throughout this ordinance. 
3-101.2 Classification of principal uses. The following rules shall apply where a single lot contains activities that resemble two or more different activity types that are not classified as accessory activities: 
1.  Classification of each establishment. The principal activities conducted on a single lot by each individual establishment, management, or institution shall be classified separately. 
2.  Classification of major classes of activities. If the principal activities conducted on a single lot by a single establishment, management, or institution resemble two or more different major classes of activities, to wit, residential, community facilities, commercial, manufacturing, or agricultural and extractive activities, the principal activities of each major class shall be classified separately. 
3.  Classification of multiple activity types. If principal activities conducted on a single lot by a single establishment, management, or institution resemble two or more activity types within the same major class of activities, all such principal activities shall be classified in the activity type within said class the description of which type most closely portrays the overall nature of such activities. However, when activity types have any characteristics of group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation; community assembly; extensive impact facilities; outside material and equipment sales and repair yards; restaurant; fast food; Warehousing goods, transport and storage; hazardous manufacturing or mining and quarrying, all principal activities within the same major class of activities as any of such types shall be classified within that one of such types the description of which most closely portrays said principal activities; except that all such commercial activities shall be classified within the scrap operation activity type if they have any of its characteristics. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-101) 
Sec. 3-102. - Listing of activity types. 
    All activities are hereby classified into the following types: 
A.  Residential activities. 
Permanent 
Semi-transient 
B.  Community facility activities. 
Administrative services 
Child care facilities 
Community assembly 
Cultural and recreational services 
Educational facilities 
Essential public transport, communication and utility services 
Extensive impact facilities 
Health care facilities 
Intermediate impact facilities 
Religious assembly facilities 
Special institutional care facilities 
Special personal and group care facilities 
Waste disposal operations 
C.  Commercial activities. 
Adult entertainment businesses 
Adult oriented businesses 
Animal care and veterinary services 
Automotive parking 
Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair 
Banking, financial, insurance and real estate services 
Convenience retail sales and services 
Entertainment and amusement services-limited 
General business and communication services 
General retail sales and services 
Group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation 
Outside material and equipment sales and repair yards 
Professional services, medical 
Professional services, nonmedical 
Restaurant, full-service 
Restaurant, take-out 
Scrap operations 
Self service storage 
Transient habitation 
Warehousing goods, transport and storage 
Wholesale sales 
D.  Manufacturing activities. 
Manufacturing, basic industry 
Manufacturing, general 
Manufacturing, hazardous operations 
Manufacturing, limited 
E.  Agricultural and extractive activities. 
Agriculture, general 
Agriculture, intensive 
Agricultural services 
Mining and quarrying 
Plant and forest nurseries 
Note- Vacant land, itself, shall not constitute an activity type. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-102; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 3, 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 3-103. - Detailed activity listing. 
    3-103.1 Residential activities-Class and types. 
1.  Activity type-Permanent residential activities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include permanent residential activities which involve occupancy of a dwelling unit as defined by this ordinance. This form of occupancy shall not be construed to include: 
i.  Institutional living arrangements involving provision of special care or forced residence, such as nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, orphanages, asylums, and prisons; 
ii.  Transient accommodations such as transient hotels, motels, tourist homes, or similar establishments; 
iii.  Dormitories, nurses' residences, fraternity or sorority houses, monasteries or convents or similar establishments containing group living or sleeping accommodations; or 
iv.  In a building with mixed use occupancy, that part of the building used for any nonresidential uses, excepting accessory residential uses. 
b.  Use listing. The following dwelling unit types, as defined by this ordinance, are considered as permanent residential activities when located within any district. However, only those dwelling unit types as indicated by individual district regulations may be permitted therein. 
Single-family dwelling 
Duplex dwelling 
Multifamily dwelling 
Manufactured home dwelling 
2.  Activity type-Semi-transient residential activities. This grouping is intended to include residential activities which are semi-transient in nature and involve occupancy of a rooming unit as defined by this ordinance. This form of occupancy shall not be construed to include: 
a.  Intent and limitations. Institutional living arrangements involving provision of special care or forced residence, such as nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, orphanages, asylums, and prisons; or in any building with mixed use occupancy, that part of the building used for any nonresidential uses, excepting accessory residential uses. 
b.  Use listing. A general term "lodginghouse" is included within this ordinance to describe a group of residential uses considered semi-transient in nature when they meet the general limitations of rooming units (as defined by this ordinance). The term lodginghouse is intended to include, subject to the general limitations for semi-transient residential activities, the following residential types: 
Apartment hotel 
Boardinghouse 
Roominghouse 
Residential hotel 
3.  Activity type-Mixed use development. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include mixed use developments and buildings as allowed in the Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) and Commercial Town Center (CTC) zoning districts. 
b.  Use listing. 
Mixed-use building 
Mixed-use site 
    3-103.2 Community facilities activities-Class and types. 
1.  Activity type-Administrative services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the activities typically performed by public, utility and private nonprofit administrative offices. 
b.  Use listing. 
City, county, state and federal offices 
Civil defense facilities 
Court buildings 
Fire department facilities 
Police department facilities 
Post offices 
2.  Activity type-Child care facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include licensed establishments wherein an agency, person or persons regularly provide nonmedical care for a group of five or more children for periods of less than 24 hours a day. 
b.  Use listing. 
Child care center 
Family child care home 
Group child care home 
3.  Activity type-Community assembly. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a broad range of facilities utilized as public gathering places in conjunction with various social and recreational events. This grouping is not intended to include facilities primarily utilized for profit, nor is it to include any facility which has the characteristics associated with extensive impact community facilities. 
b.  Use listing. 
Civic, social, fraternal, and philanthropic associations 
Private (nonprofit) clubs, lodges, meeting halls, and recreation centers 
Temporary nonprofit festivals 
4.  Activity type-Cultural and recreational services 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include services and facilities of a cultural or recreational nature which are either owned by, or operated for the use and enjoyment of, the general public. The grouping is not intended to include entertainment and amusement facilities which are operated by private persons as profit making ventures. 
b.  Use listing. 
Art galleries (noncommercial) 
Athletic associations 
Libraries 
Museums 
Parks, playgrounds and playfields 
Planetariums and aquariums 
Recreational centers and gymnasiums (public nonprofit) 
Swimming pools and beaches 
Yachting clubs (private) 
Zoological and botanical gardens (noncommercial) 
5.  Activity type-Educational facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include services and facilities typically performed by public, parochial and private nursery schools, kindergartens, primary and secondary schools. The grouping is not intended to include special training and schooling services offered by private individuals for profit or technical schools, colleges and universities. 
b.  Use listing. 
Public, parochial and private kindergartens 
Primary and secondary schools 
6.  Activity type-Essential public transport, communication and utility services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include facilities necessary and incidental to the operation of transport, communication, and utility services. The grouping is not intended to include major transport terminals or utility production and processing facilities. 
b.  Use listing. 
Electrical and gas substations 
Gas, electric and water distribution lines and pumping facilities for water and sewer systems 
Rights-of-way for all modes of transportation 
Sewage collection lines 
7.  Activity type-Extensive impact facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include public activities and facilities which have a high degree of impact upon surrounding land uses due to hazards, and nuisance characteristics, traffic generation and parking requirements. 
b.  Use listing. 
Airports, air cargo terminals, heliports, helistops or any other aeronautical device 
Electricity generating facilities 
Major petroleum and natural gas transmission lines and facilities 
Marine terminals 
Military bases or reservations 
Railroad, bus and transit terminals 
Railroad yards and other transportation 
Equipment marshaling and storage yards 
Water and sewage treatment plants 
8.  Activity type-Health care facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include medical and other health care facilities which are required for promotion and protection of public health and safety. This grouping is not intended to include the offices, clinics, laboratories, etc., of private physicians or of other health care professionals. 
b.  Use listing. 
Center for observation and rehabilitation 
Hospitals 
Medical clinics (excluding substance control facilities) 
9.  Activity type-Intermediate impact facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a broad range of public and private activities that have a significant effect upon surrounding land uses due to their traffic generation characteristics, parking requirements, land requirements, or potential nuisances associated with such uses. 
b.  Use listing. 
Cemeteries, columbariums and mausoleums 
Colleges, junior colleges and universities, but excluding profit-making business schools 
Commercial boat docks, marinas and yacht clubs 
Electrical and gas substations 
Funeral homes/funeral parlors 
Golf courses 
Major mail processing centers 
Radio, telephone, television towers and transmission facilities 
Water storage facilities 
10.  Activity type-Religious assembly facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include facilities utilized by various religious organizations for worship or community service functions including child care facilities and parents day out. The grouping is not intended to include facilities which primarily function to produce products, including printed matter, for sale or general distribution to groups other than the immediate membership of the organization located upon the same zone lot nor is it intended to include school facilities providing primary or secondary education. 
b.  Use listing. 
Chapels 
Churches 
Convents and monasteries 
Sanctuaries 
Synagogues 
Temples 
11.  Activity type-Special institutional care facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include facilities that involve forced residency, fulltime supervision and/or walk-in care for: 
(1)  Individuals legally confined due to violations of law; 
(2)  Individuals who are addicted to drugs and/or alcohol; and 
(3)  Individuals who are mentally ill, including the criminally dangerous. 
b.  Use listing. 
Detention and/or correctional institutions 
Drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities 
Halfway houses (serving convicted felons or recovering substance abusers) 
Institutional care facilities: (including all types of asylums for the psychotic or insane) 
Substance control centers (serving recovering substance abusers) 
12.  Activity type-Special personal and group care facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a wide variety of facilities for persons who have need of special care or supervision when such care or supervision is provided in a group environment where meals are provided in a shared dining facility. This grouping is not intended to include facilities which involve independent living arrangements in "dwelling units" as defined by this ordinance regardless of the level of care provided. The grouping does not include facilities primarily oriented to provision of surgical or emergency medical care nor is it to include facilities for delinquent minors, the criminally dangerous, the addicted and/or mentally ill individuals. 
b.  Use listing. 
Assisted living facilities for elderly or handicapped persons 
Convalescent homes 
Day care facilities for elderly persons 
Family care facilities 
Group care facilities 
Nursing homes 
Retirement or rest homes 
Note-See definition of the term "family" for exemptions to these provisions granted by Title VIII, of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
13.  Waste disposal operations. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include operations engaged in storage, hauling and ultimate disposal of waste products. The grouping does not include operations involved in storage, processing and shipping of scrap materials for recycling or reuse except when such materials are classified as hazardous or include activities that may present serious hazards to human life and health. The grouping does include all operations engaged in disposal of solid waste as defined in section 68-211-103, Tennessee Code. 
b.  Use listing. 
Hazardous waste disposal 
Medical waste disposal 
Radioactive waste processing, storage and disposal 
Solid waste landfills 
Solid waste processing and recycling 
Waste incinerators, including hospital and medical waste 
    3-103.3 Commercial activities-Class and types. 
1.  Activity type-Adult entertainment businesses. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include all "adult oriented businesses and activities" as defined by this ordinance. This grouping includes all facilities wherein material is presented, sold, distributed, or exhibited and which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined by this ordinance for observation by patrons therein. 
b.  Use listing. 
Adult arcade 
Adult bookstore 
Adult club 
Adult mini-motion picture theater 
Adult motion picture theater 
Adult store 
Tattoo and body piercing establishment 
2.  Activity type-Animal care and veterinary services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the activities or facilities utilized by veterinarians in the care of small domestic pets. The grouping is not intended to include facilities or services for on-site treatment of large farm animals. (See Agricultural Services.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Veterinary clinics 
Kennels 
3.  Activity type-Automotive parking. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include facilities for parking and/or storage of operative automotive vehicles. The grouping is not intended to include the storage of junk or scrap or inoperative vehicles of any type. 
b.  Use listing. 
Auto parking lots 
Parking garages 
4.  Activity type-Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include retail dealers selling new and used automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, utility trailers and motorcycles. Repair shops and parts sales facilities are to be included, to the extent that such facilities are oriented to servicing or repair of vehicles. The grouping is not intended to include automotive distributors, the greater part of whose sales are to dealers or to institutional or industrial users. (See Wholesale sales.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Auto dealers 
Auto and home supply stores 
Auto body repair/paint shops 
Auto repair services 
Auto towing services 
Boat dealers 
Carwashes 
Motorcycle dealers 
Radiator and muffler shops 
Recreational and utility vehicle sales, service and storage 
Tire sales retreading and repair shops 
5.  Activity type-Banking, financial, insurance and real estate services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include firms engaged in the provision of financial, insurance and real estate brokerage services, as well as advice, information, or consultations of a professional nature (other than those classified as community facility activities, medical and professional service, or business and communication services). The grouping also includes executive management, or administrative activities of private, profit oriented firms, but excludes the sale and/or storage of goods or chattel, unless, otherwise, permitted by this ordinance. 
b.  Use listing. 
Agricultural credit institution 
Banking and bank-related functions 
Credit unions 
Holding and investment organizations 
Installment sales finance companies 
Insurance carriers, agents, brokers and service 
Money management and investment offices 
Real estate brokers, managers and appraisers 
Rediscount and financing institutions for credit agencies other than banks 
Savings and loan associations 
Securities commodities, brokers, dealers and exchanges 
Title offices 
Pawn shops 
Payday and title pledge establishments 
6.  Activity type-Convenience retail sales and services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include firms engaged in the retail sale, from the premises, of goods and services which are needed immediately and often and which are purchased where it is most convenient for the shopper, as well as the provision of personal convenience services which are typically needed frequently and recurrently. (Individual establishments are limited to a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet, or as otherwise specified herein.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Bakeries 
Barbershops 
Beauty shops 
Candy, nut and confectionery stores 
Convenience markets 
Dairy products stores 
Drug stores 
Fruit stores 
Gasoline service stations 
Hardware stores 
Health spas 
Laundry, cleaning and garment services 
Meat and fish markets 
Newsstands 
Shoe repair shops 
Retail Liquor Stores (Minimum 3,000 square feet to Maximum 10,000 square feet sales floor area) 
Vegetable markets 
7.  Activity type-Entertainment and amusement services-limited. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include establishments engaged in providing amusement or entertainment to groups of assembled spectators and/or participants for payment of a fee or admission charge. The activities are limited to those conducted within enclosed buildings having a total seating capacity for 500 or fewer persons. 
b.  Use listing. 
Art galleries, commercial 
Bowling alleys and billiard parlors 
Coin operated amusement arcades 
Dance studios and schools 
Exhibition halls and commercial auditoriums 
Fitness centers and reducing salons 
Gardens (botanical and zoological) 
Karate schools 
Motion picture theaters 
Recording and television production studios 
Theaters, legitimate 
Theatrical producers, bands, orchestras and entertainers 
Video game arcades 
8.  Activity type-General business and communication service. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include firms engaged in the provision of services of a clerical, goods brokerage and communications of a minor processing nature. 
b.  Use listing. 
Advertising agencies and services 
Commercial cleaning services 
Commercial testing laboratories 
Communications services: 
Radio and television broadcasting studios 
Telegraph offices and message centers 
Telephone exchanges 
Television and recording production studios 
Computer and data processing services 
Credit reporting, adjustment and collection agencies 
Detective agencies and protective services 
Drafting services 
Employment, personnel and temporary help services 
Exterminating services 
Interior decorator and consulting services 
Mailing, reproduction and commercial art services 
Management, consulting and public relations services 
Membership organizations: 
Automobile clubs 
Better business bureaus 
Chapter of commerce 
Labor unions 
Photo finishing services 
Political organizations 
Professional associations 
News syndicates 
Research and development laboratories 
Trading stamp services 
Travel agencies 
9.  Activity type-General retail sales and services. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the retail sale or rental from the premises, primarily for personal or household use, of goods and/or services; but excluding goods and services listed under the other activity types. 
b.  Use listing. 
Antique and secondhand merchandise stores 
Book and stationery stores 
Camera stores 
Children's and infants' stores 
Department stores 
Drapery, curtain and upholstery stores 
Family clothing stores 
Floor covering stores 
Florists 
Furniture stores 
Furriers and fur shops 
Gift shops 
Grocery stores (shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet in sales floor area) 
Hardware stores 
Hobby, toy and game stores 
Household appliance stores 
Jewelry stores 
Luggage shops 
Miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores: 
Bathing suit stores 
Custom tailors 
Shirt shops 
Sports apparel stores 
Uniform stores 
Miscellaneous general merchandise stores: 
Direct selling organizations 
Mail order houses 
Miscellaneous home furnishings stores: 
Bedding and linen stores 
cookware stores 
Cutlery stores 
Glassware and china shops 
Lamp and shade shops 
Paint and wallpaper stores 
Music stores 
Newsstands 
Proprietary stores 
Radio and television stores 
Sewing and piece goods stores 
Shoe stores 
Sporting goods stores 
Tobacco stores 
Variety stores 
Women's accessory and specialty stores 
Women's ready-to-wear store 
10.  Activity type-Group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the provision of cultural, entertainment, educational and athletic services, other than those classified as community facilities, to large groups (500 or more) assembled spectators and/or participants. 
b.  Use listing. 
Amusement parks and fairgrounds 
Commercial campgrounds 
Commercial sporting facilities: 
Golf courses and driving ranges 
Riding stables 
Skating facilities 
Swimming pools and beaches 
Commercial resorts 
Commercial sports arenas and playing fields 
Drag strips 
Marinas, boat docks and boat rental 
Racetracks (auto, motorcycle, dog and horse) 
11.  Activity type-Outside material and equipment sales and repair yards. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include establishments engaged in the retail and wholesale sale and storage of bulk materials and heavy equipment where operations require open storage and display. 
b.  Use listing. 
Construction equipment sales 
Contractors storage yards 
Farm equipment sales and service 
Feed milling and sales 
Heating, plumbing and electrical suppliers 
Highway and street construction contractors 
Lumber and other building material dealers 
12.  Activity type-Professional services, medical. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include establishments primarily engaged in providing medical, dental and other health services to individuals. The grouping is limited and does not include the broad ranging services provided at general health care facilities such as hospitals. 
b.  Use listing. 
Blood banks 
Chiropractors' offices 
Dental offices and laboratories 
Limited outpatient medical service facilities 
Medical laboratories 
Optometrists 
Physicians' offices and clinics (outpatient services) 
Psychologists and psychotherapists 
13.  Activity type-Professional services, nonmedical. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a broad listing of generally recognized professions, other than medicine, which are compatible with one another and tend to exert similar impacts upon their surroundings. 
b.  Use listing. 
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services 
Artists' studios 
Attorneys and law offices 
Consulting scientists 
Educational and scientific research services 
Engineering and architectural services 
Songwriters and music arrangers 
Writers and lecturers 
Commercial testing laboratories 
14.  Activity type-Restaurant, full service. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include establishments where the principal business is the sale of food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation consists of one or more of the following: 
i.  A sitdown restaurant where customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are generally served food and beverages in nondisposable containers by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed; or 
ii.  A cafeteria or cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages generally are served in nondisposable containers and consumed within the restaurant; or 
iii.  Small specialty restaurants having floor area exclusively within a shopping or office center, sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within the center and having access to a common interior pedestrian access way. 
This activity may include the on-premise[s] sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages as an accessory and secondary use, but excludes any service to a customer in a motor vehicle. 
b.  Use listing. 
Cafes 
Cafeterias 
Restaurants 
Taverns 
15.  Activity type-Restaurant, take-out. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include food service establishments where the principal business is the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation is that of a fast-food or drive-in restaurant offering quick food service, where orders are generally not taken at the customer's table, where food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers and where food and beverages may be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle. 
b.  Use listing. 
Drive-in restaurants 
Fast food Restaurants 
16.  Activity type-Scrap operations. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include firms engaged in storage or sale, from the premises, of used or waste material or other items, except when such activities involve goods or materials that may present serious hazards to human life and health, are incidental to a manufacturing operations classified as "hazardous operations" or are classified as toxic or hazardous materials. (See Manufacturing-hazardous operations for storage of material that may present serious hazards to human life and health.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Automobile junkyard 
Recycling firms 
Salvage establishments 
Waste transfer stations 
17.  Activity type-Self-service storage facilities. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include all self-storage facilities as defined by this ordinance. The grouping shall not include storage or transport of goods or materials that may present serious hazards to human life and health. (See manufacturing-hazardous operations for storage of goods that may present serious hazards to human life and health.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Self-service storage facilities 
18.  Activity type-Transient habitation. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include commercial and institutional establishments engaged in furnishing temporary living accommodations, including lodging and/or meals on a fee basis. Included within this grouping are all facilities where 30 percent or more of the living units located on the same zone lot and held under the same ownership are being occupied on a less than monthly basis. 
b.  Use listing. 
Hotels, motels 
Tourist homes or courts 
Sporting and recreational vehicle camps 
19.  Activity type-Warehousing goods, transport and storage. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include establishments and facilities associated with the commercial warehousing, storage and transport of goods. The grouping does not include "self-storage facilities" as defined and regulated by this ordinance nor does it include storage or transport of goods or materials that may present serious hazards to human life and health. (See manufacturing-hazardous operations for storage of goods that may present serious hazards to human life and health.) 
b.  Use listing. 
Freight forwarders 
General warehousing 
Household goods storage 
Local and long distance trucking terminals 
Packing and crating services 
Refrigerated warehousing 
Truck terminals and freight handling 
20.  Activity type-Wholesale sales. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping includes the storage and sale from the premises of goods, to other firms for resale, as well as storage of goods and their transfer to retail outlets. This grouping is not intended to include establishments and facilities associated with the commercial warehousing, storage and transport of goods that may present serious hazards to human life and health. (See Manufacturing-hazardous operations for storage of goods that may present serious hazards to human life and health.) 
b.  Use listings. 
Apparel, piece goods and notions 
Beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages 
Chemicals and allied products 
Drugs, drug proprietaries and sundries 
Electrical goods and appliances 
Farm products raw materials 
Farm supplies 
Furniture and home furnishings 
Groceries and related products 
Hardware, plumbing and heating equipment, and supplies 
Metals and minerals 
Motor vehicles, vehicle parts and supplies 
Paints, varnishes and supplies 
Paper and paper products 
Petroleum and petroleum products 
Sporting, recreational, photographic and hobby goods 
Tobacco and tobacco products 
(Ord. No. 2010-37, § 1, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2016-36, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
    3-103.4 Manufacturing activities-Class and types. 
1.  Activity type-Manufacturing, limited. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include manufacturing operations which involve compounding, processing, assembling, packaging treatment or fabrication of materials necessary to create the following products: 
Apparel accessories, such as hats, jewelry and umbrellas 
Art objects 
Bakery goods 
Beverages 
Dairy products 
Instruments for scientific, medical, dental, engineering and other professional purposes 
Printed matter 
Signs 
Note- No activity included within this grouping shall involve the outside storage of any amount of raw material or finished goods. 
b.  Use listing. In addition to the manufacturing of the above products the following activities and operations are held to be limited manufacturing activity: 
Bookbinding 
Candlemaking 
Data processing service 
Photocopying 
Photoengraving 
Precision machining of dies, jigs and fixtures 
Printing 
Publishing 
Record pressing 
Upholstering 
2.  Activity type-Manufacturing, basic industry. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include firms engaged in conversion, processing and storage of extracted or raw materials, or in the use and/or storage of flammable or explosive materials, or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions, other than those classified as hazardous operations. The grouping includes activities engaged in the following operations as well as the storage, manufacture, compounding, or treatment of the materials indicated: 
Asphaltic cement and concrete batching 
Cotton seed oil 
Fat rendering 
Fuel production, refining and bulk storage 
Organic fertilizers 
Smelting and refining of metals 
Wood pulp 
b.  Use listing. Subject to the general intent and limitations set out above for this use grouping the following manufacturing activities and operations shall be considered basic manufacturing: 
Abrasive and nonmetallic mineral processing 
Asphaltic cement plants 
Bulk fuel storage, processing and distribution 
Cement and/or concrete plants 
Coal yards 
Cotton ginning 
Crematories 
Fat rendering 
Foundries 
Grain milling 
Ore reduction 
Offal processing 
Pulp manufacturing 
Slaughterhouses 
Steel works and metal smelting 
Tanneries 
3.  Activity type-Manufacturing, general. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a broad range of operations which includes assembling, manufacturing and fabricating. The grouping does not include those activities engaged in operations classified as basic industry or hazardous operations. 
b.  Use listing. Subject to the general intent and limitations set out above for this use grouping manufacturing activities and operations, except those classified as basic industry or hazardous operations shall be classified as general manufacturing operations. 
4.  Activity type-Manufacturing, hazardous operations. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include all manufacturing and storage operations and facilities that may present serious hazards to human life and health. The use listing presented within this grouping is intended to be illustrative of the type operations included within this activity type and is not intended to be inclusive of all operations which may be considered as hazardous. The grouping is specifically intended to include operations engaged in storage of, as well as manufacturing operations involving the use of substances that may present serious hazards to human life and health. In any instance where the nature of operations or of materials utilized in such operations can be substantiated as presenting serious hazards to human life and health, such activities shall be classified as hazardous operations. 
b.  Use listing. 
Arsenals 
Atomic reactors 
Explosives and fireworks manufacture and storage 
    3-103.5 Agricultural and extractive activities-Class and types. 
1.  Activity type-Agriculture, general. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the raising of tree, vine, field, forage and other plant crops intended to provide food or fiber, as well as keeping, grazing or feeding animals for animal products, animal increase or value increase. 
b.  Use listing. 
Animal raising 
Food crop production 
2.  Activity type-Agriculture, intensive. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include feedlots, dairy farms and egg production operations covered under provisions of sections 48-18-101 through 48-18-104, Tennessee Code, where animals are tightly confined in buildings or outdoor pens including facilities for the processing, packaging, or treatment of agricultural products. 
b.  Use listing. 
Dairy farms 
Egg production operations 
Feedlots 
3.  Activity type-Agricultural dervices. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include a variety of service functions that are directly linked to the agricultural activities that these functions support. 
b.  Use listing. 
Crop drying, storage and processing services 
Crop planting, cultivating and protection services 
Horticultural and soil preparation services 
Veterinary services for livestock 
4.  Activity type-Mining and quarrying. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include operations and facilities either utilized by, or in support of the extraction of minerals, ores, petroleum and natural gas or in the quarrying and collection of stone, sand and gravel, clay and other nonmetallic minerals (such as phosphate rock). 
b.  Use listing. 
Borrow pits involving soil extraction for off-site use 
Chemical fertilizer and nonmetallic mineral mining 
Clay, ceramic and refractory minerals mining 
Coal mining 
Crude petroleum and natural gas production 
Metal ore and mineral mining 
Sand and gravel quarrying 
Stone quarrying 
Metal ore and mineral mining 
Sand and gravel quarrying 
Stone quarrying 
5.  Activity type-Plant and forest nurseries. 
a.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include the cultivation for sale of horticultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs and trees, intended for ornamental, landscaping, or tree planting purposes. 
b.  Use listing. 
Forest nursery 
Plant nursery 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-103; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 2, 1-14-2013; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 2, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 2013-53, § 1, 7-8-2013; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 4, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-42, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-41, § 1, 9-14-2015) 
Sec. 3-104. - Supplementary use regulations. 
    3-104.1 General[ly]. In addition to the bulk, parking, landscaping and other regulatory provisions of this ordinance, supplemental development standards are required for specific land uses when located in certain zone districts. These development standards are necessary because certain uses may tend to dominate or adversely affect the area more than other uses permitted within the same zone district due to large land area, unique operating, traffic generating or other characteristics. The land use tables for the zoning districts reference those uses and activities which must comply with supplemental development standards as: 
SUP: Principal use permitted with supplemental provisions 
C: Conditional use (subject to approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals) 
ASP: Accessory use permitted with supplemental provisions 
The community service or institutional nature of these activities makes it necessary that they be located within areas where the potential exists for the use to be incompatible. A distinction is made between those uses and activities which involve relatively minor and predictable impacts and those uses which have impacts that cannot be satisfactorily predetermined for every possible location within a zone district. Uses with relatively minor, predictable impacts are indicated with the designation (SUP). These uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator upon a demonstration that the established conditions can be met. The second category involve "Conditional uses" (C) which are permitted only upon approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. The last category involves certain uses which are incidental to the operation and enjoyment of other principal land uses but remain appropriate only when certain standards are applied to limit their scope. These are designated as "Accessory uses permitted with supplemental provisions (ASP)." 
The supplementary use regulations appearing within this section shall apply to new uses and to existing uses as set out in subsections 3-104.2 and 3-104.3. 
    3-104.2 Application to new uses. No zoning permit shall be issued for the use of any building or land, where such use was not established prior to adoption of this ordinance, unless the activity is in compliance with all supplementary use regulations specified for such activity within this article. 
    3-104.3 Application to existing uses. Where any use of a building or land was established prior to adoption of this ordinance, such activity may be continued or expanded according to the provisions of article XIII of this ordinance; provided, however, that any expansion of such activity shall comply as fully as possible with the supplementary use regulations specified for such activity within this section. 
    3-104.4 Plans required. 
1.  Principal uses permitted with supplemental provisions. Prior to establishing or expanding any use or activity classified as a principal use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) the Zoning Administrator shall have determined that such use complies with all applicable standards established for such use in this ordinance and, in any instance where either new construction or exterior modifications to an existing structure is to be undertaken in conjunction with the establishment of such use or activity, a site plan meeting the specifications of article XIV, subsection 14-103.2, is approved. 
2.  Conditional uses. No zoning permit shall be issued for any use or activity classified as a conditional (C) use until such use is approved by the Zoning Board of [Zoning] Appeals and, in any instance where either new construction or exterior modifications to an existing structure is to be undertaken in conjunction with the establishment of such use or activity, a site plan meeting the specifications of article XIV, subsection 14-103.2, is approved. 
    3-104.5 Provisions applicable to residential activities. 
1.  Single-family and duplex dwellings. When a single-family or duplex dwelling is located within variable lot size residential development (VLRD) the supplemental development standards of article V, subsection 5-104.3, shall apply to such use. 
2.  Manufactured home dwelling. When a manufactured home is located within a Manufactured Home Park (MHP) District, the supplemental development standards of article V, subsection 5-104.2, shall apply to such use. 
3.  Multifamily dwelling. When a multifamily dwelling is located within a complex of two or more buildings on a zone lot or portion of a zone lot, the supplemental development standards of article V, subsection 5-104.1, shall apply to such use. 
4.  Attached dwellings. All attached dwellings shall comply with the supplemental development standards of article V, subsection 5-104.4 
    3-104.6 Provisions applicable to community facility activities. 
1.  Child care facilities. In all districts where authorized as either a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) or a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the child care facilities activity type: 
a.  Child care home, family. 
i.  All state and local licensing and code requirements including those pertaining to building, fire safety and health shall be met to the satisfaction of the approving agency at all times during operation of the facility. 
ii.  Lot size, building coverage and setback provisions shall conform to those applicable to residential uses located within the zoning district. 
iii.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each nonresident or nonfamily member employee in addition to the spaces required for the dwelling. The residential driveway is acceptable for this purpose. 
iv.  An off-street drop-off/pick-up area shall be provided. 
v.  Signage shall conform to the provisions of article XI. 
vi.  No structural or exterior decorative alteration that will alter the character of an existing residential structure or be incompatible with surrounding residences may be permitted. (Note: This provision shall not be construed as prohibiting alterations necessary to ensure the safety of the structure for its intended use.) 
vii.  An outside play area of sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements established by the Tennessee Department of Human Services shall be provided. This area shall be fenced and shall be located within portions of the lot other than that utilized for a septic disposal field or any portion of the lot existing from the street line to a line drawn parallel to the front wall of the dwelling extending from one side lot line to the other. 
b.  Child care home, group. 
i.  All state and local licensing and code requirements including those pertaining to building, fire safety and health shall be met to the satisfaction of the approving agency at all times during operation of the facility. 
ii.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for each nonresident or nonfamily member employee in addition to the spaces required for the dwelling. The residential driveway is acceptable for this purpose. 
iii.  An off-street drop-off/pick-up area shall be provided. 
iv.  Signage shall conform to the provisions of article XI. 
v.  No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the safety of the structure for its intended use shall be made to any group care home that is occupied as a dwelling. Minimal outward modifications may be made to the structure or grounds of group care homes whose principal use is as a child care facility (and not a residence) only if such changes are compatible with the character of the neighborhood or area and with the intent of the zoning district in which the use is located. 
vi.  The Board may limit either interior or exterior modifications of any structure built as a dwelling to those which would not hamper reconversion to its original state upon cessation of the child care operation. 
vii.  An outside play area of sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements established by the Tennessee Department of Human Services shall be provided. This area shall be fenced and shall be located within portions of the lot other than that utilized for a septic disposal field or any portion of the lot existing from the street line to a line drawn parallel to the front wall of the dwelling extending from one side lot line to the other. 
viii.  Fencing shall be provided which is adequate for the protection and safety of children being served by the group care facility. 
ix.  Screening may be required which is adequate to protect abutting properties. 
x.  Any child care facility which upon passage of this ordinance does not comply with one or more of the provisions set forth above may continue to operate and to serve the number of children for which such facility is licensed by the State of Tennessee. No such facility shall be permitted to expand or to serve a greater number of children until the facility is brought into compliance with these provisions. 
c.  Child care centers. In any instance where a child care center is proposed as a principal use or activity such may be permitted subject to compliance with the criteria set out below. A child care center, if sited on the premises of an operating community service activity such as, but not limited to, a private or public school, place of worship, community center or library and is associated with that activity, shall be considered accessory to the principal use of the property concerned and no independent permitting process shall be required. However, prior to issuance of any building permit, it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator that the child care center meets or exceeds the design criteria and operational standards set forth below: 
i.  All state and local licensing and code requirements including those pertaining to building, fire safety and health shall be met to the satisfaction of the approving agency at all times during operation of the facility. 
ii.  No child care center shall be located in any private family residence unless the portion of the residence where the children have access is used exclusively for children during the hours the center is in operation and is separate from the usual living quarters of the family. 
iii.  At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each on-duty staff person. 
iv.  Signage shall conform to the provisions of article XI, for the district wherein the use is located. 
v.  Within residential districts, no structural or exterior decorative alteration that will alter the character of an existing residential structure or be incompatible with surrounding residences may be permitted. Any new or remodeled structure shall be designed to be compatible with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
vi.  The Board may limit either interior or exterior modifications of any structure built as a dwelling to those which would not hamper reconversion to its original state upon cessation of the child care operation. 
vii.  An outside play area of sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements established by the Tennessee Department of Human Services shall be provided. This area shall be fenced and within residential districts shall not be located within any portion of the lot existing from the street line to a line drawn parallel to the front wall of the building extending from one side lot line to the other. No portion of the outside play area shall be at any point closer than 15 feet to any septic disposal field. 
viii.  An on-site vehicle turnaround, or separate entrance and exit points and passenger loading area shall be provided. 
ix.  To provide for the safe pick-up and delivery of children, an unloading zone is required. One unloading space is required for each 20 children. Loading and unloading of children from vehicles shall only be permitted on the driveway, approved parking area and directly in front of the facility. 
x.  Any child care centers shall be served by public sewer. 
xi.  All elements of the site and structure shall, at all times, meet all building, sanitation, health, traffic safety and fire safety code requirements. 
xii.  Fencing, screening and landscaping may be required to protect the area immediately surrounding the day care center. 
xiii.  Any child care center which upon passage of this ordinance does not comply with one or more of the provisions set forth above may continue to operate and to serve the number of children for which such facility is licensed by the State of Tennessee. No such facility shall be permitted to expand or to serve a greater number of children until the facility is brought into compliance with these provisions. 
2.  Community assembly. In all districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the community assembly activity type: 
a.  The principal access shall be to a designated collector street or arterial street designated on the major street plan. 
b.  No such facility shall be permitted on a lot within any residential district unless it contains twice the minimum lot area requirements of the district; provided, however, that if such community assembly includes outdoor activities, the minimum lot area shall be four acres. 
c.  The use shall comply with all of the district bulk regulations, applicable off-street parking requirements and landscaping, buffering and design review standards without recourse to variances. 
d.  All public utilities including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
e.  All activities shall be conducted such that no noise shall exceed the sound levels established in article XII, subsection 12-106.1. 
3.  Cultural and recreational services. In all districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the cultural and recreational services activity type: 
a.  No such activity shall be permitted on a lot, unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of the district; provided, however, that if such cultural and recreational service includes outdoor activities, the minimum lot area shall be four acres. 
b.  The use shall comply with all of the district bulk regulations, applicable off-street parking requirements and landscaping and buffering standards without recourse to variances. 
c.  All public utilities including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
d.  The principal access shall be to a collector or arterial street designated on the major street plan. 
4.  Educational facilities. All uses classified in the educational facilities activity type shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
a.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance from minimum yard requirements whenever an existing structure is proposed for conversion to a community education facility. 
b.  This activity type is a permitted (P) use by right in all districts in which it is authorized only if it is located on a lot meeting the site size standards for the appropriate type school as set forth in standards established by the Tennessee Department of Education. 
c.  This activity type may be permitted on a smaller site as a conditional (C) use subject to the following provisions: 
i.  The Planning Commission shall review the master development plan and make a recommendation as to the appropriate site size and plan for the proposed school. In its review, the Planning Commission shall take into account: 
(a)  Proposed enrollment levels; 
(b)  Physical site characteristics, such as steeply sloped areas, areas subject to flooding, or unstable soils; 
(c)  The need for buffers, such as screening, fencing, unused open spaces, and access and traffic control, to protect surrounding land use; and 
(d)  Optional programmatic activities to be conducted on the site, including indoor or outdoor interscholastic competitive sports; outdoor intramural competitive sports; outdoor physical education activities requiring large land areas, such as baseball, softball, football, soccer, golf, field hockey and track and field events; marching band; outdoor concerts, assemblies and theatrical performances; vocational training facilities; and outdoor education space such as nature study areas and experimental gardens. 
ii.  The minimum site sizes established below may be recommended whenever none of the optional programmatic activities are to be present on the site, no hazardous site characteristics exist and adequate buffering can be accomplished without additional land. The reduced site size shall not be less than an absolute minimum based on the following table: 
Enrollment Capacity Minimum Site Size 1-49 1.5 acres 50-99 2.0 acres 100-149 2.5 acres 150 or more 2.5 acres plus 0.5 additional acres for each 50 students or fraction thereof above 149  
iii.  Any school in existence upon adoption of this ordinance shall not be subject to the land area requirements of this section, but shall be subject to all other code requirements including fire, electrical, plumbing and building codes. 
5.  Extensive impact facilities. In all districts where authorized as conditional (C) uses, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the extensive impact activity type: 
a.  The location, size and design of such facilities shall be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along arterial and collector streets without traversing local minor streets. 
c.  The proposed facility shall provide a basic community function or essential service necessary for a convenient and functional living environment in order to be located on the proposed site. 
d.  The off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
6.  Health care facilities. In all districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the health care activity type as indicated: 
a.  Minimum lot area. 
i.  No health clinic shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless it contains a minimum of 10,000 square feet, or twice the lot area requirements of the district, whichever is greater. 
ii.  No hospital or center for observation or rehabilitation shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless it contains a minimum of five acres. 
b.  Hospitals, centers for observation or rehabilitation. The minimum side and rear yards for hospitals and centers for observation or rehabilitation shall be 50 feet for one or two story buildings, increased by five feet for each story above two. 
c.  All other regulations of the zone district shall apply. 
d.  There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries fencing, screening and landscaping as appropriate to protect any surrounding residential area. 
e.  The location and operation of such facility shall be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area and shall not have an adverse effect on the properties in the surrounding area. 
f.  All public utilities including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
g.  The following activity classes and types may be permitted as accessory to the health care activities provided they appropriately complement the health care activity, will not impose an adverse impact on the surrounding land use, and be subject to all other provisions of the zoning district: 
i.  Community facility activities. All facilities. 
ii.  Commercial activities. 
Convenience sales and services 
Automotive parking 
Restaurant, sitdown 
Professional services, medical 
7.  Intermediate impact facilities. In all districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the intermediate impact activity type: 
a.  The location, size and design of such facilities shall be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along major streets without traversing local minor streets. 
c.  The proposed facility shall provide a basic community function or essential service necessary for a convenient and functional living environment in order to be located on the proposed site. 
d.  The off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
e.  All communications transmitter stations, including towers and operating equipment shall adhere to the following standards: 
i.  A conditional use permit for a commercial communication tower in a residential district shall only be authorized upon a finding by the Board of Zoning Appeals that: 1) there is a significant gap in service coverage; and 2) there are no other feasible alternative locations. 
ii.  All towers with a height of 150 feet or more (measured from base to top) shall be constructed utilizing a wind rating of 80 mph plus ice loading for Middle Tennessee. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certification prepared and stamped by a registered professional structural engineer that the tower in question meets this design standard. 
iii.  All towers, regardless of height, may be required to utilize an Alternative tower structure meaning the tower shall be designed to look like a man-made tree, clock tower, bell steeple, steeple, light pole or other similar alternative-design, that in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners, is compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and effectively camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas or towers. The Planning Commission and/or the Board of Commissioners may elect to use a conventional tower design that is not an alternative design if the conventional design is deemed more suitable for the immediate surroundings and landscape. 
iv.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative tower structure means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures, that in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners, are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna support structure means any building or structure other than a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities. 
    Applicant means any person that applies for a tower development permit. 
    Application means the process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. The term "application" includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
    Owner means any person with fee title or long-term (exceeding ten years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the city who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit. 
    Registered professional engineer means any engineer licensed by the state. 
    Stealth means any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including but not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements and towers designed to look other than like a tower such as light poles, power poles and trees. The term "stealth" does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed or monopole tower designs. 
    Structural engineer means a registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Tennessee Board of Architectural and Engineering Examiners and having a specialty in structural engineering design. 
    Telecommunications facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, telecommunications facilities shall not include. 
    Wireless transmission facilities shall mean the buildings, cabinets, equipment and property, including but not limited to, generating and switching stations, repeaters, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, towers, alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer low-power mobile voice transmission, data transmission or other wireless communications by linking a wireless network of radio wave transmitting devices through a series of short range, contiguous cells that are part of an evolving cell grid. 
A.  Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or 
B.  Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
    Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term "tower" does not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC. 
iv.  Findings. 
A.  The Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: 
(i)  The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities; and 
(ii)  The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. 
B.  The city's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act. 
v.  Purposes. 
A.  The general purpose of this article is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. 
B.  Specifically, the purposes of this article are to: 
(i)  Regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(ii)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of towers and telecommunications facilities; 
(iii)  Minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design, sitting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(iv)  Promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(v)  Promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower structures to support antenna and telecommunications facilities; 
(vi)  Avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and 
(vii)  Ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses. 
vi.  Development of towers. 
A.  A tower shall be permitted as a conditional use within residential, commercial or industrial zoned districts in accordance with tables 5-102A, 6-102A and 7-102A respectively. 
B.  No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower upon any parcel of land within any zoning district unless a development permit shall have been issued by the zoning administrator of the city. Application shall be made to the zoning administrator in the manner provided in this article. 
C.  Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150 feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of 150 feet in accordance with the criteria in subsection 7.e.xvii of this section. 
D.  No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the tower is capable of supporting another person's operating telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size and surface area to the telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant on the tower. 
E.  An application to develop a tower shall include: 
(i)  An engineered site plan showing existing and proposed topographic features (MSL datum) for the site including existing and proposed contours, spot elevations, erosion protection and sediment control plan (EPSC), site access to a public road, the tower base, equipment sheds (total number) and fencing with a detail, landscape and screening. Sign with contact names and telephone numbers for tower owner and communications providers shall be placed on gate. 
(ii)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. 
(iii)  The legal description, folio number and address of the parcel of land upon which tower is situated. 
(iv)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable antenna support structures within a one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property. 
(v)  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant in the city. The applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent technological design, including microcell design, as part of the design plan. The applicant must demonstrate the need for towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's telecommunications services. 
(vi)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on city-owned towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(vii)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers of usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(viii)  Written technical evidence from a qualified registered professional engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site. 
(ix)  A written statement from a qualified registered professional engineer that the construction and placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties. 
(x)  Written, technical evidence from a qualified registered professional engineer that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in certifications and inspections regarding structural requirements. 
(xi)  Written, technical evidence from a qualified registered professional engineer acceptable to the building official that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
(xii)  In order to assist city staff in evaluating visual impact, the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. 
(xiii)  The act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of RF emissions and does not allow the city to condition or deny on the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications facility (whether mounted on towers or antenna support structures) which meet FCC standards. In order to provide information to its citizens, the city shall make available upon request copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission standards for telecommunications facilities transmitting from towers or antenna support structures. Applicants shall be required to submit information on the proposed power density of their proposed telecommunications facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards. 
(xiv)  The development review committee may require an applicant to supplement any information that the committee considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed to supply. The committee may deny an application on the basis that the applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the city in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for denial. 
vii.  Setbacks. 
A.  All towers shall be set back from all commercially and industrially zoned property lines a distance that is equal to or greater than one and one half times the height of the tower. All towers shall be set back from all residentially zoned property lines a distance that is two times the height of the tower or 200 feet, whichever is greater. 
B.  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
C.  Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in subsection 7.e.xvii of this section, when placement of a tower in location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished. For example, adjacent to trees which may visually hide the tower. 
viii.  Separation or buffer requirements. For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property. The minimum tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdiction boundaries as follows: 
A.  Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of 200 feet or 200 percent of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater. 
B.  Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers which have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to this article: 
(i)  Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of 750 feet. 
(ii)  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of 1,500 feet. 
(iii)  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of 750 feet. 
ix.  Method of determining tower height. Measurement of tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section shall include the tower structure itself, the base pad and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto which extend more than 20 feet over the top of the tower structure itself. Tower height shall be measured from adjacent grade. 
x.  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Upon commencement of construction of a tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which is 300 percent of the height of the tower from the tower and when required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA. 
xi.  Exterior finish. 
A.  Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
B.  All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located. The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in this Code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing. 
xii.  Access. A parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access to at least one paved vehicular parking space on site. 
xiii.  Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be permitted on any antenna support structure at least 50 feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all other structures. The owner of such structure shall, by written certification to the zoning administrator, establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building permit: 
A.  That the height from grade of the telecommunications facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure by more than 20 feet. 
B.  That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are set back one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in height above the primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. This setback requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the city. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the primary roof, but which do not protrude more than 18 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure. 
xiv.  Modification of towers. 
A.  A tower existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which was in compliance with the city's zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may be modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of this article, except for separation or buffer requirements, certification and inspections and maintenance, provided: 
(i)  The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating, within six months of the completion of the modification or rebuild, additional telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size and surface area to the discrete operating telecommunications facilities of any person currently installed on the tower. 
(ii)  An application for a development is made to the zoning administrator who shall have the authority to issue a development permit without further approval. The grant of a development permit pursuant to this section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming. 
(iii)  The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and telecommunications facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height allowed under this article. 
B.  Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than 180 days. This article shall not be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted which structure or use is in violation of this Code prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
xv.  Certifications and inspections. 
A.  All towers shall be certified by a qualified structural engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the standards set forth by this Code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to subsection (7)e.vi of this section, development of towers and every five years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certifications shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and then every five years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to subsection (7)e.vi of this section and every two years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and then every two years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the city to submit more frequent certifications should here be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized. 
B.  The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between the inspection and certification required in subsection (7)e.xv.A of this section, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the building code and all other construction standards provided by this Code and federal and state law. 
C.  The city reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the tower owner. 
xvi.  Maintenance. 
A.  Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures an accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
B.  Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, state and local regulations and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
C.  All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. 
D.  All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC. 
E.  In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
xvii.  Criteria for site plan development modifications. 
A.  Notwithstanding the tower requirements provided in this article, a modification to the requirements may be approved by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following: 
(i)  In addition to the requirements for a tower application for modification shall include the following: 
a.  A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a result of approving the modification. 
b.  A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the modification. 
c.  A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the applicant upon which the request for modification is based. The technical study shall be certified by an engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties. 
d.  For a modification of the setback requirement, the application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and negotiate an agreement for collocation and the result of such attempts. 
e.  The zoning administrator may require the application to be reviewed by an independent engineer under contract to the city to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested. The cost of review by the city's engineer shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall consider the application for modification based on the following criteria: 
(i)  That the tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding properties. 
(ii)  Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification. 
(iii)  In addition, the administrator may include conditions on the site where the tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the modification. 
C.  In addition to the requirements of subsection (7)e.xvii.A of this section, in the following cases, the applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following: 
(i)  In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement, subsection (7)e.vii of this section, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the person is to locate the tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land. 
(ii)  In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other towers in subsection (7)e.viii of this section, pertaining to separation or buffer requirements, that the proposed site is zoned I-R or I-G and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in subsection (7)e.viii of this section. 
(iii)  In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially zoned land in subsection (7)e.viii of this section, if the person provides written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower a telecommunications facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communications system and if the person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower from being visible to residentially zoned property. 
D.  In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for towers and telecommunications facilities or to the minimum height requirements for antenna support structures that the modification is necessary to: 
(i)  Facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid construction of a new tower; or 
(ii)  To meet the coverage requirements of the applicant's wireless communication system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from a qualified registered professional engineer that demonstrates that the height of the proposed tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be approved. 
xviii.  Abandonment. 
A.  If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 365 consecutive days, the board of commissioners shall notify the owner, with a copy to the applicant, that the site has been abandoned. The owner shall have 30 days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period. If the owner fails to show that the tower has been in use or under repair during the period, the board of commissioners shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment, the owner shall, within 75 days, dismantle and remove the tower and associated structures. 
B.  To secure the obligation set forth in this section, the applicant and/or owner shall post a bond in the amount determined by the Board of Commissioners. 
xix.  All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a determination of no hazard from the Federal Aviation Administration, as well as all required Federal Communications Commission permit information. 
xx.  The entire tract containing such tower and equipment shall be enclosed with a fence no less than six feet in height. Access gates shall be locked at all times when the site is not occupied. 
xxi.  Existing noncomplying telecommunications structures or other buildings. Any tower which has been constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived that does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance will be permitted to operate as a nonconforming use, notwithstanding the fact that no antennas have been located on the nonconforming tower, provided that the initial application to add antennas to the tower shall comply with the following: 
A.  The applicant shall submit the following with the application: 
(i)  An as-built site survey that confirms that the tower conforms with the requirements found in subsections (7)e.vi.F(i)-(iii) and (7)e.xx of this section, and in addition shows access to at least one paved road, the distance from the tower to all property lines, measured in compliance with subsection (7)e.vii.B of this section, the distance from the tower to all residentially zoned lands, the distance from the monopole tower to any other tower or towers within 750 feet and for a self-supporting or guyed tower, the distance from a self-supporting or guyed tower to any other tower or towers within 1500 feet, the height of the existing tower measured in compliance with subsection (7)e.ix of this section, confirmation that the tower exterior is or is not of noncorrosive material and any artificial lighting on the tower; 
(ii)  An engineered site plan showing any additional equipment sheds to be added to the site and any existing and proposed landscaping required to comply with subsections (7)e.xi.B; 
(iii)  A written statement from a qualified registered professional engineer that confirms that the tower, as modified by the addition of the antennas proposed in the application, complies with the requirements found in subsections (7)e.vi.E, (7)e.vi.F(ix)-(xi), and (7)e.xvi.B of this section; 
(iv)  A written certification from a qualified structural engineer that confirms that the tower and foundation, as modified by the addition of the antennas proposed in the application, complies with the requirements found in subsection (7)e.xv.A of this section; 
(v)  Photographs of the tower showing the exterior finish of the tower; 
(vi)  A letter from the owner of the tower confirming that the tower owner will comply with the requirements of subsections (7)e.vi.E and (7)e.xvi.A, C, D and E of this section and that after the installation of the antennas pursuant to the application, the tower will thereafter comply with the requirements of subsections (7)e.xv.B and C, (7)e.xvii and (7)e.xviii of this section; and 
(vii)  A determination of no hazard as required by subsection (7)e.xix of this section. 
B.  If no antennas are located on the nonconforming tower within six months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the nonconforming tower shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (7)e.xviii of this section. 
C.  Subsequent application(s) to add antennas shall comply with subsections (7)e.xxi.A and B of this section as herein provided. 
f.  Crematories in association with funeral homes shall not be allowed on any property abutting a residential zoned property. 
8.  Religious facilities. Land use development standards apply to religious facilities according to seating capacity ranges. For existing facilities located within residential districts, a conditional use permit shall be required for any proposed increase that upgrades the range of seats. 
a.  Religious facilities with a maximum sanctuary capacity of 50 seats shall be classified as a principal use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) activity and shall meet the following standards: 
i.  No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of the district or one acre, whichever is less. 
ii.  Religious facilities within this grouping may have driveway access on any street. 
iii.  Religious facilities within this grouping shall be screened along all property lines adjoining any AR, RS or R residential district. 
iv.  The Board of Zoning Appeals, upon a showing by the applicant that the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, may waive any of the above referenced requirements. 
b.  Religious facilities with a maximum sanctuary capacity in excess of 50 seats that are located in a newly-constructed structure, or in an existing structure that is being expanded in size by 20 percent or more shall be classified as a conditional use (C) activity and shall meet the standards established for facilities within its seating capacity range: 
i.  The minimum lot size shall be based on the number of seats. 
Seating Capacity Minimum Lot Size 51 to 200 2 acres + 0.5 acre/100 seats 201 to 400 5 acres + 0.5 acre/100 seats more than 400 10 acres  
ii.  If the site area exceeds three acres in size, such facilities shall be located only on designated arterial or collector streets as shown on the official major thoroughfare plan. 
iii.  The facility must meet adequate parking requirements for the applicable zoning classification of the property and provide a sufficient amount of parking to avoid conflicts with other uses that share the same parking lot. 
iv.  The Board of Zoning Appeals, upon a showing by the applicant that the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, may waive any of the above referenced requirements. 
c.  A religious facility with a maximum sanctuary capacity in excess of 50 seats that is adaptively reusing an existing structure, or is converting an existing structure with an expansion in size of less than 20 percent shall be classified as a condition use (C) activity and shall meet the standards established for facilities within its seating capacity range if it shall meet the following standards: 
i.  The minimum lot size shall be based on the number of seats. 
Seating Capacity Minimum Lot Size 51 to 200 2 acres + 0.5 acre/100 seats 201 to 400 5 acres + 0.5 acre/100 seats more than 400 10 acres  
ii.  If the site area exceeds three acres in size, such facilities shall be located only on designated arterial or collector streets as shown on the official major thoroughfare plan. 
iii.  The facility shall meet adequate parking requirements for the applicable zoning classification of the property and shall not impede other users that share the same parking lot from having adequate parking. 
iv.  Religious facilities within this grouping shall be screened, according to landscape standard B, along all property lines adjoining any residential district. Any conditional use (C) permit issued under this subsection shall not have a term longer than three years. Permit holders under this subsection shall be presumed eligible for renewal for one additional term, not to exceed three years, to be issued by the Board of Zoning Appeals, absent a finding of failure to comply with standards i.-iii. above. 
v.  The Board of Zoning Appeals, upon a showing by the applicant that the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, may waive any of [the above referenced requirements]. 
9.  Special institutional care facilities. In those districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to all uses classified in the special institutional care activity type: 
a.  The location, size and design of such facilities shall be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along designated arterial or collector streets as shown on the official major thoroughfare plan without traversing local minor streets. 
c.  The purpose(s) of the facility must be clearly established by the agency responsible and the appropriate staff services must be provided to achieve the stated purpose(s). 
d.  The facility shall have resident 24-hour staff and appropriate professional services shall be supplied. 
e.  The off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
f.  The minimum lot area shall be five acres, plus one additional acre for each ten persons accommodated. 
g.  The minimum side and rear yards shall be 100 feet for a one- and two-story building, increased by ten feet for each additional story. 
h.  All public utilities including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
10.  Special personal and group care facilities. In all districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the special personal and group care activity type as indicated: 
a.  All activities. 
i.  The purpose(s) of the facility must be clearly established by the agency responsible and the appropriate staff services must be provided to achieve the stated purpose(s). Written findings shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding these requirements based on advice from such agencies as the Tennessee Department of Human Services. 
ii.  An appropriate license must be secured for any activity regulated by any public agency, including the Tennessee Department of Human Services. Any activity lawfully regulated by any public agency may be permitted for only that time period for which a valid license is obtained. Where grades or classes of approvals are granted, only the most restrictive may be permitted. 
iii.  Necessary utilities including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
iv.  Notwithstanding the aforedescribed provisions, the Board may be permitted to vary the required yards and the screening strip for parking when the application involves a change in activities in existing structures. The plan shall provide for compensating features to offset any potentially adverse conditions that might be brought about by said variance. 
b.  Family care and group care facilities. 
i.  The purpose(s) of the facility must be clearly established by the agency responsible and the appropriate staff services must be provided to achieve the stated purpose(s). Group care facilities accommodating from seven to 12 individuals shall have 24-hour staff and professional services in the behavioral sciences available. Group care facilities accommodating more than 12 individuals shall have resident 24-hour staff, and shall provide professional services in the behavioral science. The Planning Commission must make a written finding to the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding these requirements based on advice from such agencies as the Tennessee Department of Human Services. 
ii.  Family care community facility may not accommodate more than one individual (excluding staff) per living room. 
iii.  Group care community facility must contain 1,500 square feet of net floor space for the first six residents, including resident staff and 150 square feet of net floor space per person above six residents. 
iv.  Group care facilities accommodating from seven to 12 persons and family care facilities accommodating from one to six persons shall meet all bulk regulations of the district for a residence. 
v.  Group care facilities accommodating from 13 to 25 shall have a minimum lot area of one acre. When more than 25 persons are accommodated, there shall be one additional acre required for each additional 25 persons accommodated. 
vi.  The minimum side and rear yards for group care facilities accommodating 13 or more persons shall be 50 feet for a one- or two-story building, increased by five feet for each story above two. 
c.  All other facilities. 
i.  No such facility shall be permitted on a zone lot within any residential district, unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of the zone district. 
ii.  All bulk regulations of the district shall be met. 
iii.  The requirements of the accessory off-street parking presented in article IX, subsection 9-103.2, shall apply to the particular use as specified. 
11.  Waste disposal operations. In all districts where authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) the supplementary regulations established in article VII, section 7-401 shall apply to uses classified in the waste disposal operations activity type. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 3, 1-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-58, § 1, 8-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-28, § 1, 7-13-2015; Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 3-27-2017) 
    3-104.7 Provisions applicable to commercial activities. 
1.  Adult entertainment establishments. All adult entertainment establishments shall be located within the Adult Entertainment Overlay District. These districts may overlay those base zone districts as indicated in table 7-102A. In addition, all adult entertainment establishments shall adhere to the following location criteria within the overlay district: 
a.  No establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet (measured property line to property line) of any church, public or private school ground, college campus, public park or recreation facility, public library, child care facilities, or a lot zoned residentially or devoted primarily to residential use; and 
b.  No establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet (measured property line to property line) of another adult entertainment establishment. 
2.  Animal care and veterinary services. In all districts where authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP), uses classified in the animal care activity type shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
a.  All animal care uses shall occur in completely walled and roofed structures, except that completely fenced exercise yards may be provided as specified in subpart b of this section, below. 
b.  Exercise yards shall be completely fenced and screened from all abutting lots and streets. Exercise yards shall not be used for overnight accommodations. The use of exercise yards shall be restricted to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
c.  Animal care boarding facilities shall be restricted to domesticated animals that have an adult weight not exceeding 200 pounds. 
d.  The design of animal care facilities shall provide for the off-street pickup and drop-off of animals. 
e.  Animal care, veterinary office and services shall be strictly prohibited should the lot on which the facility is situated adjoin any residentially zoned property unless the residential property is unoccupied. 
3.  Banking, financial services and real estate. Within the CNS District, banking, financial services and real estate operations shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per establishment, with no more than two establishments per lot. 
4.  Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair. Within all commercial and industrial districts where this activity type is permitted, the following requirements shall be applicable to auto body repair/paint shops. Other uses within the "use listing" shall be permitted by right and not subject to these requirements. 
a.  All vehicle repair shall be performed within an enclosed building and shall be located no closer than 50 feet to any abutting residential district. Temporary work may be performed outside so long as it is performed within a yard fully enclosed with opaque fencing and not visible from off-site. 
b.  All damaged vehicles shall be stored within a building or within an area fully screened from public view or adjacent property by a minimum six-foot high opaque fence or wall. Said storage yard shall not be within any front yard or other yard adjacent to any street. 
c.  Buffers requried elsewhere in this ordinance shall be provided. 
d.  No storage of vehicles shall be permitted for periods in excess of 30 days. 
e.  The use shall not include any use deemed to constitute a "junk yard." 
f.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of tires or other automotive parts. 
5.  Convenience retail and services. In all districts where authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP), the convenience retail and services activity type shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
a.  Strong preference shall be given to location of complementary additions in the immediate vicinity of existing convenience establishments of other activities in patterns which facilitate easy pedestrian circulation from the surrounding area and from one establishment to another, and to arrangements which encourage joint use of parking areas and automotive entrances and exits. 
b.  In the environment in which convenience establishments are intended to be permitted, it is the intent of this section that no such establishment or group of establishments shall be of such size or character as to create the impression of general commercial development. Therefore, in addition to other limitations designed to achieve these ends, no individual convenience establishment shall have a gross floor area exceeding 5,000 square feet). 
c.  Number of fuel pumps allowed in various zoned districts: 
1.  CNS and OPS. A maximum of two (2) fuel pumps serving no more than four (4) vehicles at any one time. 
2.  CRC. A maximum of four (4) fuel pumps serving no more than eight (8) vehicles at any one time. 
3.  CI, CG and CMU. A maximum of eight (8) fuel pumps serving no more than sixteen (16) vehicles at any one time at the following allowable locations: 
i.  Parcels fronting Highway 70 (Lebanon Road) within a 500 feet radius of the intersection in areas zoned Commercial Interchange (CI), Commercial General (CG) and Commercial Mixed Use (CMU). These intersections include Benders Ferry, Park Glen, Mt. Juliet Rd., Nonaville and Devonshire. 
ii.  Parcels fronting Highway 171 (Mt. Juliet Road) located at the intersection of Pleasant Grove Rd., Providence Parkway and Herschel Drive. 
iii.  Existing convenience retail sale and service with gasoline sales in areas zoned Commercial Interchange (CI), Commercial General (CG) and Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) and in operation on the date of this ordinance. 
iv.  Parcels within a 2,000 feet radius of the following two locations: a) intersection of the centerline of the S. Mt. Juliet Road bridge over I-40 and the centerline of I-40; and b) the intersection of the centerline of the Beckwith Road Bridge over I-40 and the centerline of I-40 for zoned districts CI, CG and CMU. 
d.  Exterior storage and prohibitions in OPS and CNS zoned districts: 
1.  Exterior storage of goods or materials of any kind are prohibited. The placement of waste disposal facilities is permitted in the rear of the commercial operation only and shall not be located in any required yard. Such facilities shall be totally screened using similar exterior from which the outside walls of the principal building is constructed and shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner. 
2.  Except as provided herein for fuel sales, all sales, services, or displays in connection with convenience establishments shall be within completely enclosed buildings and there shall be no display, service or storage outside such buildings. No public address systems or other devices for reproducing or amplifying voices or music shall be mounted outside such buildings or be audible beyond any line of the lot on which the building is situated. 
e.  Within the CTC district, convenience markets and/or gasoline service stations shall not be permitted. 
f.  Retail liquor stores shall only be permitted and operated consistent with the following: 
1.  Within the Commercial Interchange (CI), Commercial General (CG), Commercial Retail Center (CRC), or Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) zoning districts, and 
2.  The sales floor area for a liquor store shall be no less than 3,000 square feet nor more than 10,000 square feet, and 
3.  New construction for retail liquor stores shall incorporate glass "store fronts" that begin four feet above finished floor, extend for a minimum of four vertical feet, and comprise not less than 25 percent of the front façade of the building or suite as applicable, and 
4.  Windows, including glass doors, shall not be used for advertising or signage purposes and the visibility through said windows and doors may not be obstructed by any temporary or permanent signs, or other material, and 
5.  Security bars shall not be placed on the inside or outside of doors and/or windows, however, solid type security doors may be used, and 
6.  Freestanding signs shall be "monument" in design and not exceed a total height of seven feet. Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted, and 
7.  Retail liquor stores shall fully comply with chapter 4, article IV, "Retail Liquor Stores" of the City Code. 
6.  Entertainment and amusement services, limited. Within those districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, activities classified in the entertainment and amusement services, limited activity type shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
a.  The facility shall be located so as to be compatible with the surrounding area and provide safety to those using such facility. 
b.  All state and local regulations pertaining to fire safety and emergency access shall be met. 
c.  All public utilities, including a central sewage collection and treatment system (as defined by this ordinance) shall be available to the site. 
d.  Adequate accessory off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate such use. 
e.  Notwithstanding the aforementioned provisions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall in each instance require such additional measures as are in its judgment necessary and proper to protect the health, safety and welfare of users or occupants of the facility and of the public in general. 
7.  General business and communications. Within the CNS and OPS districts, general business and communications activities shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per establishment, with no more than two establishments per lot. 
8.  Group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation. Within those districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, activities classified in the group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation activity type shall be subject to the following supplementary regulations: 
a.  The location, size and design of such facilities shall be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along designated arterial or collector streets as shown on the official major thoroughfare plan without traversing local minor streets and without reducing the level of service (LOS) on collector or arterial streets. 
c.  The off-street parking requirements shall be based upon the recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
d.  All activities shall be conducted such that no noise shall exceed the sound levels established in article XII, subsection 12-106.1. 
e.  When an application for a group assembly permit includes amusement parks, sports arenas, fairgrounds, racetracks and similar recreational pursuits, the following requirements shall be observed: 
i.  The minimum site shall be 25 acres; 
ii.  The minimum setback of all structures from all public roads shall be 100 feet; 
iii.  Such facility shall be situated so that no residential dwelling or zoned lot is located within 250 feet of a principal property entrance, outdoor activity area, principal building or service area, at the time of approval; 
iv.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum of one space for each four patrons or seats. For those facilities which are not utilized on a regular and frequent basis, parking may be provided on adjacent parcels of land provided further that any parcel so used is located no more than 500 feet from the lot boundary; 
v.  Any lighting provided at such facilities shall be designed so that no direct light falls on adjacent residential property; 
vi.  Accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with the principal use of the property provided that such uses are physically designed as a part of or within the principal structure. Such uses may include food sales, beverage sales, gift or souvenir shops and similar activities; 
vii.  Accessory structures may be permitted which are incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. Such structures may not be located within any required setback or buffer area. 
9.  Professional services, medical. Within the CNS District, medical offices and facilities shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per establishment, with no more than two establishments per lot. 
10.  Professional services, nonmedical. Within the CNS district, nonmedical offices and facilities shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per establishment, with no more than two establishments per lot. 
11.  Restaurant, full-service. Within the CNS district, full-service restaurants shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area per establishment, with no more than two establishments per lot. 
12.  Restaurant, take-out. Within the CTC districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, activities classified in the restaurant, take-out activity type shall be subject to the provision established for activities within subpart 4, convenience retail and services, of this section. 
13.  Scrap operations. In all districts where authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) the supplementary regulations established in article VII, section 7-401 shall apply to uses classified in the scrap operations activity type. 
14.  Self-service storage. In any districts where authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP), the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the self-service storage activity type: 
a.  No self -storage facility shall be approved upon a lot less than two acres in size. 
b.  All storage shall be kept within an enclosed building, except propane or a gasoline engine or storage tanks or any boat or vehicle incorporating such components, which shall be stored in designated screened exterior areas. This provision shall not be interpreted to permit the storage of partially dismantled, wrecked, or inoperable vehicles. 
c.  A barrier shall be provided around the perimeter of the facility. Said barrier shall be located at the setback line and may consist of either the solid facades of the storage buildings or a fence. If the barrier is to be provided by a fence, said fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of opaque or semi-opaque materials that will prevent the passage of light and debris, such as brick, stone, architectural tile, masonry units, wood, or similar materials, but expressly prohibiting woven wire. 
d.  No business activity other than the rental of storage units and pick-up or deposit of dead storage shall be conducted on the premises. All contracts for rental of self-storage facilities shall include clauses prohibiting the storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals and the use of the property for any purpose other than dead storage. Examples of prohibited activities include, but are not limited to the following: 
i.  Auctions, commercial wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous or garage sales. 
ii.  The servicing, repair or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances or other similar equipment. 
iii.  The operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns or other similar equipment. 
iv.  The establishment of a transfer or commercial warehouse business. 
e.  One parking space for every 200 storage cubicles or fraction thereof shall be located adjacent to the project office. A minimum of two such spaces shall be provided. 
f.  Driveway aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width. A driveway aisle where access to storage units is only on one side of the aisle may be 20 feet in width. 
g.  The maximum size of a storage unit shall be 600 square feet, and no more than 4,000 square feet shall be leased to a single tenant. 
h.  All outdoor lighting shall be shielded so as to direct light and glare only onto the premises of the self-service storage facility and away from all adjoining property. Such lighting may be sufficient to discourage vandalism and theft. 
(Ord. No. 2010-37, § 2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2010-41, §§ 2, 3, 8-9-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 3, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 1, 4-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-34, § 1, 6-12-2017) 
    3-104.8 Provisions applicable to manufacturing activities. 
1.  Manufacturing, limited. Within any commercial district where limited manufacturing activity is authorized as a use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP), no stocks, merchandise or material (with the exception of automobiles, tractors and other transportation, excavation or agriculturally related vehicles) may be stored upon any open area situated on any zone lot and all manufacturing activities shall be conducted in totally enclosed buildings. 
2.  Manufacturing, basic industry. Basic industrial operations may be permitted only within I-S, Special Industrial Districts when approved as provided in article VII, section 7-104. 
3.  Manufacturing, hazardous operations. Hazardous manufacturing operations may be permitted only within I-S, Special Industrial Districts when approved as provided in article VII, section 7-104. The following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the manufacturing hazardous activity type: 
a.  The location of such an activity shall be in an area likely to be sparsely developed for reason of topography, lack of existing or planned utilities, accessibility or a similar cause. 
b.  Such facility shall not be located on a site having an area of less than 50 acres. 
c.  The location, design and nature of the facility shall be such that the facility will not pose any significant hazard to human life, health or safety. 
d.  All regulations of the State Fire Marshal and the local fire department relating to the storage of explosives shall be met. 
    3-104.9 Provisions applicable to agricultural and extractive activities. 
1.  Special conditions for egg production houses, feedlots and stockyards. These provisions are adopted pursuant to Title 44, Chapter 18, Feedlots, Dairy Farms and Egg Production Houses, of the Tennessee Code. In those districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the intensive agriculture activity type: 
a.  The location of such an activity shall be in an area sparsely developed during the length of time the use as an egg production house, stockyard or feedlot is anticipated. 
b.  No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot, unless it contains a minimum lot area five acres. 
c.  Any permit issued, thereunder, shall be based on a site plan or other documents submitted with an application that shall indicate the following: 
i.  Existing contours of the site and up to 100 feet beyond the site boundary. Contour intervals shall be at two-foot intervals. 
ii.  Location of the area in which the proposed keeping of animals is to be conducted. 
iii.  Location of all proposed buildings, animal pens, roadways and other facilities proposed on the site. 
iv.  Proposed method of drainage of the animal pens. 
v.  Proposed fencing of the site. 
d.  Any egg production house, feedlot or stockyard shall be located on a site such that the closest point of any building or fenced lot, yard, corral or other area in which livestock are confined primarily for purposes of feeding, growing, raising, or birthing prior to slaughter is set back a minimum of 500 feet from any existing residence and 250 feet from any public right-of-way. 
e.  Any facility to be constructed shall submit a groundwater protection plan with the application required, hereinunder. Such plan shall address: 
i.  Decreased water quality from erosion and runoff; and 
ii.  Surface water and groundwater contamination from poultry waste. 
f.  A plan for disposal of waste, including manure, litter and dead birds, shall accompany the application required, hereinunder. 
g.  A plan for odor control to include evidence developed from operations similar to the one being proposed shall accompany the application required, hereinunder. 
2.  Agricultural services. In those districts where authorized as a conditional (C) use, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the agricultural services activity type: 
a.  The location of such activity shall be on a site at least five acres in size. 
b.  The site shall be located within an area where the activity does not create a nuisance to residential activities located on adjoining properties. 
c.  All operations shall continuously comply with the performance standards presented in article XII of this ordinance. 
d.  Fencing shall be provided around all activities within this grouping. 
3.  Mining, quarrying and soil extraction activities. Mining, quarrying and soil extraction activities may be permitted only within I-S, Special Industrial Districts when approved as provided in article VII, section 7-104. The following supplementary regulations shall apply to uses classified in the manufacturing hazardous activity type: 
a.  The location of such an activity shall be in an area sparsely developed and likely to remain sparsely developed during the length of time the mining or quarrying activity is anticipated. 
b.  Approval for mining and quarrying activities may also include accessory concrete batching plants, asphaltic cement mixing plants and/or rock crushing activities on the same lot or adjoining lots that may have directly opposing frontages on the same public street. If such accessory activities are included on the quarry site, the total site must meet all the special use regulations for mining and quarrying activities; however, in conditions of multiple lots, the outer perimeter of the site shall be considered the lot line. 
c.  Fencing shall be provided around all open excavations. 
d.  After the quarrying operation has been terminated, the site shall be graded and/or filled so as to be in substantial conformity with the topography of the surrounding lands. All fill material shall be nontoxic, nonflammable and noncombustible solids. All areas that are backfilled shall be left so that adequate drainage is provided. 
e.  Any permit issued, hereunder, shall be based on a site plan or other documents submitted with an application that shall provide for the following: 
i.  Existing contours of the site and up to 100 feet beyond the site boundary. Contour intervals shall be at two-foot intervals. 
ii.  Location of the area in which the proposed quarrying activity is to be conducted. 
iii.  Location of all proposed buildings, crusher and screening equipment, roadways and other facilities proposed on the site. 
iv.  Proposed method of drainage of the quarry area. 
v.  Proposed fencing of the quarry area. 
vi.  Methods proposed for blasting. 
vii.  Methods proposed to control noise, vibration and other particulate matter in order to meet the operational performance standards as set out in the zoning ordinance. 
viii.  Finished contours of the site after the quarrying operation has been terminated. 
f.  Before issuing a use permit, the City shall require the owner of a quarry facility to execute a bond not less than $600.00 or more than $1,000.00 per acre of active quarrying throughout a five-year period to restore the lands in the manner prescribed, herein, including the removal of all structures and machinery. 
g.  Any use permit issued, hereunder, may be limited as to term. After the expiration date of such permit, the City may review and grant an extension of time in the same manner and procedure as prescribed for an original application. 
4.  Provisions applicable to rock crushing activities. 
1.  No rock crushing shall be permitted on a construction site without a valid permit issued by the Public Works Director of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
2.  Before issuing a permit, the Public Works Director shall require submittal of the following information: 
a.  Copies of any required state or federal permits. Note: State and federal regulations impose strict limitations as to dust, pollution and maximum allowable noise levels; 
b.  Proof of liability insurance, in the amount of $1,000,000.00, with the City of Mt. Juliet named as an additional beneficiary, shall be provided; 
c.  Letter of credit shall be executed in the amount to be determined by the Public Works Director. The letter of credit amount shall be sufficient to pay 150 percent of any estimated costs of restoring the site, including clean-up and landscaping, should the rock crushing operation be abandoned. 
d.  A separate letter of credit shall be executed in an amount of $10,000.00. This letter of credit shall be sufficient to pay for any clean-up to or repair of surrounding sites necessitated by the rock crushing activity. Prior to making a claim under this letter of credit, a property owner injured by the rock crushing activity must give the permit holder 14 days' notice. The permit holder shall then have 14 days to remediate the situation. This letter of credit will not be issued on behalf of or for the benefit of the city and the city shall in no way be involved with the administration of this letter of credit, with the exception of setting the required monetary rate. 
e.  Permitee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Mt. Juliet from any and all claims, demands, losses, causes of action, damage, lawsuits, and judgments, including attorney's fees and costs, arising out of or directly or indirectly related to the work of the permitee. 
3.  Site plan: A separate site plan, specific to the proposed rock crushing operation, shall be submitted to and approved by the Public Works Director. Any site plan or application submitted for this purpose shall include provisions detailing the following information: 
a.  Erosion and sediment control and drainage; 
b.  Stormwater management; 
c.  Fencing and safety plan; 
d.  Adjacent properties and structures establishing that operations will be at a minimum 500 feet from the front door of any occupied structure at the time of permit issuance and at the time of any permit renewal; and 
e.  Site stabilization plan. 
f.  City of Mt. Juliet permit. 
4.  Upon submission of a completed application and site plan, the Public Works Director may issue a permit for conduct of rock crushing operations consistent with this ordinance. 
5.  Prohibition of operations: 
a.  Rock crushing operations may occur only between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday unless otherwise specified in writing by the Public Works Director. 
b.  Rock crushing operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to comply with the City of Mt. Juliet permit. No operations will be permitted which causes dust to be deposited on neighboring properties or vehicles. 
c.  At the discretion of the Public Works Director, any violation of this ordinance may result in suspension of rock crushing operations until noncompliance with this ordinance is corrected. 
6.  Uses of crushed rock: 
a.  Rock crushed on site shall not be used for any purpose until approval is granted by the Public Works Director. 
b.  Rock crushed on site shall not be sold. 
c.  Rock crushed on the permitted site may be used on another site owned by the same property or developer. Said secondary destination site shall be operating under a City of Mt. Juliet permit for an approved Site Development Plan or approved Infrastructure Plan. 
d.  If rock crushed on site is approved for use pursuant to [subsection] 6.c., the developer shall be required to execute a separate letter of credit in an amount determined by the Public Works Director. This letter of credit shall be equal to 150 percent of any estimated costs of repairing the roadways between the two sites. 
7.  Rock being hauled from the permitted rock crusher site to an approved secondary site shall comply with the requirements of Ordinance 2013-82, Street surety. 
8.  Any use permit issued hereunder shall be issued for a 12-month term. After the expiration date of such permit, the permitee may request and the Public Works Director may grant a 12-month extension of time in the same manner and procedure as prescribed for an original application. There are no limits on the number of extensions a permitee may request. 
(Ord. No. 2003-40, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2004-34, 8-9-2004; Ord. No. 2007-22, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 2009-07, 2-9-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-104; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 5, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-38, § 1, 5-12-2014) 
Sec. 3-105. - Accessory uses. 
    In addition to the principal activities expressed above, each activity type shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal activity when such accessory activity is located on the same zone lot as such principal activity and meets the further conditions set forth below. 
3-105.1 Accessory uses permitted by right or upon administrative approval. Certain of the accessory uses enumerated within this section are permitted as a matter of right subject to the general definition of an accessory use. Other uses designated by the notation (ASP) are permitted upon approval by the Zoning Administrator upon a determination that any criteria or standards established for such use have been met. Such accessory uses include the following: 
1.  Accessory apartment. An apartment shall be considered an accessory use to any single-family residential activity that is a self-sufficient housekeeping unit, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The single-family residence is owner occupied and meets all regulations for the district. 
b.  There is free and clear access between the principal and accessory dwelling units without going outdoors. 
c.  Only one meter per utility shall be installed to service both units. 
d.  A maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area, excluding garage and utility space, shall be used for the accessory apartment. 
e.  No entrance that would be visible from the street shall be added solely for the purpose of providing direct outside access to the apartment. 
f.  The accessory apartment shall not be occupied by anyone other than a family member, defined as grandmother, grandfather, mother, father, sister, brother, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, aunt or uncle. 
g.  An instrument shall be recorded with the Register's Office covenanting that the apartment is being established as an accessory use and may only be used under the conditions listed above. 
h.  The covenants provided herein may be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Accessory storage. Storage of goods sold by a principal commercial activity engaged in by the same firm on the same lot shall be considered an accessory use. 
3.  Administrative office. Operation of an administrative office of a firm engaged in a principal manufacturing or commercial activity on the same zone lot, but only if such office does not occupy more than 49 percent of the total floor area occupied by the same firm located on the same zone lot. 
4.  Bed and breakfast homestay. This activity may be permitted subject to the limitations of a minor home occupation and the criteria presented in subsection 2-103.6 of this article. 
5.  Columbarium. A columbarium shall be considered an accessory use when located within a place of worship. 
6.  Farm buildings. Private barns, stables, sheds and other farm buildings. Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises. 
7.  Home child care. Child care for up to four preteenage children shall be considered an accessory use. The dwelling unit in which this activity occurs shall meet all applicable state and local regulations. 
8.  Minor home occupations. In all zones permitting residences, minor home occupations in compliance with the following regulations are permitted as accessory uses. Due to their small scale and residential nature, minor home occupations are relatively common accessory uses which are not easily detectable and are not reasonable or desirable to regulate through a conditional use permit. However, in order to ensure that such activities remain within the limited scope of this provision, a use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator. The effective period for the use permit shall not exceed two years. At the end of every two-year period, renewal shall be automatically granted upon receipt of properly documented certification that the home occupation continues to be operated within the limitations set forth below: 
a.  A minor home occupation may be conducted within a dwelling and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling. No more than 500 square feet or 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less, may be utilized by the minor home occupation. 
b.  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation, within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of colors, materials, construction, lights, signs, or the emission of noise or vibration. 
c.  No traffic shall be generated by such minor home occupation by persons other than the occupants of the dwelling and any parking required as a result of the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and in portions of the lot other than in required yards. 
d.  No minor home occupation shall involve the use, parking, storage or repair of any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 11,000 pounds, except deliveries by parcel post, United Parcel Service or similar in town delivery service trucks. 
e.  No minor home occupation shall involve the on-site use or storage of tractor trailers, semi-trucks, buses or heavy construction equipment. 
f.  No equipment or process shall be used in any minor home occupation that creates noise, vibration glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or processes shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises. 
g.  No outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation shall be permitted. 
h.  No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of mechanical or electrical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or the district in which the structure is located. 
i.  No person other than residents of the dwelling shall be employed at the location in the conduct of a minor home occupation. 
j.  The following are specifically prohibited as minor home occupations, but may be permitted as major home occupations in accordance with the procedures of section 3-105.2, Accessory uses permitted with supplemental provisions: 
i.  Appliance repair. 
ii.  Beauty salons and barbershops. 
iii.  Cabinetmaking. 
iv.  Ceramics (with kiln larger than six cubic feet). 
v.  Dance or music studios with more than four students. 
vi.  Medical or dental office. 
vii.  Transportation equipment repair. 
viii.  Upholstering. 
ix.  Veterinary uses (including care, grooming or boarding). 
9.  Parents day out. Child care for preteenage children, for not more than 12 hours in any one week, shall be considered an accessory use when operated by a place of worship. 
10.  Private recreation facilities. Private swimming pools, tennis courts and other outdoor recreational facilities exclusively for the use of the residents. 
3-105.2 Conditional accessory use provisions. In addition to the requirements established for accessory uses generally, the specific standards set out below for individual accessory uses and activities shall be met as part of the conditions for issuing the use permit. Upon issuance of any permit for a conditional accessory use as specified by this section such use or activity shall be continuously subject to compliance with any operational standard or criteria established by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals and limitations imposed upon such use by virtue of its being classified as accessory to a principal use or activity. Any conditional use permit issued hereunder shall be for a maximum time period of two years. Such permit may be renewed for additional periods upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that all conditions and operational limitations established by the Board in originally issuing the permit are being complied with fully. In any instance where the Zoning Administrator shall find that questions exist concerning compliance with any aspect or limitation of the permit, he shall refuse to renew the permit and immediately take all actions necessary to have the permit reviewed by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. All accessory activities to a conditional (C) use shall be approved in accordance with the procedure set out in article XIV, section 14-106, for review and approval of conditional uses generally. An accessory activity may be approved along with the principal conditional use or at any point subsequent thereto in the manner provided, herein. Accessory uses with supplemental provisions include the following: 
1.  Accessory agricultural occupations. Uses permitted as accessory agricultural occupations shall include, but not be limited to auto, truck and farm equipment repair, welding shops, wood working shops, manufacture or processing of garments, the sale of farm products, supplies and equipment and other similar uses that in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals would meet the criteria of an accessory-agricultural occupation. These provisions are established to provide supplemental occupations for residents located in a rural environment. All applicants requesting approval for this type of home occupation are required to meet the provisions set forth below and any other safeguards the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem necessary to protect neighboring and near by properties. 
a.  Property must be located in an AR-40 district and meet minimum lot size and dimensional requirements for the district. 
b.  No proposed use shall occupy more than one accessory building with a total square footage not to exceed 3,000 square feet. 
c.  Accessory buildings may not be altered so that the character of the agricultural function is not maintained. 
d.  Any accessory agricultural occupation located within 200 feet of any residential structure on an adjoining lot shall maintain a 50-foot buffer at all points along the shared property line between the uses. 
e.  Adequate parking shall be provided to serve the accessory agricultural occupation as well as the agricultural and residential functions taking place upon the lot. 
f.  No outside storage of goods or materials shall be visible from any public road. 
g.  Uses involving the storage, transfer or disposal of hazardous materials shall not be permitted. 
h.  All automobiles or trucks parked on the site are required to have a current registration and license plates. 
2.  Accessory child care. Child care for preteenage children shall be considered an accessory use when operated by a health care, commercial or industrial activity where the care is provided solely for the children of their employees and meets all applicable state and local regulations for a child care center for children. 
3.  Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments may be permitted as conditional accessory activities. 
a.  Individual rooms which are rented shall not contain cooking facilities. 
b.  The owner and/or operator must reside on the premises. 
c.  The bed and breakfast establishment shall not create noise, light or traffic conditions detrimental to neighboring properties. 
d.  No exterior alterations other than those necessary to ensure safety of the structure, shall be made to any building for the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast establishment. 
e.  The bed and breakfast establishment must front on or have direct access to a public street of adequate design for the proposed use. 
f.  Off-street parking shall be provided, however no off-street parking is permitted in the front yard area. 
g.  Off-street parking spaces shall be one for each guest/rental room in addition to the provisions spaces required for the dwelling. Maneuvering area shall be provided on-site to allow vehicles to exit property front-end first. 
h.  Screening may be required of off-street parking areas to minimize any detrimental impact to adjoining properties. 
i.  The bed and breakfast establishment shall be serviced by a public water and wastewater system. 
j.  A landscaping plan shall be required that is compatible with neighboring properties. 
4.  Major home occupations. In all zones permitting residences, home occupations that exceed the standards for minor home occupations may be approved as conditional accessory uses subject to the following: 
a.  Participants. The home occupation is to be conducted only by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit, plus no more than one nonresident assistant or employee. Persons engaged in the building trades or similar fields, using their dwelling units or residential premises as an office for business activities carried on, off the premises, may have more employees that the limitation set forth above, if such persons are not employed on the premises. 
b.  Hours of operation. In no case shall a home occupation be open to the public at times earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m. 
c.  Scale. A home occupation shall be conducted within a dwelling and shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling. No more than 500 square feet or 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less, may be utilized by the home occupation. 
d.  Residential appearance and character. In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation, within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of colors, materials, construction, lights, signs or the emission of noise or vibration. 
e.  Noise, equipment and process restrictions. No equipment or process shall be used in any home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the formal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or processes shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises. 
f.  Restriction of wholesale and retail sales. There shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies or products, provided that orders previously made by telephone or at a sales party may be picked up and products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation may be sold. However, direct sales of products produced off premises are not permitted. 
g.  Deliveries and large vehicle storage. The home occupation shall not involve the use, parking, storage or repair of any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 11,000 pounds, except deliveries by parcel post, United Parcel Service or similar in town delivery service trucks. 
h.  Outside storage. There shall be no storage of equipment, vehicles, or supplies associated with the home occupation outside the dwelling or accessory building. 
i.  Display of products prohibited. There shall be no display of products visible in any manner from outside the dwelling. 
j.  Hazards. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of mechanical or electrical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or shall be used or stored on the property in conjunction with any home occupation permitted, hereunder. No use shall be permitted which involves the manufacture or storage of products that are dangerous in terms of risk of fire, explosion or hazardous emissions. 
k.  Heavy transportation and construction equipment prohibited. No home occupation shall involve the on-site use or storage of tractor trailers, semi-trucks, or heavy construction equipment. 
l.  Parking. A parking plan shall be presented with each request for a conditional use permit presented, hereunder. The plan shall demonstrate: 
i.  That adequate off-street parking can be provided on the site to accommodate the additional needs generated by the home occupation. 
ii.  That any added parking will not detract from the visual appearance of the residence or adversely impact adjoining properties. 
5.  Operation of a cafeteria. Operation of a cafeteria for employees, residents, patrons or others participating in the principal activity conducted by an organization engaged in community facility activity on the same zone lot. Where the community facility is permitted as a conditional use an accessory cafeteria must be approved as a part of the action granting said permit. 
6.  Residential occupancy in connection with nonresidential activity. Residential occupancy may be permitted as an accessory use to a principal nonresidential activity located on the same zone lot subject to the following: 
a.  Only one unit permitted. No more than one dwelling or rooming unit may be permitted in connection with a principal nonresidential activity located upon the same zone lot. 
b.  Occupancy limited. Any dwelling or rooming unit permitted under the provisions of this section shall be limited to occupancy by person(s) employed in the principal nonresidential activity located upon the same zone lot. 
c.  Residential occupancy prohibited. No dwelling or rooming unit may be located upon any site with a nonresidential activity that is defined by this ordinance as a hazardous occupancy. 
7.  Production for retail sale. Production of goods for sale by a firm engaged in a principal commercial activity on the same lot shall be considered an accessory use, but only if: 
a.  All goods so produced are sold at retail by the same firm on the same zone lot; 
b.  Such production does not occupy more than 49 percent of the total floor area occupied by such firm on the lot; 
c.  Such production does not in any case occupy more than 2,000 square feet of such floor area; and 
d.  Such production occurs only in an enclosed building. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-105) 
Sec. 3-106. - Temporary events, uses, and portable buildings. 
    The provisions of this section are necessary to govern the operation and allowance of temporary events. All temporary events are subject to approval by the City of Mt. Juliet. Any person or entity desiring to conduct or sponsor such events must submit an application to the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, for a temporary permit and shall fully describe the nature and purpose of the requested activity. All information and plans required by the Zoning Administrator as necessary for determining compliance with the provisions contained in this section or elsewhere herein shall be provided in accordance with prescribed submittal and deadline requirements. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the application and may approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions temporary permits for such events. 
    All temporary events shall comply with the entirety of section 3-106, and unless otherwise altered by this section, shall comply with all zoning and other requirements of the City of Mt. Juliet. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant permits for temporary events when, and only when, all requirements have been met. No permit issued, herein under, shall be for a time period in excess of that stipulated below for each individual activity. 
I.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the requirements of this section and are not intended to have general application to the Zoning Ordinance or other City regulations. 
Major road: For the purposes of this section, major roads are: North and South Mt. Juliet Rd. (State Hwy. 171), Old Lebanon Dirt Road, Division Street, Adams Lane (from Mt. Juliet Road to Crossings Blvd.), Providence Parkway, Belinda Parkway (east to Providence Trail), Central Pike, Beckwith Road, Nonaville Road, Golden Bear Gateway, and Lebanon Road (US Highway 70), or any road classified as an arterial street in the Major Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. Staff reserves the right to revise this list as deemed necessary. 
Portable building: Includes, but is not limited to, recreational vehicles, tents, carts, kiosks, and construction trailers. 
Temporary event/use: An activity limited in duration, as defined herein, that does not require the issuance of a regular City of Mt. Juliet Business Tax License. In this context the term event and use is used interchangeably. 
Sponsor: The applicant and/or operator of the temporary event for whom the temporary event request is approved, and who is responsible for ensuring conformance with City and other regulations, and is the point of contact for the business or organization. 
Mobile vendor shall mean a person, corporation, company, or business that sells or offers for sale new goods, wares, merchandise, beverages or food stuffs of any kind or nature whatsoever from cart, or other mobile vehicle designed for preparing or selling these products. 
II.  Temporary events/uses. 
A.  Circus or carnival. This class of temporary events includes travelling businesses open to the public and offering shows, amusement rides and other activities for entertainment, and often characterized by high traffic and attendance, evening hours, lights and noise. Such use shall only be permitted in the following districts subject to the approval standards and conditions presented herein: 
Use permitted in the following zoning districts: 
Commercial districts - All 
Industrial districts - IR and IG 
Standards and conditions: These events shall comply with all applicable City regulations, including the contents of section 3-106, and with the following requirements. 
1.  Approval standards. Prior to issuance of any permit the Zoning Administrator shall establish that the proposed activity satisfies the following standards: 
a.  That the proposed activity is in conformance with all applicable City ordinances; 
b.  That the proposed activity will not result in undue adverse traffic congestion and unsafe conditions regarding the use of public roads; 
c.  That the proposed activity will not present or create a threat to the safety of persons or property because of fire, explosion or other threat; 
d.  That the proposed activity will not create unhealthy conditions regarding water supply, sewage disposal or solid waste disposal; 
e.  That the proposed activity will not interfere with the use of neighboring property for its customary use by creation of noise, dust, noxious odors, lighting or other activities which exceed the operational performance standards established in article XII of this [Zoning] Ordinance; 
2.  Approval conditions. Within those districts where permitted the following supplementary provisions shall apply to all circuses and carnivals. 
a.  No permit may be issued for a period longer than ten days. 
b.  Such activity may be permitted only on lots where adequate off-street parking can be provided. 
c.  When the activity is to be located within any residential district, the minimum site shall be no less than four acres in size. 
d.  Sanitary facilities shall be approved by the local Department of Health. 
e.  The Zoning Administrator shall stipulate, based upon the pattern and nature of land uses within the immediate area, whether a maximum of 60 or 70 decibels noise level shall be permitted to occur at the site boundary. 
f.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to restrict the days and hours of operation of the activity. 
B.  Christmas tree sale/fireworks. Use permitted in the following zoning districts: 
Christmas tree sales - All districts 
Firework sales - All commercial/industrial districts 
Standards and conditions: These events shall comply with all applicable City regulations, including the contents of section 3-106, and with the following requirements. 
A.  Such permit may not be issued for a period longer than 45 days. 
B.  Firework sales shall not be permitted within 200 feet of any residential use. 
C.  Retail firework sales shall also be subject to the City of Mt. Juliet Code of Ordinances, chapter 10, article VI, "Fireworks". 
C.  Special civic events, nonprofit festivals, bazaars, etc. This class of temporary events includes those typically associated with nonprofit, non-commercial organizations. Examples include, but are not limited to: fundraisers, summer concerts, church/religious events, school events, group yard sales, Arbor Day celebrations, patriotic events, youth and adult sports events. 
Use permitted in the following zoning districts: All districts 
Standards and conditions: These events shall comply with all applicable City regulations, including the contents of section 3-106, and with the following requirements. 
1.  Approval standards. Prior to issuance of any permit the Zoning Administrator shall establish that the proposed activity satisfies the following standards: 
a.  That the proposed activity is in conformance with all applicable City ordinances; 
b.  That the proposed activity will not result in undue adverse traffic congestion and unsafe conditions; 
c.  That the proposed activity will not present or create a threat to the safety of persons or property because of fire, explosion or other threat; 
d.  That the proposed activity will not create unhealthy conditions regarding water supply, sewage disposal or solid waste disposal; 
e.  That the proposed activity will not interfere with the use of neighboring property for its customary use by creation of noise, dust, noxious odors, lighting or other activities which exceed the operational performance standards established in article XII of this ordinance; 
2.  Approval conditions. Within those districts where permitted, the following supplementary provisions shall apply to all temporary nonprofit festivals, bazaars, and similar activities. 
a.  No permit may be issued for a period longer than ten days. 
b.  Such activity may be permitted only on lots where adequate off-street parking can be provided. 
c.  When the activity is to be located within any residential district, the minimum site shall be no less than four acres in size. 
d.  Sanitary facilities shall be approved by the local Department of Health. 
e.  The Zoning Administrator shall stipulate, based upon the pattern and nature of land uses within the immediate area, whether a maximum of 60 or 70 decibels noise level shall be permitted to occur at the site boundary. 
f.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to restrict the days and hours of operation of the activity. 
D.  Commercial sales event (on-site) (approved Ord. 2012-59). Commercial sales events (on-site), hereinafter referred to as "event", are conducted in association with an existing permanent on-site business and include grand opening/going out of business events, holiday sales event, and similar uses. Events only require approval under this ordinance when they involve the outdoor placement of merchandise, portable or temporary signs and/or banners, tents, carts, or other structures specific to the event. Such use shall only be permitted as allowed below. For the purposes of this section, these events shall not apply to major or minor home occupations. 
Use permitted in the following zoning districts: 
All zoning districts when associated with a permitted conforming use. 
Standards and conditions. These events shall comply with all applicable city regulations, including the contents of section 3-106, especially the standards and conditions in subsections III and V, and with the following requirements. 
1.  Written approval from the property owner shall be provided for all events. 
2.  These events shall only be allowed in conjunction with the principal use to which they are associated and may not constitute a separate business. 
3.  In addition to a bona fied grand opening or going out of business event, a business may conduct no more than six commercial sales events associated with nationally observed holidays in a calendar year. 
4.  A maximum of one 'grand opening,' and one 'closing' or 'going out of business' event shall be permitted per use, per year for any given location. 
5.  Each event shall be limited to maximum of seven consecutive days. 
6.  In no case, shall any table, seat, display, tent, cart, wagon, trailer, vehicle, or portable building, cause a reduction in the available amount of parking spaces, to the detriment of the principal use or activities dependent on such parking except as allowed in subsection V.C. 
7.  All temporary structures shall be certified as being in compliance with all applicable fire, building, health, life safety, and other regulations as may be in effect from time to time. If in the determination of the city an approved temporary event constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the city may consider revoking the permit for this location and/or the temporary event. 
8.  Regulations for temporary signs are contained in article XI, Signs, and in subsection 3-106.VI, Signs for temporary event and uses, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
E.  "Commercial" events (off-site). This class of temporary event includes independent commercial ventures not associated with an on-site principal (permanent) business, that operate on a developed site, or in association with a vacant property. Examples include, but are not limited to, the retail sale of plants, food, art, or other products. This classification includes mobile vendors which may include the sale of food or nonfood products, from carts, wagons, tents, or other vehicles designed for preparing or selling these products. These temporary events are not necessarily related to holidays, seasons, or any other recurring activity. Such use shall only be permitted as allowed below. 
Use permitted only when conducted as a part of an otherwise approved temporary event/use as listed in [subsections] A through D of this [section] or in association with an event sponsored by a governmental entity such as the City of Mt. Juliet or a Wilson County School. Off-site commercial events, including mobile vendors, shall not be permitted as independent stand-alone uses except as noted in [paragraph] 1 below. 
Standards and conditions. These activities shall comply with all applicable city regulations, including the contents of section 3-106, especially the standards and conditions in subsections III and V, and with the following requirements. 
1.  Mobile vendors and the use of carts not exceeding more than 40 square feet in floor/ground area are permitted when: a) located within a shopping center containing a minimum of five acres, and b) are more than 200 feet from a public road, and c) receive the approval of the property owner or his/her/it's authorized agent. Individual carts or cart groups shall be a minimum of 300 feet from each other and comply with sign regulations herein. Groups of carts may not exceed three in number. 
2.  A maximum of two tables seating no more than eight persons may be placed on the site. 
3.  Hand washing or sanitizing facilities shall be provided for all temporary events offering or selling food for immediate consumption. 
4.  Mobile vendors shall be no closer than 1,320 feet (as measured by public road access) from a permanent business conducting or offering for sale merchandise similar to that of the mobile vendor. 
5.  Signs displayed on-site, specific to the temporary event, shall be permanently affixed to the cart, wagon, trailer, or other vehicle used for the sale of merchandise. Signs shall not encroach into any right-of-way or road easement. No other advertising signs are permitted. Additional regulations for temporary signs can be found in section 11-106 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
6.  The mobile vendors current business tax license, if required, and the mobile vendors proof of liability insurance shall be displayed prominently and conspicuously by the mobile vendor on all mobile vending units when engaged in the business of vending. If the mobile vendor sells food or beverages, the Health Department Food Service Permit and Inspection Report must also be prominently and conspicuously displayed. 
7.  All mobile vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles as a part of their operation, in a prominent location, and sufficient in size to collect all waste and recyclables generated by customers and staff of the mobile vending operation. 
F.  Temporary events/uses-Exemptions and permitting. 
1.  Other temporary events. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine whether temporary events not listed herein are permitted and under what parameters. In performing this function, the Zoning Administrator shall deny or assign a proposed event to the existing category of uses to which it is most analogous. When so assigned, the temporary event shall be permitted subject to the procedures, conditions and limitations of the temporary event to which it has been assigned. 
2.  Permitting. A temporary event exceeding the standards and/or conditions for an event specified herein, or those contained in subsection "III" of this ordinance may be approved by conditional use permit by vote of the Board of Zoning Appeals. In addition, an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be made by any applicant denied a permit by the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator within seven days of the date of permit denial. In considering requests, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall in their deliberations determine that the proposed temporary event will not: a) adversely affect the public health, safety and/or welfare, b) and will not cause an undue impact or burden on adjacent property owners or residents, c) and will not overburden existing transportation routes or roadways. 
3.  Exemptions. Any business or activity otherwise subject to this ordinance shall be exempt from these requirements during a permitted temporary event, during the time of such event, if registered with the organization to which a permit has been issued, and contained within the approved site. This does not relieve the operator of the need for a business license and complying with building or health codes. 
4.  City parks/property. The Director of Parks and Recreation has the authority to approve temporary uses/events located upon any property owned by the City of Mt. Juliet. Under such circumstances the standards and conditions found in the next section may be modified to accommodate the planned event so long as such action is not contrary to the health and/or safety of the public/participants. 
5.  Annual permits. The Zoning Administrator may issue an annual permit for a temporary event or use that is recurring throughout the calendar year. 
III.  General standards and conditions of approval applicable to all temporary events/uses. 
A.  Written approval from the property owner shall be provided for all temporary events. Additionally, for any event not conducted by the property owner, a letter from the property owner shall be provided acknowledging that he/she is fully aware of the nature and scope of the temporary event and grants approval for the event on their property. 
B.  Plans and other information necessary to review and evaluate the proposed temporary event shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator. Said plans include, but shall not be limited to, a site layout drawing or site plan in a form and content established by the Zoning Administrator, such as property boundaries, right-of-way, setbacks, location of all temporary structures and signs, location of utilities, parking and access, and stormwater management. 
C.  All such temporary events shall be limited to those sites which have adequate all-weather, dust free, off-street parking to serve the permitted use. Indoor or portable sanitary facilities shall be provided. 
D.  Hours during which such events shall be allowed to conduct business or operate are between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Portable buildings approved for a temporary event shall be permitted to remain on-site beyond these hours, unless otherwise required to be removed by the approving authority. 
E.  The operation of the temporary event shall be subject to the requirements of section 16-22 - Anti-noise regulations, of the Mt. Juliet Codification Manual and section 12-105, Specific standards, in the Zoning Ordinance. 
F.  Outdoor activities and portable buildings may not be within 100 feet of an adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
G.  The temporary event shall not present or create a threat to the safety of persons or property due to the possibility of fire, explosion or other threat; 
H.  The temporary event shall comply with all local, county, and state environmental, solid waste disposal, and sanitary waste disposal requirements. Any required Health Department certificate shall be plainly displayed; 
I.  The temporary event shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property for its customary use by creation of noise, dust, noxious odors, traffic, lighting or other activities which exceed the operational performance standards established in article XII of this [Zoning] Ordinance; 
J.  Signs shall be allowed as contained in subsection VI, Signs for temporary uses and event contained herein. 
K.  The proposed temporary event will not result in adverse traffic congestion and unsafe conditions regarding access to, and the use of, public roads. A traffic management plan may be required by the City Engineer for review and approval. This plan shall show parking areas provided and circulation routes. Based on the nature and location of the proposed temporary event a traffic impact study may also be required. 
L.  Temporary events and/or activities that require use of public right-of-way shall be planned and coordinated with the appropriate city, county, or state departments identified by the Zoning Administrator. 
M.  Trash or garbage generated by the temporary event shall be removed from the area and properly disposed of daily and within 24 hours after the activity or event has ceased to operate. The City may require a deposit or surety to cover the cost of cleaning the site and adjacent right-of-way. 
N.  Sufficient parking shall be provided. All parking areas shall be covered with gravel or similar material to produce an 'all-weather' surface. Drainage and runoff shall be controlled to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director. 
O.  In no case, shall any portable building create an obstruction to visibility as required by subsection 9-106.5, Visibility areas. 
P.  Any approval granted shall be for the proposed property and is not transferrable to another location. 
Q.  The operator or sponsor of any approved temporary event shall obtain and display the required City, Wilson County, or Tennessee business or operations license. 
R.  Signs on multi-tenant sites or within centers shall be placed within 50 feet of the building entrance. 
IV.  Temporary portable buildings. The temporary events listed in subsection II above may request and be approved to temporarily place portable buildings on the site. These portable buildings shall be placed and used only during the authorized time of the 'event' or other approved activity, subject to the restrictions herein, and further subject to all fire, building, and health requirements of the City of Mt. Juliet, or other governmental entity, in effect or applicable at the time. All required permits required from the building division or other agencies shall be obtained. 
Except as expressly allowed and approved in this section, elsewhere in this ordinance or other City Codes, no portable building, or any other such structure shall be permitted on any parcel of land within the City. This shall not affect the right to park for storage purposes (not for habitation), an RV or boat on a residential property as provided for elsewhere in City Codes. 
A.  Temporary construction offices/trailers and construction sites. 
1.  In any district, a permit may be issued by the Building Official for a temporary portable building or structure to be used as a contractor's office or for other purposes incidental to an approved construction project. Such permit shall be valid for the duration of the project; which is defined as being until the completion of construction, cessation of construction work, or expiration of the temporary permit, whichever occurs first. 
2.  Construction sites shall be permitted to display a maximum of three temporary signs with a maximum height of six feet, and maximum size of 24 sq. ft. each, which signs may display the name of the Architect, Engineer, Contractor, proposed business, etc. All signs shall be removed upon cessation of construction work or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
B.  Temporary dwelling unit in cases of special hardship. In any residential district, a temporary use permit may be issued to place a mobile home temporarily on a lot in which the principal structure was destroyed by fire, explosion or natural phenomena. The purpose of such temporary placement shall be to provide shelter for only the residents of the principal structure during the period of reconstruction and to prevent an exceptional hardship on the same. Placement of such temporary structure must not represent a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the community. An applicant for a temporary use permit as provided under this subsection must produce a written statement from the appropriate regulatory authority approving the water supply and sewage disposal systems of the temporary structure. Such a permit may be initially issued for nine months. A permit may be renewed for up to six months at a time, the total time for all permits not exceeding a total of 21 months. 
C.  Temporary real estate sales. Temporary conduct of a real estate sales office that is necessary and incidental to, and located on the site of a subdivision being developed into five or more lots shall be considered an accessory use. 
V.  General standards and conditions of approval applicable to all portable buildings. 
A.  The approval of portable buildings shall comply with all requirements in subsection III, General standards and conditions of approval applicable to temporary events, determined to be applicable by the approving authority. 
B.  Portable buildings shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any road right-of-way line and ten feet from any other property line. Supporting stakes/poles shall not extend beyond property boundaries. These requirements may be increased depending on the nature of the proposed event and adjacent uses. 
C.  In no case, shall any table, seat, display, tent, cart, wagon, trailer, vehicle, or portable building, occupy any required maneuvering, circulation, drainage, pedestrian, landscape area (with the exception of an open lawn area), or more than two parking spaces. 
D.  All temporary structures shall be certified as being in compliance with all applicable fire, building, health, life safety, and other regulations as may be in effect from time to time. 
E.  All portable buildings, including those used for mobile vending, shall be clean and in good working order, requiring no mechanical or cosmetic repairs. 
If in the determination of the City an approved temporary event constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, the City may consider revoking the permit for this location and/or the temporary event. 
VI.  Signs for temporary uses and events. 
A.  Temporary events, buildings, and other activities contained herein may be allowed to display signs as provided in this [section] 3-106. 
B.  Additional regulations for temporary signs are contained in article XI of the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  In the case of conflict between the sign regulations contained herein for temporary events or temporary buildings, and article XI, Sign Regulations, of the Zoning Ordinance, these regulations shall prevail. 
D.  In addition, signs for the temporary uses described in subsection 3-106.II, paragraphs A through G shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Signs displayed on-site, advertising a temporary use or event, may include no more than two banners, not to exceed five feet in height for horizontal banners or ten feet in height for vertical banners, and no more than 32 square feet per banner, and one individual or group of balloons or inflatables shown as 'allowed' in subparagraph a. below. Signs shall not encroach into any right-of-way or road easement, be above a roof line, nor provide an obstruction to visibility. Examples of allowed and prohibited signs are illustrated in subparagraph a. below. 
a)  Examples of allowed and prohibited signs. 

(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 3-106; Ord. No. 2012-59, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-54, § 1(Exh. A), 7-8-2013) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

Sec. 4-101. - Establishment of districts. 
    4-101.1 Base districts. In order to implement all purposes and provisions of this ordinance, the following districts are hereby established: 
1.  Residential districts. 
AR-40, Agricultural/Residential Districts 
RS-40, Single-Family Residential Districts 
RS-30, Single-Family Residential Districts 
RS-20, Single-Family Residential Districts 
RS-15, Single-Family Residential Districts 
RS-10, Single-Family Residential Districts 
R-10, One- and Two-Family Residential Districts 
RM-8, Multifamily Residential Districts 
RM-16, Multifamily Residential Districts 
R-MHP, Manufactured Home Park Development Districts 
2.  Commercial and mixed use districts. 
CG, Commercial-General Districts 
CI, Commercial Interchange Districts 
CMU, Commercial Mixed Use District 
CNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service Districts 
OPS, Office/Professional Service Districts 
CTC, Commercial Town Center Districts 
CRC, Commercial Retail Center Districts 
3.  Industrial districts. 
I-R, Restrictive Industrial Districts 
I-G, General Industrial Districts 
I-S, Special Industrial Districts 
    4-101.2 Overlay districts. The following are hereby established as special districts to which the provisions set forth in this ordinance are applicable: 
1.  F-P, Floodplain Districts. 
2.  PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. 
3.  A-E, Adult Entertainment Districts. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 4-101) 
Sec. 4-102. - Provisions for official zoning maps. 
    4-102.1 Incorporation of maps. The boundaries of districts established by this ordinance are shown on the official zoning maps which are hereby incorporated into the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning maps in their entirety, including all amendments, shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth and described herein. 
    4-102.2 Identification and alteration of the official zoning map. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the City Recorder, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map, referred to in article IV, of Ordinance Number 2001-29, Adopted October 8, 2001, of the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning maps, such changes shall be entered on such maps promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Commissioners. No amendment to this ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under article XIV. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the Zoning Administrator shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the planning jurisdiction. 
    4-102.3 Replacement of official zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Board of Commissioners may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment, thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the City Recorder, and bear the seal of the City under the following words: 
    "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted ____________ , by the City of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee." 
All prior official zoning maps or any significant parts, thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to their adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 4-102; Ord. No. 2012-44, § 2, 7-23-2012) 
Sec. 4-103. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the official zoning map, the following shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
F.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subparts "A" through "E" of this section, above, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of map. 
G.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subparts "A" through "F" of this section, above, the Board of [Zoning] Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
H.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the Board of [Zoning] Appeals may permit extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 500 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 4-103) 
Sec. 4-104. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
B.  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(1)  To exceed the height or bulk. 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families. 
(3)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area. 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open space. 
C.  Except as may be expressly permitted under the provisions of article VIII, for planned unit developments, no part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
D.  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 4-104) 
Sec. 4-105. - Zoning of annexed territory. 
    All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Mt. Juliet, unless, otherwise specified, shall be zoned RS-40, Single-Family Residential District. Such annexed territory shall retain such zoning classification until necessary studies are made by the Planning Commission and the official zoning map is amended in the manner provided in article XIV. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2004-34, 8-9-2004; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 4-105) 
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-101. - Purposes of residential districts. 
    5-101.1 General purposes. The residential districts established in this ordinance are designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following: 
1.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential developments to adequately meet the housing needs of the present and expected future population of the urban area, with due allowance to the need for a variety of choices in site selection. 
2.  To permit improved movement on the public ways and to effectively utilize existing public ways, and, as far as possible, to mitigate the effects of heavy traffic and more particularly all through traffic, in residential areas. 
3.  To protect residential areas against flood, fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other dangers, and against offensive matter, heat, glare, humidity and other objectionable influences. 
4.  To protect residential areas against undue congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of population, the intensity of activity, and the bulk of buildings in relation to the surrounding land and to one another. 
5.  To require open space in residential areas whenever practicable in order to open up these areas to light and air, to provide open space for rest and recreation, and to break up the monotony of continuous building bulk and thereby to provide a more desirable living environment. 
6.  To provide for access of light and air to windows and for privacy, as far as possible, by controls over the height of buildings and structures. 
7.  To provide appropriate space for public and private educational, religious, recreational and similar facilities, and public utilities which serve the needs of nearby residents, which generally perform their own activities more effectively in a residential environment, and which do not create objectionable influences, and to coordinate the intensity of residential land use with appropriate community facilities. 
8.  To provide a zoning framework conducive to freedom of architectural design in order to encourage development of more attractive and economical building forms. 
9.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for agricultural activities. 
10.  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accordance with a well considered general plan to promote stability of residential development, to protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings and to protect the community's tax revenues. 
    5-101.2 District purposes. 
1.  AR-40, Agricultural/Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide for low-density residential development in conjunction with suitable areas for the growing of crops, animal husbandry, dairying, forestry and other similar activities. The intensity of development is expected to range from that which characterizes rural environments to that seen in low-density suburban areas where public sanitary sewer service is least practical. In addition, these districts may include areas and lands not suited by reason of soil, geologic, topographic or other limitations for development. These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an open environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences that are incompatible with a rural environment. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they, otherwise, conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  RS-40, Single-Family Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide for low-density residential development in areas where public sanitary sewer service is least practical or where large lots and an open appearance is desired. In addition, these districts may include areas and lands not suited by reason of soil, geologic, topographic, or other limitations for development. These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an open environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences that are incompatible with a suburban residential environment. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they, otherwise, conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.  RS-30, RS-20 and RS-15, Single-Family Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide suitable areas for single-family residential development at densities which typically characterize a suburban environment where appropriate urban services and facilities, specifically, including public sewer service, are provided at the time of development. Residential development will consist of single detached dwellings and such other structures as are accessory thereto. These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an open residential environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further, it is the intent of this ordinance that these districts be so located that the expansion of appropriate urban services can be physically and economically facilitated for the orderly expansion and maintenance of urban residential development throughout the planning jurisdiction. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  RS-10 Single-Family Residential Districts and R-10 One-and Two-Family Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide suitable areas for single-family and, in the case of the R-10 district, duplex residential development. Residential development will consist of single detached dwelling structures, duplexes and other structures accessory thereto. These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an open residential environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further, it is the intent of this ordinance that these districts be located where appropriate urban services and facilities, specifically, including public sewer service, are provided so that the expansion of appropriate urban services can be physically and economically facilitated throughout the planning jurisdiction. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit, or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.  RM-8, Multifamily Residential Districts. The RM-8 districts are designed to provide suitable areas for multifamily dwellings at densities which are conducive to development of townhouse, and other forms of attached dwellings where sufficient urban facilities are available or where such facilities will be available prior to development. These districts may permit a variety of housing types and forms of property ownership within the same development. In order to permit maximum flexibility in the design solutions and ownership mechanisms available within these districts while maintaining necessary control over the development process, any RM-8 district created after adoption of this ordinance shall not be created as a freestanding district, but shall in all instances be overlain by a PUD, Planned Unit Development District. These districts also permit community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an urban residential environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further, it is the intent of this ordinance that these districts be located where appropriate urban services and facilities, specifically, including public sewer service, are provided so that expansion of appropriate urban services can be physically and economically facilitated throughout the planning jurisdiction. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
6.  RM-16, Multifamily Residential Districts. The RM-16 districts are designed to provide suitable areas for multifamily dwellings at high densities where sufficient urban facilities, specifically, including public sewer service, are available or where such facilities will be available prior to or at the time development. These districts may permit a variety of housing types and forms of property ownership within the same development. In order to permit maximum flexibility in the design solutions and ownership mechanisms available within these districts while maintaining necessary control over the development process, any RM-16 district created after adoption of this ordinance shall not be created as a freestanding district, but shall in all instances be overlain by a PUD, Planned Unit Development District. These districts also permit community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of these districts, or that are benefited by an urban residential environment without creating objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided by these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they, otherwise, conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
7.  R-MHP, Manufactured Home Park Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide suitable areas for manufactured home parks where sufficient urban facilities, specifically, including public sewer service, are available prior to or at the time of development. Manufactured homes and buildings necessary to support the residential occupancy of these structures are permitted. In order to permit maximum flexibility in the design solutions and ownership mechanisms available within these districts while maintaining necessary control over the development process, any R-MHP district created after adoption of this ordinance shall not be created as a freestanding district, but shall in all instances be overlain by a PUD, Planned Unit Development District. These districts are intended also to permit community facilities and public utility installations which are necessary to service and do service specifically the residents of these districts, or which are benefited by and compatible with a residential environment. It is the express purpose of this ordinance to exclude from these districts all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics and not planned as an integral part of a total residential development, whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided for in these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 5-101) 
Sec. 5-102. - Uses and structures. 
    5-102.1 General provisions. Principal uses of buildings or other structures and land have been classified and combined into major classes and activity types in article III of this ordinance. The procedure for interpreting the classes and type of activities is provided in article III, section 3-101. Table 5-102A, presents a tabulation of uses and structures which are classified as principal permitted (P), permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) or conditional (C) uses within the various residential districts. The supplemental design provisions with which (SUP) and (C) uses and activities are required to comply are presented in article III, section 3-104, Supplemental use regulations. 
    5-102.2 Principal permitted uses (P). Principal permitted uses are permitted as a matter of right within the district indicated, subject to the general requirements established for the district wherein the use is located. 
Table 5-102A. Uses And Structures Allowable Within Residential Districts 
Principal Uses and Activities AR-40 RS-40 RS-30 RS-20 RS-15 RS-10 R-10 R-MHP(1) RM-8(1) RM-16(1) I. Residential activities A. Permanent 1. Single-family 
dwelling P P P P P P P P 2. Duplex dwelling P P 3. Multifamily dwelling SUP(2) SUP(2) 4. Manufactured home SUP(3) B. Semi-transient 1. Lodginghouse P II. Community facilities activities A. Administrative services 1. Government offices 2. Civil defense 
facilities P P P P P P P P P P 3. Court buildings 4. Fire department facilities P P P P P P P P P P 5. Police department 
facilities P P P P P P P P P P 6. Post offices P B. Child care facilities 1. Child care center C C C 2. Family child care home SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP 3. Group child care home SUP SUP SUP C. Community assembly 1. Civic, social, fraternal and philanthropic associations C C C C C C C C C C 2. Private (nonprofit) clubs, lodges, meeting halls and recreation centers C C C C C C C C C C D. Cultural and recreational services 1. Art galleries (noncommercial) C C C C C C C C C C 2. Athletic associations C C C C C C C C C C 3. Libraries P P P P P P P P P P 4. Museums C C C C C C C C C C 5. Parks, playgrounds and playfields P P P P P P P P P P 6. Planetariums and aquariums C C C C C C C C C C 7. Recreation centers and gymnasiums 
(nonprofit) C C C C C C C C C C 8. Swimming pools and beaches C C C C C C C C C C 9. Yachting clubs 
(private) C C C C C C C C C C 10. Zoological and 
botanical gardens 
(noncommercial) C C C C C C C C C C E. Educational facilities 1. Public, parochial and private kindergartens, primary and secondary schools C C C C C C C C C C F. Essential public transport, utility and communication 1. Gas, telephone, 
television and water 
distribution lines P P P P P P P P P P 2. Pumping facilities for water and sewer 
systems P P P P P P P P P P 3. Rights-of-way for all modes of transportation P P P P P P P P P P 4. Sewage collection lines P P P P P P P P P P G. Extensive impact facilities 1. Airports, air cargo 
terminals, heliports, 
helistops and other aeronautical devices 2. Electricity 
generating facilities 3. Major petroleum and natural gas transmission lines and facilities C C C C C C C C C C 4. Marine terminals 5. Military bases and reservations 6. Railroad, bus and transit terminals 7. Railroad yards and other transportation equipment marshaling and storage yards 8. Water and sewage treatment plants H. Health care facilities 1. Center for observation and rehabilitation 2. Hospitals 3. Medical clinics C C I. Intermediate impact facilities 1. Cemeteries, columbar- 
iums and mausoleums C C C C C C C C C C >2. Colleges, junior colleges and universities (excluding for profit business and technical schools) C C C C C C C C C C 3. Commercial boat docks, marinas and yacht clubs 4. Electrical and gas substations C C C C C C C C C C 5. Golf courses C C C C C C C C C C 6. Major mail 
processing centers 7. Radio, telephone and television towers and transmission facilities C C C C C C C C C C 8. Water storage tanks and facilities P P P P P P P P P P J. Religious facilities 1. Chapels C C C C C C C C C C >2. Churches C C C C C C C C C C 3. Convents and 
monasteries C C C C C C C C C C 4. Mosques C C C C C C C C C C 5. Synagogues C C C C C C C C C C 6. Temples C C C C C C C C C C K. Special institutional care facilities 1. Detention and/or correctional institutions 2. Drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities 3. Institutional care facilities (including all types of asylums for the psychotic or insane) 4. Halfway houses (serving convicted felons and substance abusers) L. Special personal and group care facilities 1. Assisted living facilities for elderly persons C C C 2. Convalescent homes C C 3. Day care facilities for elderly persons C C C 4. Family care facilities C C C 5. Group care facilities C C C 6. Nursing homes C C M. Waste disposal operations III. Agricultural and extractive A. Agriculture, general P B. Agriculture, intensive 1. Feedlots C 2. Poultry and egg production operations C 3. Stockyards C C. Agricultural services 1. Crop drying, storage and processing services C 2. Crop planting, cultivation and protection services C 3. Horticultural services C 4. Soil preparation services C 5. Veterinary services for livestock C D. Mining and quarrying 1. Borrow pits involving soil extraction and off-site use 2. Chemical fertilizer and nonmetallic mineral mining 3. Clay, ceramic and refractory materials mining 4. Coal mining 5. Crude petroleum and natural gas production 6. Metal ore and 
mineral mining 7. Sand and gravel 
quarrying 8. Stone quarrying E. Plant and forest nurseries 1. Forest nursery P 2. Plant nursery P 3. Sod farming P Accessory uses and activities Accessory agricultural occupations C Accessory apartment ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP Bed and breakfast 
establishment C C C C C C C C C C Bed and breakfast 
homestay ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP Columbarium P P P P P P P P P P Farm buildings P Home child care P P P P P P P P P P Major home occupations C C C C C C C C C C Minor home occupations ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP Parents day out ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP ASP Private recreational facilities P P P P P P P P P P  
Key to interpreting use classifications. 
P = Use permitted by right within the district. 
SUP = Principal use permitted with supplemental provisions. 
C = Conditional use subject to approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
ASP = Accessory use permitted with supplemental provisions. 
(1)  This district requires a mandatory PUD overlay. 
(2)  See subsection 5-104.1. 
(3)  See subsection 5-104.2. 
    5-102.3 Use permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP). A use permitted with supplemental provisions is an activity, use or structure which is permitted subject to a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the specific standards indicated for the use in question have been met. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 5-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    5-102.4 Conditional uses (C). A conditional use is an activity, use, or structure which may require large land area, have unique operating, traffic generating or other characteristics that may tend to dominate or adversely affect the area more than do other uses permitted within the same zone district. Because the impacts of these uses cannot be satisfactorily predetermined for every possible location within a zone district, these land uses are permitted only upon approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 5-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    5-102.5 Accessory uses. In addition to the principal activities expressed above, each activity type shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal activity when such accessory activity is located on the same zone lot as such principal activity and meets the further conditions set forth in article III, section 3-105. Accessory uses designated with the letter (P), in table 5-102A, are permitted as a matter of right and no permit is required to conduct the activity in question. Those accessory uses designated with the letters (ASP) require a permit obtained from the Office of the Zoning Administrator. Permits for accessory uses designated (ASP) shall be issued upon demonstration that the activity in question meets the requirements established for such activity article III, section 3-105. The third classification of accessory uses designated by the letter (C) require approval as a conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Upon issuance of any permit for a conditional accessory use such use or activity shall be continuously subject to compliance with any operational standard or criteria established by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
    5-102.6 Temporary uses. The temporary uses and structures specified in article III, section 3-106, as permissible within residential districts, may be permitted for the limited time periods indicated for each such use or activity. 
    5-102.7 Uses not permitted. Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional uses, temporary uses or accessory uses are prohibited within the various residential districts. 
    5-102.8 Restriction of buildings permitted on residential zone lots. Only one principal building may be permitted on any zone lot, except as may otherwise be approved as follows: 
1.  As part of a complex of dwellings subject to the provisions of subsections 5-104.1 or 5-104.2. 
2.  As part of a PUD, Planned Unit Development District as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2004-34, 8-9-2004; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 5-102) 
Sec. 5-103. - Bulk regulations. 
    5-103.1 General[ly]. The minimum lot dimensions, maximum lot coverage, maximum density, minimum front, rear, interior and street side yards, maximum building heights and minimum separation between buildings on the same zone lot within any base residential district shall be as indicated in table 5-103a, Bulk regulations for residential districts, and the additional bulk regulations specified in this section. For certain uses, alternative bulk regulations may be specified in this article or other articles of this ordinance. Bulk regulations for PUD, Planned Unit Development Overlay Districts shall be as specified in article VIII, section 8-207, Residential development standards. 
    5-103.2 Lot dimensions. No lot shall be created and no building permit or zoning approval shall be issued for any lot that does not meet the following minimum dimensional requirements, unless otherwise provided in the development plan of a planned unit development: 
1.  Lot area. 
a.  Minimum area. Within the various residential districts, the minimum horizontal area of a lot shall not be less than the greater of: that indicated in table 5-103a, Bulk regulations for residential districts, or that required to meet the provisions of article XIII, Environmental and performance standards. 
b.  Reduction in lot area prohibited. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width, building area, or other requirements of the zoning ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
2.  Lot width. The minimum lot width (measured at the building line) shall not be less than indicated in table 5-103a, or otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
Table 5-103a.
Zone standards 
AR-40 RS-40 RS-30 RS-20 RS-15 RS-10 R-10 R-MHP RM-8 RM-16 
Maximum lot coverage by all buildings (as a % of lot area) 15 15 18 25 30 35 40 (1) 50 50 II. 
Minimum lot area 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
Minimum lot area 40,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 10,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 
Minimum lot width at the building line 125 125 100 100 75 60 60 (1) 50 50 
Minimum lot width at the building line 150 150 125 125 100 100 100 100 100 100 
Minimum development area per dwelling or rooming unit (x 1,000 sq. ft.) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 7.5 5.5 5.5 2.7 
Maximum height (in feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 
Minimum yard requirements (in feet) A. Residential buildings 1. Front 50 50 35 30 30 30 30 (1) 20 20 2. Side 25 25 20 20 10 8 8 (1) 8 8 3. Rear 40 40 20 20 20 15 15 (1) 20 20 B. Other buildings 1. Front 60 60 60 60 50 40 40 30 30 30 2. Side 35 35 30 30 20 20 20 20 20 20 3. Rear 50 50 30 30 30 25 25 20 20 20 VI. Maximum impervious 
surface ratio (as % of lot area) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 60 70 70 (1) See subsection 5-104.2. (2) In addition to the minimum lot width requirement, no lot shall exceed a width to depth ratio of 4:1.  
3.  Lot frontage. All lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated and maintained street or a permanent access easement as defined and regulated by this ordinance, except that lots located along the terminus of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 35 feet of frontage. 
4.  Maximum permitted lot coverage. Within the various residential districts, the maximum zone lot coverage by all buildings, principal and accessory, shall not, except as provided in subsection 5-104.3, exceed the percentage of the total area of the zone lot indicated in table 5-103a. 
    5-103.3 Density regulations. 
1.  Basic requirement. The residential density permitted upon any zone lot found within the residential districts is controlled by the greater of the minimum lot size specified or, in the instance of multiple dwelling units permitted on a single lot, the development area required for each dwelling or rooming unit permitted to locate thereon. This is determined by dividing the total area of the zone lot by the development area per dwelling or rooming unit which is presented in table 5-103a. 
2.  Adjustment for lot area remainder. In all districts where residential uses are permitted, if an amount of lot area not allocated to a dwelling unit is less than that required for one additional dwelling, the remaining lot area may be used to satisfy lot area requirements if it represents not less than three-fourths of the total required. 
    5-103.4 Height regulations. 
1.  Basic requirements. The maximum permitted height for buildings shall not, except as provided in subpart 2 of this section, exceed that set forth for the various residential districts in table 5-103a. 
2.  General exception to height regulations. The height limitation contained in the district regulations does not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, radio towers, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the eave height of a building and not intended for human occupancy. 
3.  Buildings to be approved by fire department. Any building exceeding 35 feet in height shall be approved by the fire department prior to the issuance of any building permit. The fire department may stipulate special fire protection measures as a condition of approval of any such structure. In any such instance, the protection measures specified by the fire department shall become a supplemental design provision applicable to such use. 
    5-103.5 Yard regulations. 
1.  Application of the lot line equivalent to measurement of yards. The following provisions shall apply in the determination of a lot line equivalent: 
a.  A front lot line equivalent is a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. In the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, the foremost point of a side lot line shall be assumed to be the point at which the side lot line and the front lot line would have met without such rounding. 
b.  A rear lot line equivalent is a straight line joining the rearmost points of the side lot lines. 
c.  A side lot line equivalent is a straight line joining the ends of the front yard line and the rear yard line on the same side of the zone lot. 
In all residential districts, the width or depth of a yard shall be measured perpendicular to lot line equivalents. 
2.  Yard diagrams. The yard diagrams as set forth in illustration 2-102.2A can be found on file in the Planning Department, shall be used in clarifying the meaning of the [terms] "line" and "yard" [in the] definitions in this section. 
3.  Permitted obstructions in required yards. In all residential districts, the following shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard, except that these items shall comply with subpart 4 of this section, Obstructions prohibited at street intersections: 
a.  In any yard. 
Air conditioning units, provided that no such unit shall extend more than one-half the required width of the yard. 
Arbors and trellises. 
Awnings or canopies projecting from a building wall over a required yard not more than six feet, and having no supports other than provided by the wall or its integral parts. 
Bay windows not projecting more than two feet into the required yard. In no case shall bay windows be located less than five feet from any lot line. 
Chimneys projecting not more than three feet into and not exceeding two percent of the area, of the required yard. 
Driveways subject to other specific provisions of this ordinance related directly thereto. 
Eaves, gutters, or down spouts, projecting into or over required yards not more than 24 inches or 20 percent of the width of such yard, whichever is the lesser distance. 
Fire escapes or staircases, the riser of which shall be at least 50 percent open, and whose vertical projection downward onto a required yard does not project more than three feet into, and not exceeding ten percent of the area of the required yard. 
Flagpoles having only one structural ground member. 
Fountains. 
Mailboxes. 
Open terraces, including natural plant landscaping. 
Sculpture or other similar objects of art. 
Street furniture such as, but not limited to, benches, drinking fountains, trash receptacles, ash trays, light standards, or directional signs. 
Vehicular parking areas, unless, otherwise, specifically prohibited by applicable sections of this ordinance. 
Vents necessary for use of fallout shelters constructed below grade of such yards, but excluding all other parts of such shelters. 
Walls, including retaining walls, or fences not exceeding six feet in height measured from finish grade level at any point along the length of, and on any side of, such walls, including retaining walls, or fences, and not roofed or structurally part of a building. 
b.  In any rear yard. 
1.  In any rear yard, clothes poles, clothes lines and recreational equipment shall be allowed. 
2.  In any rear yard, accessory buildings shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
Accessory Building Regulations AR-40 RS-40 RS-30 RS-20 RS-15 RS-10 R-10 Maximum lot coverage by all building (as percent of total lot area) 15 15 18 25 30 35 40 Maximum lot coverage for rear yard (as percent of rear yard) 15 15 15 15 25 25 25 Maximum height (in feet) 35 35 20* 20* 20* 20* 20* Minimum yard requirements (in feet)**  Side 5** 5** 5** 5** 5** 5** 5**  Rear 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 *For the R-10, RS-10, RS-15, RS-20 and RS-30 districts, the maximum height shall be the lesser of 20 feet or the height of the principal building. **For corner lots, the minimum required street side yard setback shall be one-half of the minimum required front yard depth.  
c.  In any front or side yard. In any front or side yard, accessory buildings shall only be allowed by conditional use granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon a finding that the following requirements have been met: 
1.  The building conforms to the principal building in architecture and external building materials; and 
2.  The building is not located within any required front or side yard setback; and 
3.  The building height shall be the lesser of 20 feet or the height of the principal building. 
4.  A plot plan is submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals that demonstrates compliance with all plot plan requirements for residential construction. 
5.  The property: 
(i)  Has direct frontage on Old Hickory Lake; or 
(ii)  Exceeds five acres, has topographic constraints or other unique physical irregularities that render the rear yard unusable for the location of an accessory building, and is zoned AR-40 or RS-40. 
4.  Obstructions prohibited at street intersections. On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge, or other planting or structure that will materially obstruct vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area formed by the street lines at such corner lots and a straight line joining such street lines at points which are 35 feet distance from the intersection of the street lines and measured along said street lines. In case of rounded street lines at the intersecting streets, such measurement shall be made from the point of intersection of the tangents of the curve constituting the rounding. (See the [following] illustration 5-103.5A, Vision clearance area:) 
Y = Corner Sight Distance, measured from point "c" and "c" to "d." b = Eye level from a car stopped at the intersection on the minor road; for this regulation "b" is situated 3.75 feet above the higher order street. a and d = A point 4.5 feet above the centerline of the higher order street. c = Approximate center of intersection. The entire area of the clear sight triangle described by points "a," "b," "c," shall be designed to provide an unobstructed view across it from point "b" to all points 4.5 feet above the roadway along the centerline from point "a" to point "d."  
Vision Clearance Area 

Street of Lower Order Minimum Corner Sight Distance Minimum Corner Sight Distance "Y" Major Road Type Design Speed Y (in feet) Higher order street 50 mph 500 Higher order street 40 mph 400 Community collector 40 mph 400 Residential collector 35 mph 350 Residential access street 30 mph 300 Residential access lane 25 mph 250  
5.  Basic requirements. In all residential districts, the minimum requirement for front, side and rear yards shall be as set forth in table 5-103a. 
6.  Special conditions affecting yards. 
a.  Front yards to be measured from future street lines. For the purpose of providing adequate space for future widening of streets, required front yards shall be determined by the right-of-way as shown on the latest official major thoroughfare plan. 
b.  Rear yard exception for through lots. In all residential districts, no rear yard regulations shall apply to any through lot which extends less than 250 feet in depth from street to street. The depth of such lot shall be considered to be the mean length of its side lot lines. In lieu thereof a front yard shall be required for each street frontage. 
c.  Yard requirements for zone lots of unusual shape. In all residential districts, wherever a zone lot is of such unusual shape that the yard provisions of these regulations cannot be specifically applied, the Zoning Administrator may substitute special yard requirements for such lot only to the extent that these regulations are inapplicable and not to exceed the average of the yard requirements on adjacent lots in the district. 
d.  Special yard requirements for agricultural activities. Within those residential districts where agricultural activities are permitted there shall be provided a minimum yard from all property lines of not less than 200 feet for all permitted barns and other structures, including feed lots and pens, where animals are maintained. 
e.  Special yard requirements for corner lots. The minimum required width of a side yard abutting a street shall be one-half the minimum required front yard depth for the district. Parking within this side yard is prohibited. 
f.  Minimum side yard for residential structure with facade parallel to a side lot line. For any residential structure constructed with a front and/or rear building facade parallel to a side lot line, the required side yard shall be not less than one-half the minimum required front yard depth for the district. 
g.  Special provisions for front yard setback. Any alteration, addition or construction of a building or structure on a zone lot shall extend no closer to the street which abuts the designated front yard than the average of the distances of the buildings located within 100 feet on each side of the lot whereon the alteration, addition or construction is to occur; provided that no building shall be required to provide a front yard of greater than twice the minimum front yard for the district. The average front yard requirement shall not prohibit alterations or additions to an existing structure which has irregular front walls provided said alteration or addition extends no closer to the street than the existing closest front wall to the street. The Board of [Zoning] Appeals shall have jurisdiction to vary from this strict application upon property where such provision would create an undue hardship. 
h.  Special yards and setbacks along district boundaries. Along such portion of the boundary of any Multifamily (R-M) or Manufactured Home [Park] (R-MHP) District, which coincides with a side or rear lot line of a zone lot in any other residential district, the following shall apply: 
i.  Residential buffer yards. An open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky shall be provided within the multifamily or R-MHP district, said area being at least 30 feet in width or depth. Such open area shall not be used for accessory off-street parking, or for accessory off-street loading, or for storage or processing of any kind. 
ii.  Special front setbacks. Regardless of the front yard provisions established for any multifamily or R-MHP district, no building located on any zone lot adjacent to any other residential district shall extend closer to the street than the average of the distances of the buildings located within 100 feet of the lot; provided that no building shall be required to [be] set back more than twice the minimum front yard applicable within the zoning district wherein it is located. 
    5-103.6 Separation of buildings on same lot. In all residential districts where more than one principal building is to be located upon a single zone lot, the minimum distance between such buildings shall be the greater of 30 feet or the separation required by adopted building and fire codes. 
    5-103.7 Special provisions for party walls. Within those districts where semi-detached and attached dwellings are permitted the following shall apply: 
1.  The governing building code and fire protection requirements shall apply to all construction details of firewalls. 
2.  The firewall shall bisect the line dividing each portion of the building or lot so that one-half of the firewall is held by each of the abutting properties. 
3.  If a firewall is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty, any owner may restore said wall and if other owners thereafter make use of the wall, they shall contribute to the cost of restoration thereof in proportion to such use without prejudice, however, to the right of any such owner to call for a larger contribution from the others under any rule of law requiring liability for negligent or willful acts and omissions. 
4.  Each abutter who may share in the owner ship of any firewall shall have an easement on the property of any other owner(s) for the purpose of reconstruction and protection of remaining unit(s) from the elements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 5-103; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 2, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2013-27, § 1, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 5-104. - Supplemental design provisions. 
    5-104.1 Development standards for multifamily dwellings. 
1.  Purpose. The special provisions set forth herein are intended to provide design criteria for multifamily dwellings when such dwellings are located within two or more principal buildings on a zone lot or portion of a zone lot. These provisions shall not apply to developments of multifamily dwellings where such dwellings are individually owned as in the case of condominium or cooperative ownership. All developments involving condominium or cooperative ownership shall be reviewed and approved under the provisions for planned unit developments (See article VIII). 
2.  Master site development plan required. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to provide for implementation of these provisions by Planning Commission review of the master development plan required for all such development by article XIV, subsection 14-103.2. Provided, however, that in any instance where this use is located within a planned unit development this requirement may be fulfilled by submission of the plans required by that section. 
3.  Design criteria, general. It is the intent that multifamily dwellings where they are permitted: 
a.  May be appropriately intermingled with other types of housing; 
b.  Shall not contain more than 12 dwelling units per floor on a single unbroken frontage; and 
c.  Shall constitute groupings making efficient economical, comfortable and convenient use of land and open space. 
4.  Design criteria, detailed. 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with reasonable visual and acoustical privacy. A fence at least six feet in height shall enclose the boundary of each multifamily development site. A detail of the proposed fence is to be presented with the site development plan. The aesthetic and protective nature of the proposed fence shall be considered an integral element of the overall site design and shall be reviewed as part of the design review process. Where in the judgment of the Planning Commission alternative measures such as landscaping or placing of berms are found to provide equal or superior protection, these measures may be substituted for the fence. 
b.  Paved pedestrian walkways shall be provided for convenient and safe access to all living units and recreational facilities from the streets, driveways, parking courts or garages and for convenient circulation and access to all facilities. 
c.  The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features to the maximum extent feasible. Prior to any site clearing or development activity the developer shall submit a landscape plan along with the site development plan. Where necessary to provide both internal and external privacy and to screen out objectionable features such as noise or automobile lights, additional new plant material shall be added. 
d.  Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes from erosion. 
e.  An adequate amenity package for occupants of the apartments shall be provided. The amenity package shall as a minimum include the following: 
i.  Exterior sitting areas with a total minimum area of 20 square feet per bedroom, easily accessible by paved walkways to the residents such facilities are designed to serve. Generally, such facility shall be located no more than 750 feet from any residential building it is to serve. All sitting areas shall be equipped, with benches, picnic tables and other passive recreational facilities. All such sites shall be suitably landscaped to enhance their intended function. 
ii.  Play lots and/or playgrounds with a total minimum area of 100 square feet per bedroom. These areas shall be provided with playground equipment sufficient to meet the needs of children expected to reside within the complex. Individual pieces of playground equipment shall be specified on the site plan. All recreational equipment provided shall be durable commercial grade equipment which shall meet all Consumer Product Safety Commission safety guidelines as well as the ASTM F1487-93, public use playground standard. The playground shall be served by paved pedestrian walks linking individual buildings to the recreational facility. Additional sitting areas may be substituted for playgrounds on a square foot for square foot basis when the development is planned for occupancy only by elderly adults. 
iii.  Club house facilities shall be located within the development. A minimum floor area of 2,000 square feet shall be required for any development. In developments containing 200 or more dwelling units ten square feet of additional floor area shall be provided for each unit thereafter. 
iv.  Centralized refuse (garbage) disposal facilities shall be provided. All dumping cart/bins shall be opaquely screened by either wood or masonry and landscaped. 
v.  Outdoor decorative trash receptacles. Outdoor trash receptacles shall be required for all multi-family developments, with the exception of those developments that have received site plan approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance. 
In addition, outdoor trash receptacles shall comply with the criteria listed, as follows: 
a)  Locations. 
1)  For multi-family developments, a minimum of one decorative trash receptacle shall be located at each entrance and exit of all amenity centers and/or club houses, a minimum of one within the location of a swimming pool (if proposed), and a minimum of one at all grilling/picnic locations. 
2)  The location of all trash receptacles shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended or emergency exits. 
b)  Design. 
All multi-family site plans shall show the proposed design, size, typical elevation and location for each decorative trash receptacle on the plan. 
The design of the trash receptacle shall be made of black powdered coated steel, have a minimum capacity of a 36-gallon container and shall be of a strap-type design. (A typical design is shown in illustration 5.1 below for example only). 
Illustration 5.1 

vi.  Streetlights and area lights, lighting the entire development. 
f.  All private drives, parking areas or other vehicular ways used for the common access for two or more residences shall be suitably paved and maintained as a condition of approval of the project. 
g.  All dwelling units shall be positioned so as to ensure the availability of adequate fire protection. All buildings shall have a fire hydrant located within 150 feet of the furthermost point of each dwelling unit. A minimum flow of 2,500 gallons per minute (gpm) for a one hour duration with a residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi) shall be available to all dwellings. As an alternative to upgrading water mains to fully meet these flow standards, multifamily dwellings may be provided internal protection in the form of sprinkling systems. In the event such systems are provided, the required fire flow may be reduced by 50 percent from that required without such systems. 
h.  Every building utilized for multifamily dwellings shall be accessible to fire apparatus by way of access roadways with all-weather driving surfaces of not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width, with adequate roadway turning radius capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and having a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches. The required width of the access roadway shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. "No Parking" signs or other appropriate notice, or approved obstructions inhibiting parking, may be required and if installed shall be maintained. No barriers may be placed within the development which would prevent emergency vehicles from pulling around or between buildings. 
5.  Required improvements. The following shall be required: 
a.  Internal streets. 
i.  In general, internal drives or travelways located within any multifamily development shall be privately constructed and maintained. 
ii.  The pavement width and geometric design standards of all internal drives or travelways located within any multifamily development shall be as specified within the subdivision regulations. In any instance where an internal travelway is proposed for dedication as a public street, the pavement design shall meet or exceed that required in the subdivision regulations. 
b.  Public street access. 
i.  The minimum distance between access points along public street frontage, measured centerline to centerline shall be 200 feet. 
ii.  The minimum distance between the centerline of an access point and the nearest curbline or street line of a public street intersection shall be 100 feet. 
c.  Storage of waste. All refuse disposal areas shall be maintained in such manner as to meet County and City health requirements and shall be screened from view. 
d.  Sanitary sewage requirements. All development projects approved under this section shall be served by public sanitary sewage systems that meet the standards of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
e.  Water metering requirements. Each dwelling unit, within any multifamily development, shall have an individual water meter. 
f.  Utilities requirement. All cables serving electrical, telephone, television and street lighting shall be placed under ground. 
g.  Mail delivery. All multifamily complexes shall develop a plan for mail delivery which meets the criteria developed by the local post office. This plan shall be presented with the master development plan. 
6.  Parking space and traffic circulation requirements. 
a.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. 
b.  Off-street parking may be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. Such parking areas shall be generally located in close proximity to the dwelling units they are designed to serve. At least one parking space per dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a maximum walking distance of 200 feet from the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit such space is to serve. Where appropriate, common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be maintained and lighted for night use. Screening of parking and service areas shall be achieved through ample use of trees, shrubs, hedges and screening walls. 
c.  Each building shall be physically separated from the highway or street by a curb or planting strip at least eight feet wide against unchanneled motor ingress and egress. The complex shall have not more than two accessways to any highway or street without special approval by the Planning Commission. 
7.  Open space requirements. Any common open space provided within a development of multifamily dwellings shall: 
a.  Meet the requirements for quality and improvement established in article VIII, subpart [subsection] 8-204.1. 
b.  Be protected by covenants as outlined in article VIII, subpart [subsection] 8-204.4, which will ensure the improvement and continued maintenance of all such properties. 
c.  Serve as recreational area and open space only. 
8.  Permitted density. The density or number of dwelling units permitted within a given area, shall be computed utilizing the development area per dwelling unit for the district wherein the multifamily dwellings are to be located. In any instance where a particular development is located in more than one district, the density shall be separately computed for each district and no density may be transferred between districts. 
9.  Yard and building spacing requirements. Within any development approved under the provisions of this section, the following yard requirements shall apply: 
a.  For units located entirely within the interior of the site no yards as such are required, however, buildings shall be spaced so that the minimum distance between such buildings shall be the greater of 30 feet or the separation required by adopted building and fire codes. 
b.  All buildings located along the periphery of the site shall be set back as provided in article V, subsection 5-103.5, subpart 6.h, Special yards and setbacks along district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2016-40, § 1, 8-8-2016) 
    5-104.2 Development standards for manufactured home developments. 
1.  Purpose. The regulations contained herein are intended to apply to all manufactured home developments as defined by this ordinance. Provided, however, in any instance, where such developments involve subdivision of land and sale of lots or land space for placing of manufactured homes such developments shall be reviewed and approved under the provisions for planned unit developments (see article VIII). 
2.  Master site development plan required. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to provide for implementation of these provisions by Planning Commission review of the master development plan required for all such development by article XIV, subsection 14-103.2. Provided, however, that in any instance where this use is located within a planned unit development this requirement may be fulfilled by submission of the plans required by that section. 
3.  Design criteria, general. 
a.  No part of a manufactured home development shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses as are required for the direct servicing and well-being of residents and for the management and maintenance of the development. 
b.  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a manufactured home or of the site or lot on which such dwelling is located, provided that all provisions of this ordinance pertaining to such use are met. 
c.  A fence at least six feet in height shall enclose the boundary of each manufactured home development site. A detail of the proposed fence is to be presented with the site development plan. The aesthetic and protective nature of the proposed fence shall be considered an integral element of the overall site design and shall be reviewed as part of the design review process. Where in the judgment of the Planning Commission alternative measures such as landscaping or placing of berms are found to provide equal or superior protection, these measures may be substituted for the fence. 
d.  The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features to the maximum extent feasible. Prior to any site clearing or development activity the developer shall submit a landscape plan along with the site development plan. Where necessary to provide both internal and external privacy and to screen out objectionable features such as noise or automobile lights, additional new plant material shall be added. 
e.  Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes from erosion. 
4.  Minimum development size and density permitted. No manufactured home development shall be approved which contains less than five acres in area or has less than ten manufactured home spaces. 
The maximum density permitted within any manufactured home development shall be as provided in table 5.103A. 
5.  Dimensional requirements for parks. 
a.  Buffer yards and setbacks meeting the requirements of article V, subsection 5-103.5, subpart 6.h, shall be provided along the periphery of all manufactured home developments in addition to yards required for individual manufactured homes. 
b.  Within the interior portions of the manufactured home development, no yards, except as required to meet the spacing standards of subpart 6, Spacing of manufactured homes and site coverage, of this section are required. 
c.  No building or structure erected or stationed in a manufactured home park shall have a height greater than two stories or 30 feet. 
6.  Spacing of manufactured homes and site coverage. 
a.  Manufactured homes shall be so harbored on each space such that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between manufactured homes; for manufactured homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance may be less than 20 feet, but not less than 15 feet. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet from any building within the park. 
b.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the nearest edge of any manufactured home and an abutting access street. 
c.  No manufactured home stand shall occupy an area in excess of 25 percent of the respective lot area. The total area occupied by the manufactured home and its accessory structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the respective lot area. 
7.  The manufactured home lot. 
a.  The limits of each manufactured home lot shall be marked on the ground by suitable means. Location of lot limits on the ground shall be the same as shown on accepted plans. The minimum area of a manufactured home lot shall be 5,000 square feet or the area required to meet other provisions of this section. 
b.  The manufactured home stands shall be improved to provide adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the manufactured home. 
c.  Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with an outdoor living and service area. Such area shall be improved as necessary to ensure reasonable privacy and comfort. The minimum outdoor living area shall not be less than 200 square feet of contiguous area. 
d.  Tenant storage shall be provided for each manufactured home, either on the individual lot or site of the dwelling or in a centralized storage facility. 
e.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored and supported so as to meet or exceed the standards established in Part 4, Manufactured Home Anchoring, of section 68-126, Tennessee Code. 
8.  Utilities and other services. The following shall be required: 
a.  Internal streets. 
i.  In general, internal drives or travelways located within any manufactured home development shall be privately constructed and maintained. 
ii.  The pavement width and geometric design standards of all internal drives or travelways located within any manufactured home development shall be as specified within the subdivision regulations. In any instance where an internal travelway is proposed for dedication as a public street, the pavement design shall meet or exceed that required in the subdivision regulations. 
b.  Public street access. 
i.  The minimum distance between access points along public street frontage, measured centerline to centerline shall be 200 feet. 
ii.  The minimum distance between the centerline of an access point and the nearest curbline or street line of a public street intersection shall be 100 feet. 
c.  Emergency access. Every manufactured home or building located within a manufactured home development shall be accessible to fire apparatus by way of access roadways with all-weather driving surfaces of not less than 20 feet of unobstructed width, with adequate roadway turning radius capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and having a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches. The required width of the access roadway shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. "No Parking" signs or other appropriate notice, or approved obstructions inhibiting parking, may be required and if installed shall be maintained. No barriers may be placed within the development which would prevent emergency vehicles from pulling around or between buildings. 
d.  Storage of waste. Centralized refuse disposal facilities shall be provided. All dumping cart/bins shall be opaquely screened by either wood or masonry and landscaped. 
e.  Service buildings. Service buildings housing laundry, sanitation or other facilities for use by the occupants shall be permanent structures complying with the applicable codes. 
f.  Water requirements. Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a connection to a public water supply on trunk lines not less than six inches in diameter. Each dwelling unit, within any manufactured home development, shall have an individual dwelling unit water meter. 
g.  Fire hydrant requirements. Each manufactured home development shall be equipped with fire hydrants capable of providing required fire flow. Hydrants shall be spaced so that the farthest point of any manufactured home, measured by the most directly accessible route, is no more than 400 feet from a hydrant. 
h.  Sanitary sewer requirements. Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a connection to a public sanitary sewer line. 
i.  Utilities requirement. All cables serving electrical, telephone, television and street lighting shall be placed under ground. 
j.  Mail delivery. All manufactured home complexes shall develop a plan for mail delivery which meets the criteria developed by the local post office. This plan shall be presented with the master development plan. 
9.  Parking space and traffic circulation requirements. 
a.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home. 
b.  Off-street parking may be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. Such parking areas shall be located in close proximity to the dwelling units they are designed to serve. At least, one parking space per dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a maximum walking distance of 200 feet from the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit it is to serve. Where appropriate, common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be maintained and lighted for night use. Screening of parking and service areas shall be achieved through ample use of trees, shrubs, hedges and screening walls. 
c.  All private drives, parking areas or other vehicular ways used as a common access for two or more residences shall be suitably paved and maintained as a condition approval of the project. 
d.  Paved pedestrian walkways shall be provided for convenient and safe access to all living units and recreational facilities from the streets, driveways, parking courts or garages and for convenient circulation and access to all facilities. 
10.  Recreation facilities. An adequate amenity package for occupants of the manufactured home development shall be provided. The amenity package shall as a minimum include the following: 
a.  Play lots and/or playgrounds with a total minimum area of 200 square feet per manufactured home dwelling. These areas shall be provided with playground equipment sufficient to meet the needs of children expected to reside within the complex. Individual pieces of playground equipment shall be specified on the site plan. All recreational equipment provided shall be durable commercial grade equipment which shall meet all Consumer Product Safety Commission Safety Guidelines, as well as, the ASTM F1487-93, Public Use Playground Standard. The playground shall be served by paved pedestrian walks linking individual dwellings to the recreational facility. Additional sitting areas may be substituted for playgrounds on a square foot for square foot basis when the development is planned for occupancy only by elderly adults. 
b.  Clubhouse facilities shall be located within the development. A minimum floor area of 2,000 square feet shall be required for any development. In developments containing 200 or more dwelling units ten square feet of additional floor area shall be provided for each unit thereafter. 
c.  All multifamily complexes containing 100 or more dwelling units shall provide swimming pool facilities for the residents. 
    5-104.3 Variable lot residential development. The purpose of this section is to provide a permissive voluntary alternative procedure to be utilized in placement of buildings and in location of open spaces associated therewith. These provisions are intended to provide for variations in lot size and open space requirements within the residential districts. The density standards established for individual districts are to be maintained on an overall basis and thereby provide desirable and proper open air space, tree cover, recreation areas or scenic vistas; all with the intent of preserving the natural beauty and environmental integrity of the area, while at the same time maintaining the necessary maximum population density limitations of the base zoning districts. 
1.  General provisions. The provisions contained within this section are intended to provide a flexible procedure for locating dwellings upon sites. As such, the provisions do not constitute a use but an alternative procedure for the spacing of buildings and the use of open areas surrounding those buildings. It is necessary, however, that the purposes and intent of this ordinance be ensured and that proper light, air and privacy be made available for each dwelling unit. The master site development plan required in subpart 2 of this section, is intended to provide not only an accurate statement of the development scheme proposed for each such development but an enforceable legal instrument whereby the Planning Commission may be ensured that the general purposes, standards, etc., contained in this ordinance are being met. 
2.  Master site development plan required. 
a.  Contents. A master site development plan containing the information required by the provisions of article XIV, subsection 14-103.2, shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval along with a sketch plat as required by the subdivision regulations. In addition to the information required to meet the provisions of subsection 14-103.2, the master development plan shall show: 
i.  Topographic features, both existing and proposed, with contours of not more than two-foot intervals where slopes average 12 percent or less and five-foot intervals in areas where slopes are greater than 12 percent. 
ii.  Location of any open space that is proposed to be held in common ownership. 
iii.  Proposed ground coverage, floor area and heights of all buildings. 
iv.  Where any lot or roadway is proposed for location upon any portion of the site where the natural topography exceeds 12 percent such alteration shall be evaluated by a licensed geotechnical engineer and a report of findings and recommendations submitted with the plan of development. 
b.  Coordinated review. Upon receipt of a master site development plan and sketch plat containing information as required above, the Planning Commission may: 
i.  Concurrently review the site development plan and sketch plat; 
ii.  Jointly approve, approve with modification, or disapprove these documents; and 
iii.  In the instance of approval, or approval with modification, transfer the site development plan to the Zoning Administrator for enforcement. 
c.  Enforcement. Upon approval of a master site development plan, the Zoning Administrator shall note the boundary and extent of such development upon the official zoning map and shall become responsible for enforcement of the plan. Only minimal adjustments involving the placement of any structure will be permitted once a site development plan has been approved. Any other change shall require submission of a proposed amendment to the approved plan. 
3.  Development standards. The following standards and requirements shall apply to all developments subject to the provisions of this section: 
a.  General standards for development. In the interest of promoting the most appropriate and economical use of the land while assuring that the character of the residential district is maintained, the Planning Commission in its review of a proposed development shall consider the following: 
i.  Protection of the character, property values, privacy and other characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood; 
ii.  Provision for surface drainage control, sewage disposal and water supply, recreation and traffic control; and 
iii.  Preservation and protection of existing trees, ground cover, top soil, streams, rock outcroppings and scenic or historic sites from dangers and damage caused by excessive and poorly planned grading for streets and building sites. 
b.  Availability of public utilities. Generally all public utilities, specifically including water and a central sewage collection and treatment system shall be available at the site. Where public sewer is not available, no lot or housing site may be created which has less area than the greater of, 30,000 square feet or that required to meet standards of the County Department of Environment and Conservation. All septic fields for each dwelling unit shall be located within the area of fee simple ownership of said dwelling unit. 
c.  Permitted density. The density permitted is intended to be consistent with that allowed within conventional developments offering no common open space. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be computed as follows: 
i.  From the gross acreage available within the development shall be subtracted: any portion of the site where the full use of the land is not available to the landowner because of restrictions thereon; specifically including any portion of the site which lies within a floodway district. 
ii.  The area remaining after the above adjustments shall be divided by the minimum lot area per family for the applicable dwelling unit type and zone district in which the dwelling unit is located. For developments located in more than one zoning district, the density shall be computed separately for that portion of the development lying within each district. No developmental density may be transferred across zoning district boundaries. 
d.  Minimum lot area. Within all developments approved under the provisions of this section the minimum area of lots designated as residential building sites shall be as follows: 
i.  Lots served by public sewer. The minimum size of lots served by public sewer shall be as indicated in table 5-104.3a. 
ii.  Lots served by on-site sewage disposal systems. The minimum size of lots served by on-site sewage disposal systems shall be the greater of, 30,000 square feet or the area required to meet standards of the County Department of Environment and Conservation. 
e.  Lot width and yard requirements. Within any development approved under the provisions of this section the following yard requirements shall apply: 
i.  Lots adjacent to conventional residential development. All lots located along the periphery of a development site adjacent to or directly across a street from existing conventional residential lots shall have minimum width, measured at the setback line, equal to 90 percent of the width required by the basic provisions established for the district within which the development is located. Such lots shall contain at least 80 percent of the minimum lot area required by the basic provisions established for the district within which the development is located. 
ii.  All other lots. The provisions for spacing of buildings set forth in subpart f (below) shall apply to all buildings and structures approved under the provisions of this section. 
f.  Building spacing. The minimum space between any two buildings shall be the greater of that required to meet the minimum distances established in table 5-104.3a, or the separation required by adopted building and fire codes. 
g.  Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed the [following] maximum building envelope standards in table 5-104.3a: 
Table 5-104.3a. Density and Bulk Criteria for Standard Lots Within Variable Lot Residential Developments Density and Bulk Criteria Zone District AR-40 RS-40 RS-30 RS-20 RS-15 RS-10 I. Density (in dwelling units per acre) 1.1 1.1 1.5 2.2 2.9 4.3 II. Minimum lot size (in 000 sq. ft.) Without public water or sewer N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A With public water but w/o 
public sewer (1) (1) N/A N/A N/A N/A With both public water and sewer 30 30 15 11.25 7.5 III. Minimum lot frontage On street 50 50 50 50 50 50 On cul-de-sac 35 35 35 35 35 35 IV. Maximum building envelope (as percentage of lot area) 40 40 40 45 50 55 V. Minimum building envelope spacing (in feet) Building envelope separation (measured between building envelopes) 50 50 40 30 20 15 To on-site street 25 25 20 20 20 15 To off-site street (2) 50 50 45 40 40 20 To tract boundary (2) 50 50 45 40 40 20 To any lot line 25 25 20 20 15 5 To lake or stream (3) 100 100 100 100 100 100 VI. Maximum total lot 
disturbance (4) (4) (4) (4) (4) (4) (1) See subpart 3.d, minimum lot area (above). (2) Where the provisions of subsection 3.e(1), lots adjacent to conventional residential development apply, setbacks shall be as required for the base zone district. (3) This provision shall apply to streams with established floodplains. Along other streams the minimum setback shall be four times the width of the stream. (4) See subpart 4.a, tree preservation.  
h.  Access to dwellings. Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting, other emergency equipment, service deliveries, furniture moving vans and refuse collection. 
i.  Pedestrian circulation. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be insulated as completely as possible from the street system in order to provide separation of pedestrian underpasses or overpasses in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping areas and other neighborhood uses which generate a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic. 
4.  Environmental protection. The following provisions shall apply within all developments approved under the authority of this section: 
a.  Tree preservation. All trees six inches or greater in caliper shall be inventoried and a plan for tree protection meeting the requirements of article X, established. 
b.  Slope protection. It shall be the general policy of the Planning Commission to discourage alteration of slopes where the natural topography exceeds 15 percent. In particular, toe cuts along the base of such slopes shall be avoided. In any instance where either roads or building sites are proposed upon slopes exceeding 15 percent, any and all alterations shall be evaluated by a licensed geotechnical engineer and the proposed construction activity certified as stable prior to any clearing or excavation. 
c.  Siltation and erosion control. A plan of siltation and erosion control shall be approved for all developments subject to the provisions of this section. Such plan shall be instituted at the time construction activity or land alteration is begun and shall remain in effective operation throughout the entire period when land development is taking place. 
No portion of any lot proposed as a building site may lie within any area subject to the floodplain protection provisions of this ordinance. 
5.  Open space requirements. Common open space provided within any development approved under authority of this section shall: 
a.  Meet the requirements for quality and improvement established in article VIII, subpart [subsection] 8-204.1. 
b.  Be protected by covenants as outlined in article VIII, subpart [subsection] 8-204.4, which will ensure the improvement and continued maintenance of all such properties. 
c.  Serve as recreational area and open space only. 
d.  Be transferred to a private maintenance trust at a time and in the manner specified by the Planning Commission as a condition of approval of the project. 
    5-104.4 Development standards for single-family residential. 
1.  The front façade and any other façade shall contain 100 percent brick and/or stone. All percentages are calculated based on the wall surface area and do not include areas used for windows, doors, and fascias. The use of alternate materials or secondary wall materials allowed herein in differing quantities may be authorized at the sole discretion of the Regional Planning Commission. 
2.  Trim, eaves, and soffits may incorporate the use of vinyl, aluminum and other materials approved by the International Residential Code as adopted. 
3.  Approved roof materials include: concrete or terra cotta tile, asphalt shingles, and standing seam metal roofing. Shingles shall be fungus resistant. 
4.  No tract home or custom home may be built adjacent to or across from a home with the identical elevation. Dwellings constructed next to or across from another dwelling shall include a variety of architectural elements that can include the following: differences in roof lines, the shape, design and size of windows and doors (including garage doors), shutters, materials, colors, and porches. Tract home builders/developments shall provide a minimum of four floor plans with a minimum of three elevations each. 
5.  A minimum of 22 feet of driveway depth shall be provided between a garage door and a sidewalk or public path. 
6.  No wall or window mounted air conditioning or heating units may be installed or placed in a front or street facing façade (excluding alleys). Such units may be located in a side or rear façade not adjacent to a street. 
7.  Covered front porches are recommended for dwellings, and where provided, a minimum depth of six feet and area of 120 [square feet] is recommended. 
8.  Rear porches or patios are recommended for dwellings, and where provided, a minimum of 200 square feet is recommended. These areas, whether proposed to be covered or not, shall be planned so as to comply with rear setback requirements. 
9.  Mechanical equipment shall not be roof-mounted, but may be on the ground, within attic space or other location screened from public view. 
10.  All homes shall contain a minimum of a two-car garage. Side, rear or alley-loaded garages are recommended. 
a)  Arterials and Collectors: When fronting an arterial or collector street, garages and driveways shall be restricted to alleys, side-streets, or other approved combined access drives. In no case shall a garage be street-facing other than to the side street. 
b)  Access Streets: When fronting an access street, garages and driveways shall be restricted to side-, rear-, or alley-loaded. In no case shall a garage be street-facing other than to the side-street. 
c)  Access Lanes: Street-facing garages will only be acceptable on access lanes if they incorporate the following features: Ten feet minimum set back from the front of the home including the front porch if applicable and two garage doors separated by a two-foot minimum brick or stone column. 
11.  Street-facing garages shall include a double-wide driveway (minimum 18 feet wide). Driveway approaches connecting to side loaded garages may be less than 18 feet wide if proper maneuvering space is provided. The interior width of a two-car garage shall contain a minimum clear space of 20 feet and contain a minimum of 440 square feet. No stairs, water heaters or other fixed items may encroach into this space. 
12.  Alley-loaded garages shall be located so that parked vehicles do not encroach into the alley. The garage shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of the alley pavement, or five feet from the edge of the alley pavement with a ten feet by 20 feet parking pad adjacent to the garage. 
13.  For narrow lot developments, which are defined as those subdivisions having an average lot width less than or equal to 60 feet, the following shall apply. 
a)  Rear loaded garages should be considered to avoid a "snout house" appearance. 
b)  Street facing garage façades (excluding the wall frame) shall not exceed 40 percent of the area of the front wall façade of the first floor. 
c)  The 40 percent requirement only applies to the doors of the garage and does not apply to the two feet column separating multiple garage doors as mentioned above in item 10. 
14.  A plan for the planting and/or the preservation of trees shall be required for all new subdivisions. Said plan shall accompany a request for preliminary plat approval and address the following items. The plan shall be approved by the Regional Planning Commission prior to, or with preliminary plat approval. 
a.  A minimum of one tree shall be planted or preserved per lot and may be planted or preserved in the front yard of each lot, within the private or public right-of-way as a street tree, or elsewhere as approved by the Regional Planning Commission. 
b.  The City of Mt. Juliet encourages the preservation of existing trees as a means of compliance with the requirements of paragraph "a" above. 
c.  The planting species and location for new vegetation shall be selected to avoid conflicts with vehicle and pedestrian movements. More than one species shall be used to avoid adverse impacts from disease or pests. 
15.  Except for temporary purposes, motor vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces. No more than 50 percent of any front yard may be paved or used for motor vehicle parking except that courtyard style garages and associated driveways will not count toward this 50 percent. 
16.  Regarding foundations, the finished floor elevation at the front façade shall be located above grade in accordance with the following standards: 
a)  For setbacks of ten feet or more, the finished floor elevation of the front façade shall be a minimum of 18 inches above grade; and 
b)  For setbacks of less than ten feet, the finished floor elevation of the front façade shall be a minimum of 24 inches above grade. 
c)  Exposed foundation walls or piers shall be clad in face brick or stone. Exposed smooth-faced standard concrete block is prohibited. 
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the use of slab foundations, provided: 
a)  The outer edge of the slab is clad in the materials required in this subsection; 
b)  It extends to the minimum height above grade, except that this provision may be waived for age restricted developments serving a senior adult population of age 55 and over. 
17.  Outdoor decorative trash receptacles. Outdoor trash receptacles shall be required for all amenity centers and/or club houses within single family residential developments, with the exception of those developments that have received approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance. 
In addition, outdoor trash receptacles shall comply with the criteria listed, as follows: 
a)  Locations. 
i.  A minimum of one decorative trash receptacle shall be located at each entrance and exit of all amenity centers and/or club houses, a minimum of one within the location of a swimming pool (if proposed), and a minimum of one at all grilling/picnic locations. 
ii.  The location of all trash receptacles shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended or emergency exits. 
b)  Design. 
All multi-family site plans shall show the proposed design, size, typical elevation and location for each decorative trash receptacle on the plan. 
The design of the trash receptacle shall be made of black powdered coated steel, have a minimum capacity of a 36 (thirty-six) gallon container and shall be of a strap-type design. (A typical design is shown in illustration 5.2 below for example only). 

18.  Regarding certain streetscape elements, all traffic poles and traffic sign posts shall be black or dark green in color. All street signs shall be erected with a decorative sign post, a decorative base and a decorative finial that extends beyond the top of the standard sign. All traffic signs shall be of pedestrian-scale ornamental design. Exposed metal poles are strictly prohibited unless entirely enclosed with a brick or stone veneer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-40, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-35, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 2006-04, 2-6-2006; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 5-102; Ord. No. 2015-34, § 1(Att.), 8-24-2015; Ord. No. 2016-40, § 2, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 2017-43, § 1, 7-10-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-101. - Purposes of commercial districts. 
    6-101.1 General purposes. The commercial districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following: 
1.  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations in proximity to established residential areas, for local retail and service trades catering specifically to the recurring shopping needs of the occupants of nearby residences. 
2.  To protect both retail and service developments and nearby residences against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable influences. 
3.  To protect both retail and service developments and nearby residences against congestion, by regulating the intensity of retail and service developments consistent with their marketing functions, by restricting those types of establishments which generate heavy traffic, and by providing for off-street parking and loading facilities. 
4.  To provide sufficient and appropriate space, and in particular sufficient area, to meet the area's expected future need for modern, planned commercial floor space, including the need for off-street parking space in areas where a large proportion of customers come by automobile, and to encourage the tendency of commercial establishments to concentrate in integrated planned developments, to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants. 
5.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for commercial districts to satisfy specific functional needs of the area, and in particular the need for medical services, and the needs of the general public traveling along major thoroughfares. 
6.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the mixture of compatible residential and restricted commercial developments where standards for development will provide protection for the environmental essentials of either. 
7.  To provide appropriate locations for transitional uses intervening between commercial developments and residential areas, and thereby alleviate the friction inherent between dissimilar activities. 
8.  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for all types of commercial and miscellaneous service activities. 
9.  To provide freedom of architectural design, in order to encourage the development of more attractive, efficient and economic building forms, within appropriate standards which ensure that buildings are in character with their surroundings. 
10.  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a well considered plan, to promote stability of commercial development, to strengthen the economic base of the area, to protect the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings. 
    6-101.2 Specific purposes. 
1.  CG, Commercial-General Districts. This district is designed to provide for a wide range of commercial uses concerned with retail trade and consumer services; amusement and entertainment establishments; automotive and vehicular service establishments; transient sleeping accommodations; drive-in stores; eating and drinking places, financial institutions; and offices. The uses in this district service a broad market spectrum and, therefore, ease of automotive access is a requirement. However, it is not intended that this district permit uses which generate large volumes of truck traffic. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the general community welfare are also permitted. Appropriate open space between commercial and residential areas is required. This classification is intended to recognize an existing undesirable development pattern but not repeat or significantly expand the pattern beyond those areas where such is already established. 
2.  CI, Commercial Interchange Districts. This district is designed to provide adequate space at major freeway interchanges for uses which serve the needs of the motoring public. Automobile and other vehicular service establishments, transient sleeping accommodations, and eating and drinking establishments primarily characterize this district. In addition, commercial trade and service uses are permitted if necessary to serve the recurring needs of persons frequenting these districts. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the general community welfare are also permitted. Bulk limitations required of uses in these districts, in part, are designed to maximize building in proximate residential districts. Appropriate locations for this district are near major transportation interchanges in clustered development patterns and not patterns of striped commercial development extending in a continuous manner along major traffic arteries. 
3.  CMU, Commercial Mixed Use Districts. These districts are designed primarily to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for establishments and uses engaged in general retail, restaurant, professional offices, commercial services, residential dwellings, and services ancillary thereto. As these districts tend to generate relatively large volumes of vehicular traffic and may have other characteristics detrimental to residential environments, their locations are most suitable on properties with sufficient frontage on arterial streets. Where these districts must necessarily abut existing or proposed residential areas external to the development, efforts to minimize incompatibility shall be made by providing appropriate buffers and through proper site design. In addition, a selection of community facilities and utilities considered necessary to service the principal uses in these districts or necessary for the general community welfare, are permitted. Mixed-use developments may be permitted through the planned unit development process as described in [section] 8-207 of this [Zoning] Ordinance. 
4.  CNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service Districts. These districts are intended to provide locations for retail and personal service operations serving a limited market area and engaged in the retail sale of goods and/or services from the site of frequently and recurrently needed items for personal consumption or household use. The permitted establishments are those which provide for regular local shopping and which, therefore, are visited frequently by customers. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the general community welfare are also permitted. These districts may occur along and at the intersection of arterial and community collector streets, characteristically are small, and are widely distributed throughout the community for convenient accessibility. It is expressly intended that these districts be limited in gross land area and building bulk so as to maintain compatibility with the surrounding residential environment. The bulk regulations are established to provide for maximum compatibility between the commercial activity in these districts and adjacent residential activity. The establishment of a new district of this nature must be preceded by the development of residential areas capable of supporting the proposed activities. 
5.  OPS, Office/Professional Service Districts. These districts are designed to provide for transitional uses between more intensive commercial activities occurring along major traffic arteries and residential areas. The permitted uses are ones which tend to produce relatively low volumes of traffic. In addition to the office activities, certain community facilities are permitted which are compatible with other uses permitted within these districts. The intensity of use and building bulk permitted within these districts is controlled by more restrictive regulation consistent with their intended transitional function. 
6.  CTC, Commercial Town Center Districts. This district is designed to provide for a wide range of commercial uses concerned with retail trade and consumer services; amusement and entertainment establishments; eating and drinking places, financial institutions; and offices. The uses in this district service a broad market spectrum and, therefore, ease of automotive access is a requirement. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the general community welfare are also permitted. Mixed-use developments may be permitted through the planned unit development process as described in [section] 8-207 of this [Zoning] Ordinance. Appropriate open space between commercial and residential areas is required. 
7.  CRC, Commercial Retail Center Districts. These districts are designed to provide for a wide range of commercial uses concerned with retail trade and consumer services; eating and drinking establishments, financial institutions, offices, drive-in stores and general retail. The uses in this district service a broad market spectrum and, therefore, ease of automotive access is a requirement. However, it is not intended that this district permit uses which generate large volumes of truck traffic. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these districts, or necessary for the general community welfare, are also permitted. Appropriate open space between commercial and residential area is required. This classification is intended to allow for thoroughfare retail uses not permitted in CTC or OPS districts, while recognizing the existence of nearby or adjacent residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-14-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 6-101; Ord. No. 2013-53, § 2, 7-8-2013; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 6-102. - Uses and structures. 
    6-102.1 General provisions. Principal uses of buildings or other structures and land have been classified and combined into major classes and activity types in article III of this ordinance. The procedure for interpreting the classes and type of activities is provided in article III, section 3-101, table 6-102A, presents a tabulation of uses and structures which are classified as principal permitted (P), permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) or conditional (C) uses within the various commercial districts. The supplemental design provisions with which (SUP) and (C) uses and activities are required to comply appear in article III, section 3-104, Supplemental use regulations. 
Table 6-102A. Permitted and Conditional Uses and Structures Allowable Within Mixed Use and Commercial Districts [Uses and Structures] Districts CG CI CMU CNS OPS CTC CRC Principal uses and activities I. Residential activities A. Permanent residential activity 1. Single-family dwelling 2. Duplex dwelling 3. Multifamily dwelling 4. Manufactured home dwelling B. Semi-transient residential activity 1. Lodginghouses C. Mixed Use Development 1. Mixed-Use Building P(1,5) P(1,5,6) 2. Mixed-Use Site P(1,5) P(1,5,6) II. Community facility activities A. Administrative services P P P P P P P B. Child care facilities SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP C. Community assembly P P P SUP SUP SUP SUP D. Cultural and recreational facilities P P P C C C P E. Educational facilities P P P P P P P F. Essential public transport, communication and utility services P P P P P P P G. Extensive impact facilities C C H. Health care facilities SUP SUP SUP C C C SUP I. Intermediate impact facilities C C C C C C J. Religious facilities C C C C C C C K. Special institutional care facilities C C L. Special personal and group care facilities C C C C C M. Waste disposal operations III. Commercial activities A. Adult entertainment B. Animal care and veterinary services SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP SUP C. Automotive parking P P P P D. Automotive and marine craft sales, 
service and repair P(4) P C E. Banking, financial, insurance and real estate services P(7) P(7) P(7) SUP(7) SUP(7)(8) P(7) P(7) F. Convenience retail sales and services SUP SUP SUP SUP(2)(3) SUP(2)(3) SUP(2) SUP (2) G. Entertainment and amusement services, limited P P C P P H. General business and communications P P P SUP SUP P P I. General retail trade P(9) P(9) P(9) P(9) P(9) J. Group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation C C C C K. Outdoor material and equipment sales and repair P P L. Professional services, medical P P P SUP P(8) P P M. Professional services, nonmedical P P P SUP P(8) P P N. Restaurant, full-service P P P SUP P(8) P P O. Restaurant, take-out P P P P P P. Scrap operations Q. Self-service storage R. Transient habitation P P P P S. Warehousing goods, transport and storage T. Wholesale sales P P P IV. Manufacturing activities A. Manufacturing, limited SUP Accessory uses and activities Accessory child care C C C C C C C Accessory storage P P P P P P P Administrative office P P P P P P P Employee cafeteria C C C C C Private recreational facilities P P P P P Production for retail sale C C C C C Residential occupancy C C C C C C C  
Note- Key to interpreting use classifications. 
P = Use permitted by right within the district. 
SUP = Principal use permitted with supplemental provisions. 
C = Conditional use (subject to approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals). 
ASP = Accessory use permitted with supplemental provisions. 
(1)  See [sub]section 5-104.1 and 6-104.1. 
(2)  Gasoline sales and convenience markets are not permitted within CTC Districts. 
(3)  Retail liquor stores shall not be permitted in the CNS and OPS Zoning Districts. 
(4)  In CG districts, the following use listings are prohibited: Auto dealers, auto towing services. 
(5)  When approved through the PUD or PUD Amendment process in article VIII. 
(6)  Within the Town Center Overlay District, Main Street Area, and when approved through the PUD process in article VIII. 
(7)  Excluding payday lenders and pawn shops. 
(8)  See 6-104.3. 
(9)  Grocery stores shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet in sales floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-5, § 1, 2-8-2016; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 2, 4-25-2016; Ord. No. 2016-36, § 2, 7-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 1-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-66, § 1, 12-11-2017) 
    6-102.2 Principal permitted uses (P). Principal permitted uses are permitted as a matter of right within the district indicated, subject to the general requirements established for the district wherein the use is located. 
    6-102.3 Uses permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP). A use permitted with conditions is an activity, use or structure which is permitted subject to a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the specific standards indicated for the use in question have been met. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 6-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    6-102.4 Conditional uses (C). A conditional use is an activity, use, or structure which may require large land area, have unique operating, traffic generating or other characteristics that may tend to dominate or adversely affect the area more than do other uses permitted within the same zone district. Because the impacts of these uses cannot be satisfactorily predetermined for every possible location within a zone district, these land uses are permitted only upon approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. Each conditional use is subject to a finding by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals that the specific standards indicated for the use in question have been met. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 6-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    6-102.5 Accessory uses. In addition to the principal activities expressed above, each activity type shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal activity when such accessory activity is located on the same zone lot as such principal activity and meets the further conditions set forth in article III, section 3-105. Accessory uses designated with the letter "P" in table 6-102A, are permitted as a matter of right and no permit is required to conduct the activity in question. Those accessory uses designated with the letters "ASP" require a permit obtained from the Office of the Zoning Administrator. Permits for accessory uses designated "ASP" shall be issued upon demonstration that the activity in question meets the requirements established for such activity article III, section 3-105. The third classification of accessory uses designated by the letter "C" require approval as a conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Upon issuance of any permit for a conditional accessory use such use or activity shall be continuously subject to compliance with any operational standard or criteria established by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
    6-102.6 Temporary uses. The temporary uses and structures specified in article III, section 3-106, as permissible within residential districts may be permitted for the limited time periods indicated for each such use or activity. 
    6-102.7 Uses not permitted. Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional uses, temporary uses or accessory uses are prohibited within the various commercial districts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-14-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 6-102; Ord. No. 2010-37, § 3, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2010-41, § 4, 8-9-2010; Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 4, 1-14-2013; Ord. No. 2013-17, § 4, 2-11-2013; Ord. No. 2013-49, § 1, 6-10-2013; Ord. No. 2013-53, § 3, 7-8-2013; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 3, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2014-42, 6-9-2014) 
Sec. 6-103. - Bulk regulations. 
    6-103.1 General[ly]. The minimum lot dimensions, maximum lot coverage, minimum front, rear, interior and street side yards, maximum building heights and minimum separation between buildings on the same zone lot within any base commercial district shall be as indicated in table 6-103a, Bulk regulations for commercial districts, and the additional bulk regulations specified in this section. For certain uses, alternative bulk regulations may be specified in this section or other sections of this ordinance. Bulk regulations for planned unit development (PUD) overlay districts shall be as specified in article VIII. 
    6-103.2 Lot dimensions. No lot shall be created and no building permit or zoning approval shall be issued for any lot that does not meet the following minimum dimensional requirements, unless otherwise provided in the preliminary development plan of a planned unit development: 
1.  Lot area. 
a.  Minimum area. Within the various commercial districts, the minimum horizontal area of a lot shall not be less than that indicated in table 6-103a, Bulk regulations for commercial districts, or as may be otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
b.  Reduction in lot area prohibited. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot width, building area, or other requirements of the zoning ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
2.  Lot width. The minimum lot width (measured at the building line) shall not be less than indicated in table 6-103a, or otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
3.  Lot frontage. All lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated and maintained street or a permanent access easement as defined and regulated by this ordinance, except that lots located along the terminus of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 35 feet of frontage. 
4.  Maximum permitted lot coverage. Within the various commercial districts, the maximum zone lot coverage by all buildings (principal and accessory) shall not exceed the percentage of the total area of the zone lot indicated in table 6-103a. 
5.  Maximum impermeable surface ratio. Within the various commercial districts, the impermeable surface ratio, computed by dividing the impermeable surface area by the total lot area shall not exceed the percentage indicated in table 6-103a. 
Table 6-103a. Height, Bulk, Lot Size and Open Space Requirements Within Mixed Use and Commercial Districts [Height, Lot Size and Open Space Requirements] Zone Districts CG CI CMU CNS OPS CTC CRC I. Provisions applicable to commercial, industrial and community facilities activities A. Maximum lot coverage by all buildings (as percentage of total lot area) 50 50 50 30 40 50 50 B. Maximum impermeable surface ratio (as percentage of total lot area) 80 80 80 70 70 70 70 C. Minimum area requirement for zone lots (in thousands of square feet) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 D. Minimum lot width (in feet measured at the building line) Note. see section 6-103.3(2) or (3) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 E. Maximum height (in feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 F. Minimum yard requirements Front 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 Side (3) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Rear 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 II. Provisions applicable to residential activities (Note. see subsection 6-104.1.) (1) The minimum zone lot shall [be] as required to meet other provisions of the district. (2) At all points along the boundary separating any commercial district from any residential the special yard and setback provisions of subsection 6-103.4, subpart 6, shall apply. (3) See subsection 6-103.4, subpart 7, for party wall provisions.  
    6-103.3 Height regulations. 
1.  Basic requirements. The maximum permitted height for buildings shall not, except as provided in [subpart] subsection 2, 3 or 4 of this [sub]section exceed the height set forth for the various commercial districts in table 6-103a. 
2.  General exception to height regulations. The height limitation contained in the district regulations does not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, radio towers, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
3.  Buildings in excess of 35 feet near the interstate. Buildings located within 1/2-mile of an existing or planned 1-40 interchange, and zoned Commercial Interchange (CI) or Commercial Mixed Use (CMU) may exceed the 35 feet height limit as contained in table 6-103A as follows: 
A.  In no case shall any building exceed a height of 70 feet or six stories, whichever is less; and 
B.  This height exemption shall be for office, hotel, and multi-family uses only. 
4.  Buildings in excess of 35 feet near the Town Center (downtown area). Buildings located within 1/2-mile of the existing Music City Star rail station, and zoned commercial, may exceed the 35 feet height limit as contained in table 6-103A as follows: 
A.  In no case shall any building exceed a height of 50 feet or four stories, whichever is less; and 
B.  This height exemption shall be for office, retail, educational and multi-family uses only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-27, § 1, 5-8-2017) 
    6-103.4 Yard regulations. 
1.  Permitted obstructions in required yards. In all commercial districts, the following shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard, except that items shall comply with subsection 6-103.5 of this section: 
a.  Arbors and trellises. 
b.  Awnings or canopies projecting from a building wall over a required yard not more than six feet, and having no supports other than provided by the wall or its integral parts. 
c.  Chimneys projecting not more than three feet into, and not exceeding two percent of the area, of the required yard. 
d.  Driveways subject to other specific provisions of this ordinance related directly thereto. 
e.  Eaves, gutters, or down spouts, projecting into or over required yards not more than 24 inches or 20 percent of the width of such yard, whichever is the lesser distance. 
f.  Fire escapes or staircase, the riser area of which shall be at least 50 percent open, and whose vertical projection downward onto a required yard does not exceed 30 percent of the area of such yard. 
g.  Flagpoles, having only one structural ground member. 
h.  Fountains. 
i.  Mailboxes. 
j.  Open terraces, including natural plant landscaping. 
k.  Retaining walls. 
l.  Sculpture or other similar objects of art. 
m.  Street furniture such as, but not limited to benches, drinking fountains, trash receptacles, ash trays, light standards or directional signs. 
n.  Vents necessary for use of fallout shelters constructed below grade of such yards, but excluding all other parts of such shelters. 
o.  Walls or fences not exceeding six feet in height measured from finish grade level at any point along the length of, and on any side of, such walls or fences, and not roofed or structurally part of a building. 
2.  Measurement of yard width. In all commercial districts, the width or depth of a yard shall be measured perpendicular to lot lines. 
3.  Dimension of yards. Except, as otherwise provided herein, in all commercial districts yards of such dimensions as set forth in table 6-103a, shall be provided for all commercial, manufacturing and community facilities activities. 
4.  Accessory off-street parking in required yards. Accessory off-street parking may be permitted within the required yards of commercial districts only to the extent set forth below. Within any area where permitted such parking areas shall be properly maintained and have no obstructions thereon, except as permitted by subpart 1 of this section, and shall not obstruct the visibility triangle as required by subsection 6-103.5. 
a.  Accessory off-street parking in required front yards. Within any commercial district, permitted or required accessory off-street parking may be permitted within ten feet of the front lot line. 
b.  Accessory off-street parking in side yards. In all commercial districts, accessory off-street parking may be located within five feet of any side lot line, except when such yard is adjacent to a residential district. (See subpart 6 of this section, for special provisions applicable along residential district boundaries). 
c.  Accessory off-street parking and loading in rear yards. Except as provided by subpart 6 of this section, in all commercial districts, accessory off-street parking or loading may be located within ten feet of any rear lot line. 
5.  Special provisions for through lots. In all commercial districts no rear yard is required for a through lot. In lieu thereof a front yard shall be required for each frontage. 
6.  Special provisions applying to required yards and building setbacks along district boundaries coincident with side or rear lot line of zone lot in any residential district. In all commercial districts, along such portion of the boundary of a commercial district which coincides with a lot line of a zone lot in any residential district the following yard provisions shall apply: 
a.  Special front setback. Regardless of the front yard provisions established for any commercial district, no building located on any zone lot adjacent to any residential district shall extend closer to the street than the average of the distances of the buildings located within 100 feet of the lot whereon the commercial activity is located; provided that no building shall be required to setback more than twice the minimum front yard applicable within the commercial district. 
b.  Special side and rear yards. Along all portions of the boundary of any commercial zone lot where such lot abuts or is contiguous to any residential zone lot without an intervening public street, an open area, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, shall be provided within the commercial district, said area being at least 20 feet in width or depth. Such open area shall not be used for accessory off-street parking, or accessory off-street loading, or for storage or processing of any kind. 
7.  Special provisions for party walls. In commercial districts, side or rear yard requirements may be waived along the side or rear adjacent to another commercially zoned lot if the following conditions are met: 
a.  At all points of attachment, adjoining buildings shall be separated from each other by a party wall constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Code, fire protection requirements and, otherwise, meeting the requirements of this section. 
b.  A party wall may bisect the dividing line of two adjacent lots so that one-half of the party wall is located on each of the properties, provided that the owners of each property sign a covenant granting an easement on the property to the owners of the adjoining property for the purpose of maintaining, reconstructing or protecting the party wall. 
c.  In the event of the construction of a building on the lot line, the wall along the lot line, if it is not constructed as a party wall between two buildings, shall be built in such a manner that it will meet all requirements of subpart a of this section, without regard to the wall or building on the adjoining property. 
d.  No wall constructed within ten feet of a property line shall have less than a four-hour fire rating and shall have such additional ratings as required by the Standard Building Code and National Fire Protection Association. 
    6-103.5 Obstructions prohibited at street intersections. On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge, or other planting or structure that will materially obstruct vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area formed by the street lines at such corner lots and a straight line joining such street lines at points which are 35 feet distance from the intersection of the street lines and measured along said street lines. In case of rounded street lines at the intersecting streets, such measurement shall be made from the point of intersection of the tangents of the curve constituting the rounding. 
    6-103.6 Requirements for fire lanes. Fire lanes with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be located such that the lanes extend from a public street to a point adjacent to the principal entrances of all commercial buildings. Such fire lanes shall be positioned directly adjacent to emergency water facilities designed for fire protection and shall be paved with an all weather surface capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus. The required fire lanes shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. Installation of "No Parking" signs or other appropriate notice or of approved obstructions inhibiting parking may be required and if installed shall be maintained. The owner or his representative of a building which is adjacent to the fire lane shall be responsible for keeping the fire lane free of obstructions. 
    6-103.7 Design standards for commercial structures. 
1.  Site design. Elements such as landscaping, site fences, walls and refuse and recycling containers shall be coordinated into a unitary design and shall otherwise comply with all provisions of Article X, Landscaping and screening. All utility service to individual structures shall be underground. 
2.  Building design. Building(s) may be required to incorporate similar design elements, and shall be compatible with surrounding buildings with regard to massing, color, scale, proportion of openings, roof types, types of glazed openings, and degree of detail. Color and design elements shall also be compatible with buildings in the vicinity which have been approved in accordance with these design provisions. Color schemes considered to be unpleasant, distasteful or objectionable, as determined by the Planning Commission, will be sufficient reasoning for a negative vote. On corner lots, both sides of the building facing the street are considered the front of the building, and shall include design elements such as windows, doors, texture and wall treatment to provide visual interest and prevent development of a long continuous blank wall. Commercial and institutional buildings which are visible from a public street are required to have a minimum of 100 percent brick and/or stone on the facade(s) facing a public street and 100 percent brick and stone on all other facades. Commercial and institutional buildings which are not visible from a public street are required to have a minimum of 50 percent brick and stone on all facades. The use of vinyl siding, exposed or painted corrugated metal or plain sheet metal roofs, exposed or painted metal siding, and exposed standard concrete block are prohibited. The use of metal awnings is also prohibited. Building service areas or loading areas shall not be visible from public streets and shall be located away from private streets and adequately screened. All rooftop-mounted equipment including HVAC equipment shall not be visible from public streets and must be screened by a parapet that is equal to or greater than the height of the equipment. Mechanical equipment on sides of buildings shall not be visible from public streets and must be adequately screened. No wall packs are allowed on any commercial site in the City and all light poles and light fixtures installed on commercial sites shall be finished in a dark grey, dark brown or black color. Hues including metal halide, color-corrected mercury-vapor, color-corrected high-pressure sodium and low-pressure sodium are not allowed for private lighting. All private lighting shall emit light in the range of 4,000K to 5,700K on the Kelvin temperature measurement scale to achieve a cool white color temperature. Private lighting in this section shall refer to lighting intended to illuminate private parking areas and access drives and shall not include lighting that illuminates rights-of-way or public streets. The Planning Commission may waive any of these design requirements upon a showing by the developer that alternative materials will achieve a same or similar design result and be compatible with other buildings and structures in the vicinity which have been approved in accordance with these design provisions. Within a commercial complex, the Planning Commission may waive any of these design requirements upon a showing by the developer that alternative materials will achieve a same or similar design result and be compatible with other buildings and structures in the commercial complex which have been approved after the adoption of these design provisions. 
3.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required for all commercial site plans, including multi-family developments, with the exception of those commercial subdivisions that received site plan approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance, and sidewalks shall comply with all criteria as follows: 
a.  The design, dimensions, dedications, easements, and reservations for all sidewalks shall conform to all applicable City of Mt. Juliet regulations. Sidewalks constructed within the public rights-of-way shall be installed in accordance with the adopted standards of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
b.  Sidewalks are required to be constructed along all streets within or abutting a development and shall connect to sidewalks in adjoining developments. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet in width on all streets for residential site plans and developments, and five feet in width for non-residential site plans and developments. 
d.  Sidewalks shall maintain minimum thickness of four inches except at driveway areas where the minimum thickness is six inches. 
e.  Sidewalks must comply with the City of Mt. Juliet Standard Road Details. 
f.  In any case where the reconstruction or construction of a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway is required, the City of Mt. Juliet may require the contractor to post surety in the form specified in this ordinance, for the construction of the sidewalk or walkway. 
g.  The required sidewalk improvements must be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
4.  Greenways. Development of all commercial sites in the City of Mt. Juliet and within the jurisdiction of the Regional Planning Commission shall include construction of all greenway sections that are included in the current and in any future greenway plans for the city. In any development, all parcels of land which touch or lie within the proposed route of a new greenway shall be constructed by the developer. Construction and related expenses for design, acquisition of right-of-way and construction of the greenways will be the responsibility of the developer. All greenway sections will be constructed per current City of Mt. Juliet, TDOT and FHWA standards and specifications, whichever is greater. Examples of said specifications include, but are not limited to, design, materials, thickness and width of greenway, as well as required signage, meeting ADA requirements, etc. Construction of said greenway sections will be completed by ten percent of development build out and all greenway sections will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet. The developer, property owner or their designated agent may request a waiver or variance from this ten percent requirement should the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. Said waiver, variance or adjustment will not adversely affect the community objectives of the comprehensive plan. All greenways designated by current and any future greenway plans will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet and shall not count toward required open space and amenities. 
5.  Accommodations for bicycles. Bicycle parking shall be required for all commercial site plans, including multi-family developments, with the exception of those commercial subdivisions that received site plan approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance. In addition, bicycle parking shall comply with the criteria listed as follows: 
a.  Locations. 
i.  Bicycle parking shall be located as close as or closer than the nearest car parking space to the building entrance, or other than those spaces for persons with disabilities. 
ii.  Bicycle parking facilities shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. 
iii.  A minimum of four feet from the required rack dimension shall be provided for pedestrian clearance when a rack is placed within a sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way. 
iv.  Bicycle racks shall be located in highly visible and well lit areas to minimize theft and vandalism. 
v.  When automobile parking spaces are provided in a structured parking garage, all required bicycle spaces shall be located inside the garage on the ground level. Alternative layout and design of racks to maximize space may be administratively approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
vi.  Alternative locations - in the event that compliance may not be feasible because of demonstrable hardship, the Zoning Administrator may approve an alternative location. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the following: 
a.  Alternative locations shall be well lit and secure. 
b.  All bicycle parking spaces shall be located within a 100-foot diameter of the primary building entrance. 
b.  Bicycle rack design. 
i.  All racks shall be of the wave-type design. 
ii.  Rack structure will require a user supplied locking device. 
iii.  The racks shall be constructed of durable materials to withstand permanent exposure to the elements, such as powder coated metal or stainless steel. 
iv.  Racks must be permanently mounted to a concrete or asphalt surface. 
v.  Racks shall provide clearance from other objects by using layout dimensions of at least four feet wide by six feet long. 
vi.  Construction details shall be submitted for review prior to final approval of construction plans. 
c.  Bicycle parking requirement. 
i.  The number of bicycle parking spaces required shall be based on the required automobile parking spaces and shall be provided in accordance with the following with fractional requirements for bike parking over 0.5 to be rounded up. 
ii.  A minimum of five bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all sites with up to 100 required vehicle parking spaces. Two bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for every 150 required vehicle parking spaces thereafter. 
iii.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all uses except: accessory uses; agricultural; lodging; one to four family dwellings; temporary uses; and utilities. 
6.  Outdoor decorative trash receptacles. Outdoor trash receptacles shall be required for all commercial site plans, with the exception of those commercial developments that have received site plan approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance. 
In addition, outdoor trash receptacles shall comply with the criteria listed, as follows: 
a.  Locations. 
i.  For all commercial uses, a minimum of one decorative trash receptacle shall be located at all public entrances and exits of a commercial use. 
ii.  The location of all trash receptacles shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended or emergency exits. 
b.  Design. 
All commercial site plans shall show the proposed design, size, typical elevation and location for each decorative trash receptacle on the plan. 
The design of the trash receptacle shall be made of black powdered coated steel, have a minimum capacity of a 36-gallon container and shall be of a strap-type design. (A typical design is shown in illustration 6.1 below for example only). 
Illustration 6.1

(Ord. No. 2003-40, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-35, 12-12-2005; Ord. No. 2006-04, 2-6-2006; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 6-103; Ord. No. 2011-36, § 1, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 1-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-43, § 1, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2014-68, § 1, 10-27-2014; Ord. No. 2015-43, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 3-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-40, § 3, 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 6-104. - Supplemental design provisions. 
    6-104.1 Mixed-use development standards for density, height, lot size and open space. The provisions of this section apply to any mixed-use development located on any zone lot or portion of a zone lot in any commercial district. 
1.  Provisions applicable to mixed-use developments. The provisions appearing below shall apply to all mixed-use developments (buildings and/or sites) where such are permitted within any commercial district. 
a.  Maximum bulk permitted. For any mixed-use development the height, density, bulk, lot size and open space provisions applicable to the RM-16 district (see article V, table 5-103a) shall apply. Unless modified through the PUD process these provisions and the provisions of [subsection] 5-104.1, Development standards for multi-family dwellings, shall apply. 
b.  Calculation of residential density. To determine the residential density permitted within any mixed-use development the following procedure shall be utilized: 
i.  The zone lot upon which the development is located will be apportioned as to its nonresidential-residential components as follows: 
a)  For a site containing mixed-use buildings the total GFA (gross floor area) will be calculated and the percent commercial/residential determined. The percent residential GFA will then be applied to the total acreage of the site. This acreage will be used to calculate the maximum density. A minimum of five percent of the GFA of the entire site shall be commercial. 
b)  For a mixed-use site a determination will be made as to the area of the property used for commercial/residential activities. The acreage used for residential uses will be used to calculate the maximum density. A minimum of ten percent of a site shall be used for commercial activities and uses. 
c)  For the development scenarios in 'a' and 'b' above, and variations thereto, the Zoning Administrator shall make a final determination on the methodology for calculating density. 
d)  The residential density approved for any project will be subject to review and approval by the Board of Commissioners based on the quality and characteristics of the project. The Board of Commissioners is under no obligation to approve the maximum allowable density for a project. 
ii.  The residential density permitted will then be calculated in a like manner as for any zone lot located within said district. 
iii.  In no instance, however, shall the total building bulk permitted be increased beyond that established for the district within which the mixed building(s) is located. 
c.  Applicability. The requirement in table 6-102A for a mixed-use building or mixed-use site to be approved through the PUD process contained in article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance shall not authorize such uses without the development being submitted as: 1) part of a new PUD application, or 2) an amendment (per subsection 8.203.11) to an existing PUD. In either case, mixed-use developments shall not be authorized without specific action by the board of commissioners. An existing PUD, although it may contain CMU base zoning, shall not be exempt from this requirement. 
    6-104.2 Development standards for commercial complexes. 
1.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are applicable to all commercial complexes as defined by this ordinance (see article II, section 2-102). The intent of this provision is to ensure coordination of certain critical design elements within commercial complexes by Planning Commission review of the master development plan required for all such development by article XIV, subsection 14-103.3. Provided, however, that in any instance where this use is located within a planned unit development this requirement may be fulfilled by submission of the plans required by that section. 
2.  Parking and access control. The parking and access control provisions contained in article IX, subsection 9-102.7, Joint parking facilities, shall apply within all commercial complexes. 
3.  Design standards. The following design standards shall apply to all development plans submitted for property located within any commercial complex: 
a.  Site drainage shall be designed to incorporate all buildings and structures included with the total development site. In that site drainage may adversely affect other off-site properties, the Planning Commission may require the developer of the commercial complex to post a pre-construction performance bond to ensure the proper completion of drainage improvements. 
b.  All commercial complexes shall be subject to the design standards in article VI, [sub]section 6-103.7. 
4.  Standards for internal walkways. The following design standards for internal walkways shall apply within all commercial complexes: 
a.  Walkways, a minimum of five feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the building. At a minimum these walkways shall connect street crossings to the major points of building entry. 
b.  Walkways shall be provided along the full length of the building on any side which provides building access to the public or where public parking is available, to provide safe and comfortable pedestrian access to the building. 
c.  Internal walkway surfaces shall be designed to be visually attractive and distinguishable from driving surfaces through use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort. 
    6-104.3 Special provisions applicable to CNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service and OPS Office/Professional Service Districts. 
1.  Purpose. The special provisions set forth herein are intended to provide design criteria for commercial activities proposed for location on a zone lot or portion of a zone lot within Convenience Neighborhood Service (CNS) or Office/Professional Service (OPS) Districts. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to provide for implementation of these provisions by review of the site plan required by article XIV, subsection 14-103.3. Provided, however, that in any instance where this use is located within a planned unit development this requirement may be fulfilled by submission of the plans required by those sections. 
2.  Design criteria, general. It is intended that commercial activities when permitted within these districts generally shall be small, unobstructive and produce negligible off-site impact. To this end, no individual commercial establishment shall be of such size or character as to create the impression of general commercial development. In addition, hours of operation, outdoor display of goods, signage and lighting shall be restricted so as to reduce or eliminate possible negative influences upon the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
3.  Design criteria, detailed. 
a.  Location. These facilities are intended to meet the very limited function of providing convenience goods and services to the surrounding residents. The locations for these operations are limited to intersections of arterial or major collector streets which are identified on the latest adopted major street plan. 
b.  Maximum size of establishments. No individual commercial establishment in CNS districts shall have a gross floor area exceeding 5,000 square feet. There shall be no size limitation for commercial establishments located in OPS districts. 
c.  Building design. Buildings must be constructed of masonry and wood and shall be residential in scale and architectural design. 
d.  Conduct of operations. All sales, service, or display in connection with commercial establishments shall be within completely enclosed buildings, and there shall be no display, service, or storage outside such buildings. No public address systems or other devices for reproducing or amplifying voices or music shall be mounted outside such buildings or be audible beyond any line of the lot on which the building is situated. 
e.  Exterior storage. Exterior storage of goods or materials of any kind is prohibited. Placement of waste disposal facilities is permitted in the rear of the commercial operation only and shall not be located in any front or side yard. Such facilities shall be totally screened using similar exterior materials from which the outside walls of the principal building is constructed and shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner. 
f.  Lighting. During hours of darkness when convenience establishments are in operation, parking areas and pedestrian ways on the premises shall be lighted to an intensity of at least 0.6 footcandle. No such lighting shall be directed in a manner which illuminates adjoining residential premises and no source of incandescent or mercury vapor illumination shall be directly visible from any residential property, or from any street. No neon lights inside or outside structures shall be visible from any residential property, or from any street. 
g.  Noise. No noise detectable at the property line may be generated on the site. 
h.  Special sign provisions. No signs intended to be read from off the premises shall be permitted in connection with convenience establishments except one sign, not exceeding 16 square feet in area, mounted flat against the side of the building, for each face of the building exposed to a public street. Where more than one convenience establishment is located in the same building, signs in accordance with the above formula may be permitted for each. No such sign shall extend or be mounted above or beyond the wall of the building. 
4.  Special parking provisions. Where any commercial use or activity permitted within a CNS or OPS district adjoins any existing residential use, the following special provisions may be utilized, singly or in combination, in order to offset any negative impacts of the parking upon the use and enjoyment of the adjoining residential activity: 
a.  Parking shall be restricted or prohibited within front or side yards which adjoin a residential use or activity. 
b.  No parking area may be located within any buffer yard required by the provisions of subsection 6-103.4, subpart 6, Special provisions applying to required yards and building setbacks along district boundaries coincident with side or rear lot line of zone lot in any residential district. 
c.  Off-site parking may be located on a lot other than the same lot to which the spaces are accessory provided that: 
i.  Such spaces are located in a mixed-use or commercial district; 
ii.  Such spaces are located to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through streets having predominantly residential frontage; 
iii.  Such spaces are located no farther than 400 feet from the nearest boundary of the lot occupied by the activities to which they are accessory; 
iv.  Such spaces are in the same ownership as the uses to which they are accessory and necessary instruments are executed to ensure the required number of spaces will remain available throughout the life of such uses; and 
v.  Such spaces conform to all applicable district regulations of the district in which they are located. 
5.  Special yard requirements. Along such portions of the boundary of any CNS or OPS district where such lot abuts or is contiguous to any residential zone lot, [a] buffer yard, as required by subpart 6 of subsection 6-103.4, shall be required. Such yards may be used only for purposes of screening. 
6.  Maximum size of CNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service Districts. Due to limited service nature of the CNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service District and the potential for negative impact upon nearby residential activities no CCNS, Convenience Neighborhood Service District shall be created which exceeds two acres in size. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, 12-12-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 6-104; Ord. No. 2013-53, § 4, 7-8-2013; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 4, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 3, 4-25-2016) 
ARTICLE VII. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 7-101. - Purposes of industrial districts. 
    7-101.1 General purposes. The industrial districts established by this ordinance are designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following: 
1.  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the area for all types of distributive, industrial and related activities, with due allowance for the need for choice of suitable sites. 
2.  To protect distributive, industrial and related activities, as well as residential and related activities by providing for separation of these uses, and, as far as possible, provide that appropriate space needs for distributive and industrial activities are available by prohibiting the use of such space for residential purposes. 
3.  To encourage industrial development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable influences, by permitting such development in areas where this ordinance restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial products and processes involved. 
4.  To protect adjacent residential and commercial areas, and to protect the labor force in other establishments engaged in less offensive types of industrial and related activities, by restricting those industrial activities which involve danger of fire, explosions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, and other hazards, or create offensive noise, vibration, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable influences, by permitting such development in areas where this ordinance restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial products or processes involved. 
5.  To protect industrial activities and related developments against congestion, as far as is possible and appropriate in each area, by limiting the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by requiring space off public ways for parking and loading facilities associated with such activities. 
6.  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, to promote stability of industrial and related development, to strengthen the economic base of the area, to protect the character of these districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings and to protect the City's tax revenues. 
7.  To protect adjacent residential and commercial districts from any negative impacts attributable to sites devoted to industrial activities. 
    7-101.2 Specific purposes. 
1.  I-R, Restrictive Industrial Districts. This class of district is intended to provide space for a wide range of industrial and related uses that conform to a high level of performance criteria and have the least objectionable characteristics. These districts may provide a buffer between other districts and other industrial activities that have more objectionable influences. Except as specified in article III, subsection 3-105.2, subpart 6, Residential occupancy in connection with nonresidential activity, new residential activities are excluded, and community facilities and commercial establishments which provide needed services for industry and are complementary thereto are permitted. 
2.  I-G, General Industrial Districts. This class of district is intended to provide space for the types of industrial activities which by reason of volume of raw materials or freight, scale of operation, type of structures required, or other similar characteristics require locations relatively well segregated from nonindustrial uses. Except as specified in article III, subsection 3-105.2, subpart 8, Residential occupancy in connection with nonresidential activity, new residential activities are excluded, and commercial establishments and community facilities which provide needed services for industry and are complementary thereto are permitted. 
3.  I-S, Special Industrial Districts. This class of district is intended to provide suitable areas for intense, potentially noxious and/or dangerous industrial operations, including open land operations. It is specifically intended that all newly created districts be so located as to prevent negative impact upon adjoining uses. To this end, these districts are to be protected from encroachment by other activities. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 7-101.2) 
Sec. 7-102. - Uses and structures. 
    7-102.1 General provisions. Principal uses of buildings or other structures and land have been classified and combined into major classes and activity types in article III of this ordinance. The procedure for interpreting the classes and type of activities is provided in article III, section 3-101, table 7-102A, presents a tabulation of uses and structures which are classified as principal permitted (P), permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP) or conditional (C) uses within the various industrial districts. The supplemental design provisions with which (SUP) and (C) uses and activities are required to comply appear in article III, section 3-104, Supplemental use regulations. 
    7-102.2 Principal permitted uses (P). Principal permitted uses are permitted as a matter of right within the district indicated, subject to the general requirements established for the district wherein the use is located. 
    7-102.3 Uses permitted with supplemental provisions (SUP). A use permitted with supplemental provisions is an activity, use or structure which is permitted subject to a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the specific standards indicated for the use in question have been met. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 7-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    7-102.4 Conditional uses (C). A conditional use is an activity, use, or structure which may require large land area, have unique operating, traffic generating or other characteristics that may tend to dominate or adversely affect the area more than do other uses permitted within the same zone district. Because the impacts of these uses cannot be satisfactorily predetermined for every possible location within a zone district, these land uses are permitted only upon approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. Only those uses and structures so indicated in table 7-102A, may be allowed within the districts indicated. 
    7-102.5 Accessory uses. In addition to the principal activities expressed above, each activity type shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal activity when such accessory activity is located on the same zone lot as such principal activity and meets the further conditions set forth in article III, section 3-105. Permits for accessory uses designated "ASP" shall be issued upon demonstration that the activity in question meets the requirements established for such activity article III, section 3-105. The third classification of accessory uses designated by the letter "C" require[s] approval as a conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Upon issuance of any permit for a conditional accessory use such use or activity shall be continuously subject to compliance with any operational standard or criteria established by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
Table 7-102A. Permitted and Conditional Uses and Structures Allowable Within Industrial Districts [Uses, Structures and] Activities Zone District I-R (1) I-G I-S I. Manufacturing activities A. Manufacturing, limited P P P B. Manufacturing, general P P P C. Manufacturing, basic industry SUP (2) D. Manufacturing, hazardous SUP (2) II. Commercial activities A. Adult oriented business O (3) B. Animal care and veterinary service SUP* SUP* SUP* (2) C. Automotive parking P P P D. Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair SUP SUP E. Entertainment and amusement services, limited P P F. Group assembly and commercial outdoor recreation C C G. Outside materials and equipment sales and repair P H. Professional services, medical P P P I. Professional services, nonmedical P P J. Restaurant, full-service P P P K. Restaurant, fast food P P P L. Scrap operations SUP (2) M. Self-service storage P P N. Warehousing goods, transport and storage P P SUP (2) O. Wholesale sales P P SUP (2) P. Banking and financial institutions P > > Q. General retail sales and services P III. Community facility activities A. Administrative services P P P B. Child care facilities C C C. Community assembly C C D. Essential public transport communication and utility services P P P E. Extensive impact facilities C C SUP (2) F. Intermediate impact facilities C C G. Religious facilities C C H. Waste disposal operations SUP (2) IV. Agricultural activities A. Mining and quarrying SUP (2) V. Accessory activities A. Accessory storage, enclosed P P P B. Accessory child care C C C. Administrative office P P P D. Operation of cafeteria C C C E. Residential occupancy C C C  
Note- Key to interpreting use classifications. 
P = Use permitted by right within the district. 
SUP = Principal use permitted with supplemental provisions. 
C = Conditional use (subject to approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals). 
O = Requires overlay district. 
(1)  See subsection 7-104.2, for supplemental design provisions. 
(2)  See subsection 7-104.1, for supplemental design provisions. 
(3)  See article VIII, section 8-401. 
    7-102.6 Temporary uses. The temporary uses and structures specified in article III, section 3-106, as permissible within industrial districts may be permitted for the limited time periods indicated for each such use or activity. 
    7-102.7 Uses not permitted. Any uses or structures not allowable as permitted uses, conditional uses, temporary uses or accessory uses are prohibited within the various industrial districts. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 7-102; Ord. No. 2010-37, § 4, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 3, 1-10-2011; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 6, 10-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-24, § 1, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-31, § 1, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-42, 6-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 1, 6-8-2015) 
Sec. 7-103. - Bulk regulations. 
    7-103.1 General[ly]. Minimum lot dimensions, maximum lot coverage, minimum front, rear, interior and street side yards, maximum building heights and minimum separation between buildings on the same zone lot within any base industrial district shall be as indicated in table 7-103A. Bulk regulations for industrial districts, and the additional bulk regulations specified in this section. For certain uses, alternative bulk regulations may be specified in this section or other sections of this ordinance. 
    7-103.2 Lot dimensions. No lot shall be created and no building permit or zoning approval shall be issued for any lot that does not meet the following minimum dimensional requirements: 
1.  Lot area. 
a.  Minimum area. Within the various industrial districts, the minimum horizontal area of a lot shall not be less than that indicated in table 7-103A, Bulk regulations for industrial districts, or as may be otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
b.  Reduction in lot area prohibited. No zone lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot width, building area, or other requirements of the zoning ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
2.  Lot width. The minimum lot width (measured at the building line) shall not be less than indicated in table 7-103A, or otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
Table 7-103A. Bulk Regulations for Industrial Districts [Bulk Regulations] Districts I-R I-G I-S I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings (as percent of total lot area) 50 50 50 II. Maximum impermeable surface ratio (as percent of lot area) A. Lots two acres or less 80 80 80 B. Lots greater than two acres 70 70 70 III. Minimum zone lot requirements A. Area (in thousands of square feet) 40 40 (1) B. Width (in feet, measured at building line) 100 100 150 IV. Maximum Height (in feet) 50 50 50 V. Minimum yard requirements (in feet) A. Front 20 20 (4) B. Side (2), (5) (2), (5) (4) C. Rear 20 (3) 20 (3) (4)  
(1)  The minimum lot shall be as required to meet other provisions of this article. 
(2)  Along the periphery of an industrial site that adjoins commercial or industrial property, side yards ten feet in width, are required. Where an industrial site abuts property classified as residential, the provisions of subsection 7-103.4, subpart 7, shall apply. 
(3)  Except along residential district boundaries. (See subsection 7-103.4, subpart 8.) 
(4)  See subsection 7-103.4, subpart 8, for special yard provisions within I-S districts. 
(5)  See subsection 7-103.4, subpart 9, for special provisions applicable to party walls. 
3.  Lot frontage. All lots shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated and maintained street or a permanent access easement as defined and regulated by this ordinance, except that lots located along the terminus of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 35 feet of frontage. 
4.  Maximum permitted lot coverage. Within the various industrial districts, the maximum zone lot coverage by all buildings (principal and accessory) shall not exceed the percentage of the total area of the zone lot indicated in table 7-103A. 
5.  Maximum impermeable surface ratio. Within the various industrial district, the impermeable surface ratio, computed by dividing the impermeable surface area by the total lot area shall not exceed the percentage indicated in table 7-103A. 
    7-103.3 Height regulations. 
1.  Basic requirements. The maximum permitted height for buildings shall not, except as provided in subpart 2, below, exceed that set forth for the various industrial districts in table 7-103A. 
2.  General exception to height regulations. The height limitation contained herein does not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, radio towers, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
    7-103.4 Yard regulations. 
1.  Permitted obstructions in required yards. In all industrial districts, the following shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard, except that all items shall comply with subsection 5-103.5, Obstructions, prohibited at street intersections: 
a.  Arbors and trellises. 
b.  Awnings or canopies projecting from a building wall over a required yard not more than six feet, and having no supports other than provided by the wall or its integral parts. 
c.  Chimneys projecting not more than three feet into, and not exceeding two percent of the area, of the required yard. 
d.  Driveways subject to other specific provisions of this ordinance related directly thereto. 
e.  Eaves, gutters, or down spouts, projecting into or over required yards not more than 24 inches or 20 percent of the width of such yard, whichever is the lesser distance. 
f.  Fire escapes or staircases, the riser area of which shall be at least 50 percent open, and whose vertical projection downward onto a required yard does not exceed 30 percent of the area of such yard. 
g.  Flagpoles, having only on structural ground member. 
h.  Fountains. 
i.  Mailboxes. 
j.  Open terraces, including natural plant landscaping. 
k.  Retaining walls. 
l.  Sculpture or other similar objects of art. 
m.  Street furniture such as, but not limited to, benches, drinking fountains, trash receptacles, ash trays, light standards, or directional signs. 
n.  Vehicular parking areas, unless otherwise specifically prohibited by applicable sections of this ordinance. 
o.  Vents necessary for use of fallout shelter constructed below grade of such yards, but excluding all other parts of such shelters. 
p.  Walls or fences not exceeding six feet in height measured from finish grade level at any point along the length of, and on any side of, such walls or fences, and not roofed or structurally part of a building. 
2.  Measurement of yard width or depth. In all industrial districts, the width or depth of a required yard shall be measured perpendicular to straight lot lines, or for curved lot lines, in such a way that such yard is bounded by the arc of a curve which is concentric with such curved lot line. 
3.  Dimension of yards. In all industrial districts, yards of such dimensions as set forth in table 7-103A, shall be provided. 
4.  Uses of required yard areas. The following uses may be made of yard areas, provided such uses are otherwise permissible in this district: 
a.  Landscaping. All required yard areas not occupied by driveways or sidewalks shall be devoted to landscaping, as required by article X. 
b.  Driveways. Driveways may be located within any required yard; provided, however, that no more than 50 percent of the area of any required yard may be used as a driveway. 
c.  Sidewalks. 
d.  Parking. Within all industrial districts any yard may be used for off-street parking or loading, except as provided in subpart D.7 [7.a] of this section. However, such areas shall not be used for storage or processing of any kind. No parking shall be permitted within ten feet of the front property line. 
5.  Restrictions on outside storage within areas other than required yards. 
a.  Outside storage within I-R districts. Within the I-R districts, no stocks, merchandise or material (with the exception of automobiles, tractors and other transportation, excavation or agriculturally related vehicles) may be stored upon any open area situated on any zone lot. 
b.  Outside storage within I-G and I-S districts. Within the I-G and I-S districts, outside storage may be permitted only within areas designated for such upon an approved site development plan. 
6.  Special yard provisions applying along railroad right-of-way. In all industrial districts, other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, along such portion of a rear or side lot line that coincides with a boundary of a railroad right-of-way, no rear or side yard shall be required. 
7.  Special provisions applying to required yards and building setbacks along district boundaries coincident with side or rear lot lines of zone lots located in any residential district. 
a.  Required yards along district boundaries coincident with side or rear lot lines. Within I-R and I-G, Industrial Districts, along such portion of the boundary of the industrial district which coincides with a side or rear lot line of a zone lot in any residential district, an open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky shall be provided within the industrial district. Within both I-R districts and I-G districts, the width shall be 100 feet, unless supplementary landscaping and buffering plans are approved by the Planning Commission. No portion of this open area shall be used for off-street parking, off-street loading or for storage or processing of any kind. No portion of this open area shall be paved, graveled or used for parking or as an access way of any type. 
b.  Special front setback. Regardless of the front yard provisions established for any industrial district, no building located on any zone lot adjacent to any residential district shall extend closer to the street than the average of the distances of the buildings located within 100 feet, of the lot whereon the industrial activity is located; provided that no building shall be required to setback more than twice the minimum front yard applicable within the industrial district. 
c.  Screening along residential district boundaries. To assist in preventing the transmission of light and noise from within any industrial district into any abutting residential district, screening shall be required where such district abuts or is contiguous to any residential district, without an intervening street, alley, or other public way. Such screening shall be provided within the industrial district, but not within a public street or alley, along the entire contiguity of said districts. Transitional screening which meets the standards of article X of this ordinance, shall be located in this open area. 
8.  Required yards within I-S districts. Due to the potentially noxious activities that may be permitted within I-S districts, special yard provisions are required. 
a.  Provisions applicable to zone lots occupied by any activity classified as hazardous manufacturing. In its review of any application for approval of a hazardous manufacturing activity proposed for location within an I-S district, the Board of Commissioners shall establish yards and building separations sufficient to protect the health, safety and economic benefit of persons owning or occupying nearby property. As an absolute minimum such yards shall be as indicated below. Screening shall be provided as established in subpart 7.c of this section (above). 
i.  Use adjoins residential property. Along any rear or side lot line which adjoins residential property, whether such property is presently occupied for residential purposes or only zoned for such use, an open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky at least 200 feet wide, shall be provided within the industrial district. Such open area shall not be paved nor used for off-street parking, loading, or storage or processing of any kind. 
ii.  Use adjoins commercial or industrial property. Along any lot line that adjoins property, either classified or presently utilized for commercial or industrial purposes, an open area at least 150 feet wide, shall be provided. Such area may be utilized for off-street parking or loading, but shall not be used for storage or processing of any kind. 
b.  Zone lots occupied by other than hazardous manufacturing activities. Yards for zone lots located within I-S districts, and occupied by other than hazardous manufacturing activities may be as provided for I-G districts. 
9.  Special provisions for party walls. Within I-R and I-G, Industrial Districts, side or rear yard requirements may be waived along the side or rear adjacent to another commercial or industrial zoned lot. 
a.  At all points of attachment, adjoining buildings shall be separated from each owner by a four-hour wall constructed in accordance with the Standard Building Code and the National Fire Protection Association. 
b.  A common or party wall may bisect the dividing line of two adjacent lots so that one-half of the wall is located on each of the properties, provided that the owners of each property sign a covenant in the form of an easement running with the land granting to the owner of the adjoining property the right to maintain, reconstruct and protect the wall. 
c.  In the event of the construction of a building on the lot line, the wall along the lot line if not constructed as a part or common wall between two buildings, shall be constructed as a four-hour wall and meet all requirements of the Standard Building Code and the National Fire Protection Association without regard to any construction that may exist or be proposed on the adjoining property. 
d.  All walls constructed within ten feet, of a property line, shall have a four-hour fire rating and shall comply with all requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
    7-103.5 Obstructions prohibited at street intersections. On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or structure that will materially obstruct vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area formed by the street lines at such corner lots and a straight line joining such street lines at points which are 35 feet distance from the intersection of the street lines and measured along said street lines. In case of rounded street lines at the intersecting streets, such measurement shall be made from the point of intersection of the tangents of the curve constituting the rounding. 
    7-103.6 Requirements for fire lanes. Fire lanes with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be located such that the lanes extend from a public street to a point adjacent to the principal entrances of all commercial buildings. Such fire lanes shall be positioned directly adjacent to emergency water facilities designed for fire protection and shall be paved with an all weather surface capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus. The required fire lanes shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. Installation of "No Parking" signs or other appropriate notice or of approved obstructions inhibiting parking may be required and if installed shall be maintained. The owner or his representative of a building that is adjacent to the fire lane shall be responsible for keeping the fire lane free of obstructions. 
    7-103.7 Requirements for open space. Development of all industrial sites in the City of Mt. Juliet and within the jurisdiction of the Regional Planning Commission shall include construction of all greenway sections that are included in the current and in any future greenway plans for the city. In any development, all parcels of land which touch or lie within the proposed route of a new greenway shall be constructed by the developer. Construction and related expenses for design, acquisition of right-of-way and construction of the greenways will be the responsibility of the developer. All greenway sections will be constructed per current City of Mt. Juliet, TDOT and FHWA standards and specifications, whichever is greater. Examples of said specifications include, but are not limited to, design, materials, thickness and width of greenway, as well as required signage, meeting ADA requirements, etc. 
    Construction of said greenway sections will be completed by ten percent of development build out and all greenway sections will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet. The developer, property owner or their designated agent may request a waiver or variance from this ten percent requirement should the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. Said waiver, variance or adjustment will not adversely affect the community objectives of the comprehensive plan. All greenways designated by current and any future greenway plans will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet and shall not count toward required open space and amenities. 
    7-103.8 Requirements for bicycle parking. 
A.  Locations. 
1.  Bicycle parking shall be located as close as or closer than the nearest car parking space to the building entrance, or other than those spaces for persons with disabilities. 
2.  Bicycle parking facilities shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. 
3.  A minimum of four feet from the required rack dimension shall be provided for pedestrian clearance when a rack is placed within a sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way. 
4.  Bicycle racks shall be located in highly visible and well lit areas to minimize theft and vandalism. 
5.  When automobile parking spaces are provided in a structured parking garage, all required bicycle spaces shall be located inside the garage on the ground level. Alternative layout and design of racks to maximize space may be administratively approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
6.  Alternative locations - in the event that compliance may not be feasible because of demonstrable hardship, the Zoning Administrator may approve an alternative location. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the following: 
a.  Alternative locations shall be well lit and secure. 
b.  All bicycle parking spaces shall be located within a 100-foot diameter of the primary building entrance. 
B.  Layout and design. 
1.  Bicycle rack design. 
a.  All racks shall be of the wave-type design. 
b.  Rack structure will require a user supplied locking device. 
c.  The racks shall be constructed of durable materials to withstand permanent exposure to the elements, such as powder coated metal or stainless steel. 
d.  Racks must be permanently mounted to a concrete or asphalt surface. 
e.  Racks shall provide clearance from other objects by using layout dimensions of at least four feet wide by six feet long. 
f.  Construction details shall be submitted for review prior to final approval of construction plans. 
C.  Bicycle parking requirement. 
1.  The number of bicycle parking spaces required shall be based on the required automobile parking spaces and shall be provided in accordance with the following with fractional requirements for bike parking over 0.5 to be rounded up. 
2.  A minimum of five bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all sites with up to 100 required vehicle parking spaces. Two bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for every 150 required vehicle parking spaces thereafter. 
3.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all uses except: Accessory uses; agricultural; lodging; one to four family dwellings; temporary uses; and utilities. 
    7-103.9 Building design. In all industrial districts, the exterior walls of all buildings shall be of brick, stone, tilt-up concrete or precast concrete. All architectural metal, metal panels and other materials composed of metal shall be prohibited. All concrete block shall be prohibited. All structures shall be shielded from view from all public streets with a landscaped berm. Accessory buildings and enclosures shall be consistent in design and materials with the building to which they are ancillary. The Planning Commission may waive any of these design requirements upon a showing by the developer that alternative materials will achieve a same or similar design result and be compatible with other buildings and structures in the vicinity which have been approved in accordance with these design provisions. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 7-103; Ord. No. 2014-67, § 1, 10-27-2014; Ord. No. 2015-44, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 2017-62, § 1, 10-23-2017) 
    7-103.10. Outdoor Decorative Trash Receptacles. Outdoor trash receptacles shall be required for all industrial site plans with the exception of those industrial site plans that have received approval prior to the enactment of this ordinance. 
    In addition, outdoor trash receptacles shall comply with the criteria listed, as follows: 
A.  Locations. 
1.  For all industrial uses, a minimum of one decorative trash receptacle shall be located at all public entrances and exits of an industrial use. 
2.  A minimum of one decorative trash receptacle shall be located in all designated outdoor employee gathering areas. 
3.  The location of all trash receptacles shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended or emergency exits. 
B.  Design. 
All industrial site plans shall show the proposed design, size, typical elevation and location for each decorative trash receptacle on the plan. 
The design of the trash receptacle shall be made of black powdered coated steel, have a minimum capacity of a 36-gallon container and shall be of a strap-type design. (A typical design is shown in illustration 7.1 below for example only). 
Illustration 7.1

(Ord. No. 2016-40, § 4, 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 7-104. - Supplemental provisions. 
    7-104.1 Development standards for I-S, Special Industrial Districts. 
1.  Operation and intent. The I-S, Special Industrial District, is intended to provide a mechanism for managing a wide variety of high impact, potentially noxious and/or dangerous, but necessary uses. Certain of the potential uses that may locate within the district have associated with them some special impact or potential hazard related to materials, processes or products which can not be evaluated as to effect on the surrounding area or environment in advance of the use being proposed for a particular location. At the time an application is filed for approval of an I-S district, a review of the location, design configuration and its impact will be conducted. This evaluation shall consider the proposed use, the site development plan required for all such development by article XIV, subsection 14-103.3, and all operational and environmental data required to be submitted. The express goal of this review is to determine appropriate design criteria and environmental safeguards to be applied to such use in order to protect the health and safety of the public at large. The review will formulate a basis for a detailed recommendation to the Board of Commissioners as to conditions under which the proposed use may be permitted to locate within the planning jurisdiction through creation of an I-S, Special Industrial District. 
2.  Development plans and review process. 
a.  Procedure for submission and review. The process for review and approval of any I-S, Special Industrial District, consists of three progressive elements: 
i.  Review and recommendation of a preliminary site development plan containing the information required by article XIV, subsection 14-103.3, and all operational and environmental data required by subpart 2 of this section. 
ii.  Consideration by the Board of Commissioners of the requested I-S district, as specified in this section. 
iii.  Review and approval of a final site development plan as specified herein. 
b.  Operational data required. Sufficient information shall be presented to fully divulge the operational nature, intensity and ultimate extent of the proposed activity. This information shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  The nature of materials to be utilized and processes involved in the proposed operation, to specifically include a detailed listing of types and expected quantities of all materials classified as hazardous by the Federal Department of Environmental Protection or by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conversation. 
ii.  Average number of vehicles entering and leaving the site on a daily basis and the anticipated routes of travel. 
iii.  Detailing of types and current status of all federal and state permits required for operation of the proposed facility. 
iv.  Detailing of all safety and protective measures to be utilized in connection with the operation as well as an indication of the system proposed for dealing with complaints. 
v.  A general indication of the anticipated duration of the proposed use and, details of plans and methodologies proposed for removal of the activity and/or reclamation of the site. 
vi.  A listing of the type and quantity of emissions expected to be released from the site. 
vii.  Effects of the proposed use on groundwater and air quality. 
viii.  Effects on surface water runoff and potential for any contamination of the same. 
ix.  A detailed listing of soils and geological conditions found upon the site. 
c.  Planning Commission recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the preliminary site development plan and forward a detailed recommendation concerning its disposition to the Board of Commissioners. This recommendation may contain suggestions for specific conditions and/or limitations to be applied to the use should the Board of Commissioners approve the zoning request. 
d.  Action by Board of Commissioners. After review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, the applicant may proceed to the Board of Commissioners with the proposal. At the meeting of the Board where the proposal is presented, the preliminary site development plan along with the action recommended by the Planning Commission shall be presented for review. The Board of Commissioners may approve or disapprove the proposal, or in an instance where the Planning Commission has recommended approval with conditions or recommendations for alterations, the Board may establish specific conditions within the purview of this ordinance for approval. 
Upon action by the Board of Commissioners approving the site development plan and the proposed change in zoning classification, the applicant may proceed to prepare and present to the Planning Commission a final site development plan. In no event shall a building permit be issued for any portion of a development subject to this procedure until a final site development plan has been approved. 
In the event that the action by the Board of Commissioners is a conditional approval, such conditions shall be agreed to in writing by the applicant before the zoning approval shall become final. Moreover, such acceptance by the applicant shall cause the activity to be continuously subject to compliance with the conditions set out in the grant of approval (and accepted by the applicant). Any violation of these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance to be punished as set out in article XIV. 
e.  Special information required for final site development plan. Following the action by the Board of Commissioners creating the I-S district, the applicant may proceed to prepare and present for review by the Planning Commission a final site development plan. Such plan shall contain the information specified in article XIV, section 14-103. Additionally, all such plans shall contain the following: 
i.  Approved state and federal permits. Copies of all permits required by state and federal law for operation of the facility shall be provided. 
ii.  Site restoration or reclamation plan. Depending upon the nature of the proposed use, a site restoration or reclamation plan may be required as a condition of zoning approval. Where such is required, said plan shall accompany the final development plan. Adequate provision, as determined by the City Attorney, shall be made to ensure implementation of said plan regardless of the future financial capabilities of the applicant. 
f.  Review of approval action. In the event that any site development plan shall be disapproved, such action shall, upon request by the applicant, be reviewed by the Board of Commissioners. The Board shall consider the report submitted by the Planning Commission and such other information as it may require in order to determine whether such development in its view meets the test of substantial compliance and complies with other standards of review, herein, established. Should the Board of Commissioners uphold the Planning Commission in its action, it shall notify the applicant that final approval of the development plan is denied. Should the Board of Commissioners override the Planning Commission's recommendation to disapprove the plan, it shall notify both the applicant and the Planning Commission of its decision and the action of the Board of Commissioners approving the plan shall become final. 
3.  Site location and design. 
a.  General location criteria. Any site proposed for classification as an I-S, Special Industrial District shall meet the following criteria: 
i.  The proposed site will be located in areas apart from concentrations of residential developments and community facilities where concentrations of people will be present. 
ii.  The proposed use will not pollute or deteriorate air quality, surface or subterranean water, or any other natural features. 
iii.  The proposed site will not be located in an area that could contaminate the source of an existing public water supply. 
iv.  The proposed site will be served by public utilities and services adequate to ensure a safe operation. 
v.  The proposed use will not result in transportation of dangerous products or wastes through areas of significant population concentration. 
vi.  The proposed site will have direct access from a road classified as an arterial or collector on the major thoroughfare plan. 
vii.  The proposed lot shall be sufficient so that no danger occurs to the adjoining uses. 
viii.  The proposed site will not be located within a 100-year floodplain or wetland. 
b.  General site design criteria. 
i.  Provisions shall be made for disposal of surface water falling on or crossing the site at all times, during and after completion of the operations. The operations shall not obstruct the normal flow of any public drain, or abrogate the riparian rights of any other party to a stream or drain. 
ii.  The installation of roads, parking areas, buildings, structures and operational facilities and equipment shall be located on the site so that adjoining properties will not be adversely affected. 
iii.  The operation shall be conducted at all times so as not to create any violation of environmental and operational performance standards presented in article XII. 
iv.  The proposed site shall have a public supply of water available, capable of providing required fire flow to fire hydrants on site. 
v.  In any instance where a facility approved within an I-S district involves operation of a sanitary landfill the following will apply: 
•  The proposed site will be free of sinkholes, caves, caverns, or other karst features that would present significant potential for surface collapse or significant degradation to local groundwater resources. 
•  No excavation or filling shall be made within any portion of the yard areas required by subsection 7-103.4, subpart 8. 
•  The depth of excavation and the materials to be used for fill shall not have any adverse effect on the supply, quality or purity of groundwater or wells. 
•  A layer of clean earth at least two feet thick, shall be deposited and thoroughly compacted over all fill to bring the surface to the finished surface grade as shown on the topographic plan filed with the application. 
4.  Expansion of facilities or changes in operational characteristics. Any approval of an I-S, Special Industrial District, is specifically limited to the uses, facilities and operations presented and approved in the plans provided for by this section. Any expansion of the facilities or change in the materials, services or products shall only be accomplished after approval of a modified site development plan. Such modification may be approved by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. 
    7-104.2 Development standards for I-R, Restrictive Industrial Districts. 
1.  Purpose. The special provisions set forth herein are intended to provide design criteria for all activities proposed for location on a zone lot or portion of a zone within any I-R, Restrictive Industrial District. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to provide for implementation of these provisions by review of the site plan required by article XIV, subsection 14-103.3. Provided, however, that in any instance where this use is located within a planned unit development this requirement may be fulfilled by submission of the plans required by those sections. 
2.  Design criteria, general. It is intended that industrial activities when permitted within this district shall conform to a high level of performance criteria and generally to present the lowest level of objectionable characteristics associated with manufacturing operations. Further, it is intended that buildings located within these districts shall have a high degree of aesthetic appeal. These districts are specifically intended to encourage a mix of manufacturing activity with wholesaling and retailing of equipment, building supplies, etc., within an overall business park atmosphere. 
3.  Design criteria, detailed. 
a.  All activities to be conducted within enclosed buildings. All activities associated with any use (to specifically include storage) shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
b.  Restriction of dust and odor. No dust, odor, fumes or particulate matter shall be emitted outside the building or introduced into the atmosphere at any point beyond the building. 
c.  Restriction of sound and vibration. No sound or vibration shall be emitted which can be detected at the property boundary. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 7-104; Ord. No. 2015-44, § 3, 11-23-2015) 
ARTICLE VIII. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8-101. - Operation and intent of overlay districts. 
    8-101.1 Purpose and intent. Overlay districts are hereby established as a means of addressing specific aspects of land use control or development that transcend conventional zoning district provisions. Included are overlay district provisions that permit greater design flexibility; an overlay to protect areas subject to flooding; and an overlay district designed to regulate the location of adult entertainment establishments. 
    8-101.2 Applicability. An overlay district shall represent a mapped geographic area depicted upon the official zoning map. Overlay districts may be applied to the base zone districts so indicated by this ordinance and may encompass one or more of those districts. Unless expressly stated to the contrary in this article, all lands encumbered by an overlay district shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-101) 
Sec. 8-201. - Planned unit development districts. 
    8-201.1 General provisions. 
1.  Intent and purpose. The PUD, Planned Unit Development District regulations are an alternative zoning process that allows for development of land in a well planned and coordinated manner. This procedure is intended to provide opportunities for more efficient utilization of land than would otherwise be the case under the conventional provisions of this ordinance. The planned unit development provisions permit a greater mixing of land uses not easily accomplished by the application of conventional zoning district boundaries, or a framework for coordinating the development of land with provision of adequate roadways and public services. In return, the PUD districts require a high standard for protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands, well planned living, working and shopping environments and timely provision of essential utilities and streets. 
2.  Consistency with the general plan and area development plans. No planned unit development shall be approved unless all plans for development are found to be consistent with the then current issue of the General Plan for the City and any adopted special development plans for the area in which the planned unit development is proposed. The Planning Commission shall make a formal, written finding regarding consistency of any proposed planned unit development, said report to include findings that the development: 
a.  Will be consistent with the currently effective General Plan as well as any special development plan for the area. 
b.  Is likely to be compatible with development permitted under the general development provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
c.  Will not significantly interfere with the use and enjoyment of other land in the vicinity. 
3.  Application of the district. 
a.  General[ly]. A Planned Unit Development Overlay District may be applied over any base zoning district established in article IV of this ordinance. 
b.  Provisions may be made mandatory. In the event that the adopted development plan for an area where any development is proposed so recommends, the Board of Commissioners shall require that all petitions for reclassifications of land within the area shall be formulated and administered in accordance with this section, including any amendments thereto. As appropriate for their respective areas, adopted development plans shall also contain recommendations which may differ from or supplement provisions of this article respecting new or modified PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts; design standards for signage, setbacks, parking and other matters, to be made applicable either area-wide or within particular PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts, or both. The Board of Commissioners shall not entertain proposals for reclassification of land within such areas until it has formally acted upon these recommendations. 
4.  Relation of planned unit development regulations to general zoning, subdivision, or other regulations; variations on equal satisfaction of public purposes. The planned unit development regulations that follow shall apply generally to the initiation and regulation of all PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. Where there are conflicts between the special planned unit development regulations herein and general zoning, subdivision, or other regulations or requirements, these regulations shall apply in PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. 
Where actions, designs, or solutions proposed by the applicant are not literally in accord with applicable planned unit development or general regulations, but the Board of Commissioners makes a finding in the particular case that public purposes are satisfied to an equivalent or greater degree, the Board may make specific modification of the regulations in the particular case, provided that where floor area and similar ratios (other than off-street parking) have been established by these regulations, the Board shall not act in a particular case to modify such ratios. 
Except as indicated above, notwithstanding procedures and requirements generally in effect, procedures and requirements set forth herein and in guides and standards officially adopted as part of regulations for particular classes of PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts shall apply in PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts, to any amendments creating such districts and to issuance of all required permits therein. 
5.  Jurisdiction of Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals. Those activities which require conditional use permits under various provisions of this ordinance may be permitted within planned unit developments provided that such activities are approved initially as part of the master development plan by the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners. Thereafter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may approve such uses. 
6.  Ownership and division of land. No tract of land may receive preliminary approval as a planned unit development, unless such tract is under the unified control of a "landholder" as defined by this ordinance. Unless, otherwise, provided as a condition of approval of a planned unit development, the landholder of an approved planned unit development may divide and transfer parts of such development. The transferee shall complete each such unit, and shall use and maintain it in strict conformance with the adopted master development plan. A report identifying all property owners within the area of the proposed district and giving evidence of unified control of its entire area shall be submitted along with any application for approval of a master development plan. The report shall state agreement of all present property owners and/or their successors in title: 
a.  To proceed with the proposed development according to the regulations in effect when the map amendment, including such modifications as are set by the Board of Commissioners in the course of such action creating the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, becomes effective. 
b.  To provide bonds, dedications, guarantees, agreements, contracts and deed restrictions acceptable to the Board of Commissioners in the course of such action. 
c.  To bind further successors in title to any commitments under subparts a and b, above. 
7.  Staging of development. The Planning Commission may elect to permit staging of the development, in which case, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Each stage shall be so planned and so related to existing surroundings and available facilities and services that failure to proceed with subsequent stages will not have an adverse impact on the planned unit development or its surroundings. 
b.  Each stage of the development shall, at the time of approval of any final site development plan for any portion of that stage, be assured adequate public services to serve all development proposed for that stage. 
8.  Status of previously approved PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. Any Planned Unit Development District which was approved under the provisions of Ordinance No. 86-21, as amended, and is not completely developed at the time of approval of this ordinance may continue under the development plan as approved. In any instance, however, where a change in the approved development plan is proposed such change shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-201) 
Sec. 8-202. - Definitions. 
    8-202.1 Application. In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    8-202.2 Terms defined. 
    Actual construction [means] the excavation of a site and/or the placement of building materials in conjunction with the construction of a building or other structure. 
    Common open space [means] a parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water within the site designated, designed and intended for benefit, use or enjoyment of the occupants of said development. [The term] "common open space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements as necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the occupants of such development. 
    Dwelling, attached, [means] a building located upon one zone lot containing not more than two dwelling units, attached at the side or sides in a series of three or more principal buildings each containing not more than two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, detached, [means] a building located upon one zone lot containing not more than two dwelling units, separated from structures on adjacent lots. 
    Dwelling, semi-detached, [means] a building located upon one zone lot containing not more than two dwelling units, attached at the side to not more than one other building containing not more than two dwelling units. 
    Environmental open space [means] a parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water within the site designated, designed and intended for protection of the natural landscape or certain specified resources. 
    Landholder [means] the legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to be included in a planned unit development. The holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than 50 years in duration, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest may be considered a landholder for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Private use open space [means] open areas located upon a lot and held for the exclusive use and enjoyment of owner(s) of such property. 
    Recreational open space [means] a parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water within the site designated, designed and intended for benefit, active or passive recreational use or enjoyment of the occupants of said development. 
    Restricted use open space [means] open areas located within a planned unit development that are held in some form of common ownership and restricted to use only as vegetative buffers, or other forms of environmental protection. These areas may include floodplains, steep slopes or other environmentally sensitive lands. 
    Shared use open space [means] shared use open space may exist within a planned unit development both as limited use or general use shared open space. Limited use shared open spaces are those limited to use by only a portion of the individuals who reside within the planned unit development. Shared general use open space is intended to be available for use by any resident of the development, but may be limited to use only by residents and their guests. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-202) 
Sec. 8-203. - Administrative procedure governing planned unit developments. 
    8-203.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose of these provisions is to prescribe a procedure for review, approval and continued administration of all planned unit developments provided for by this section. 
    8-203.2 Preapplication conference. Prior to filing an application for approval of a planned unit development the applicant shall confer with the Zoning Administrator concerning policy and procedure relative to the application. The Zoning Administrator shall arrange a formal meeting where the applicant or his representative shall meet with other staff persons who will be involved in reviewing and recommending action on the proposed plan of development. 
    8-203.3 Preliminary approval of the proposed planned unit development. 
1.  Application for preliminary approval. Application for preliminary approval shall be made by the landholder of the affected property or his authorized agent to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with such written general rules regarding procedure, form of application and required information as the Planning Commission may determine, provided such provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements set forth below. 
2.  Preliminary master development plan of a planned unit development. The preliminary master development plan for the proposed planned unit development shall be a general concept plan which shall include the following: 
a.  Sufficient information to disclose. 
i.  The location and size of the area involved; 
ii.  Location of transportation routes including streets, driveways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways and off-street parking and loading areas; 
iii.  Location and approximate dimensions of structures, other than one- and two-family detached dwellings, including approximate height, bulk and proposed utilization of structures including activities and the number of living units; 
iv.  Estimated population density and extent of activities to be allocated to various parts of the project; 
v.  Reservations for public uses including schools, parks and other open spaces; 
vi.  Other major landscaping features; 
vii.  The general means of the disposition of sanitary wastes and stormwater; 
viii.  The type and proposed use for any common open space included within the proposed development. Such information shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of subpart 4, of subsection 8-204.1, Quality, use and improvement of common open space; 
ix.  The ownership of all property proposed for incorporation within the PUD district. A copy of all deeds along with written documents signed by all property owners indicating willingness to abide by the approved development plan; 
x.  The base zone district(s) proposed for inclusion within the planned unit development; 
xi.  A listing of land uses proposed for the development. (Note. In an effort to increase the marketability of nonresidential sites located within PUD districts, the applicant may submit a list of alternative land uses, other than the uses shown on the plan, for such sites. Any such listing may contain only land uses permitted within the base zoning district(s) which the planned development district overlays and may be further limited as provided in subsection 8-208.1; and 
xii.  A site plan for all improved open space amenities. 
b.  A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses and activities and overall densities. 
c.  The nature of the landholder's interest in the land proposed to be developed and a written statement of concurrence from all parties having a beneficial interest in the affected property. (See subsection 8-201.1, subpart 6.) 
d.  The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures including proposed easements for public utilities, drainageways and common open space. 
e.  When it is proposed that the final master development plan will be submitted in stages, a schedule of proposed submissions thereof. 
If the application is deemed incomplete by the Zoning Administrator, a written request shall be made within ten days after the original submittal, for further information. In such case the application shall be held in abeyance until deemed complete. No plan shall be formally presented for Planning Commission action until such plan is found complete and ready for review. 
3.  Review by other departments of City government. Other departments of the City as appropriate, shall review the plan for the proposed planned unit development. 
4.  Planning Commission action on preliminary application for planned unit development. Within 45 days after initial submission the Planning Commission shall take action on the preliminary application by any one of the following: 
a.  Unconditional preliminary approval. 
b.  Conditional preliminary approval, in which the Planning Commission expressly denotes modifications which must be a part of the preliminary approval. 
c.  Disapproval. 
5.  Conditional preliminary approval; landholder's response. When the Planning Commission's action is conditional preliminary approval, the commission shall specifically note in its minutes conditions or modifications which must be compiled with in order that the proposed planned unit development receive preliminary approval. Within 60 days following the meeting wherein conditional approval is granted, the landholder may make a written response concurring with required modifications, in which case the planned unit development is deemed to have preliminary Planning Commission approval at the date of receipt of said written concurrence. When the landholder makes a negative reply or does not reply within 60 days of the date of conditional preliminary approval, the planned unit development shall be deemed as a recommendation for disapproval, unless such time limit is extended by specific action of the Planning Commission upon a written request of the landholder. In the event of a recommendation for disapproval the applicant may at his option proceed to the Board of Commissioners with his request. 
6.  Action by Board of Commissioners. Upon completing preliminary development plan review the Planning Commission shall forward its report and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners for action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's report the Board shall consider such report and recommendations, the preliminary development plan and such other information as it may require. The Board of Commissioners shall hold such required hearings and otherwise proceed in the manner set forth in article XIV, for consideration of an amendment to the zoning ordinance. 
In any instance where the Board of Commissioners may act either to approve a proposed development which the Planning Commission had recommended for disapproval or to conditionally approve the proposed development plan, the Board shall provide specific guidance to the Planning Commission relative to: 
a.  Overall design of the plan; 
b.  Any modifications required; and 
c.  Any additional information which may be required by the Planning Commission in order for it to determine substantial compliance between the preliminary and final development plan. 
7.  Planned unit development and the official zoning map. Upon approval by the Board of Commissioners, the Zoning Administrator shall place the extent of the planned unit development on the official zoning map identified by the ordinance number providing approval. Similarly in the instance of action by the Planning Commission abolishing or removing the planned unit development, the zoning administrator shall remove the PUD district from the official zoning map. 
8.  Recording of PUD district. Within 60 days following enactment of an adopting ordinance by the Board of Commissioners, all owners shall record with the Register of Deeds a boundary plat or suitably comparable document identifying that the affected properties are subject to the provisions of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District. Suitable instruments indicating the nature and extent of all off-site improvements and special conditions to which the development is subject shall be recorded with such plat. 
9.  Addition of land uses not included within an approved preliminary master development plan or listing of alternative uses allowable within the base zoning district. The proposed addition of any use not authorized within an approved preliminary development plan and accompanying listing of alternative nonresidential land uses may be added to the plan only when approved as provided, herein. The Planning Commission shall hear all such proposed amendments. In the course of its consideration of any alteration presented hereunder, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Said hearing is held for the purpose of making a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners as to disposition of the requested change. The action by the Planning Commission on the request for change shall be in the form of a resolution to the Board of Commissioners for amendment of the approved preliminary development plan. A report detailing the action recommended by the Planning Commission shall accompany the submission of Board of Commissioners. 
    8-203.4 Final approval of a proposed planned unit development. The approval by the Board of Commissioners of the preliminary development plan shall authorize and form the basis for the Planning Commission's final approval of said development. The final approval by the Planning Commission of the planned unit development shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of this section. 
1.  Application for final approval. Following approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan by the Board of Commissioners, the landholder may make application to the Planning Commission for approval of final development plans for all or a portion, (provided the portion is consistent with the staging schedule approved with the preliminary development plan), of the proposed planned unit development. No action shall be taken on any final development plan for any portion of a planned unit development until the landholder demonstrates that all land included within the portion of the development for which final approval is requested is owned by the landholder and that any options have been closed. 
The application for approval of the final development plan shall include all aspects of the preliminary application, the proposed final master development plan, other required drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, and conditions and forms of bond as were set forth by the Planning Commission resolution of preliminary approval. Copies of legal documents required by the Commission for dedication or reservation of common open space and/or for creation of a nonprofit association shall be submitted with the final development plan. 
2.  Final approval of stages. The application for final approval and the final approval by the Planning Commission may be limited to each stage as appropriate in a large planned unit development, in compliance with the staging plan approved as part of the preliminary development plan. 
3.  Final master development plan of a planned unit development. The application for final approval shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate the ultimate operation and appearance of the development, or portion thereof, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A site development plan containing the information required by [sub]section 14-103.3, Site development plans. At a minimum, such plan shall provide the following: 
i.  A grading plan indicating the anticipated finished topography of the area involved (contours shall be shown at vertical intervals no greater than two feet where topography does not exceed ten percent and five feet elsewhere). 
ii.  A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the planned unit development and to and from existing thoroughfares. This shall specifically include: width of proposed streets; a plan of any sidewalks or proposed pedestrian ways; and any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of the circulation pattern. 
iii.  An open space and recreation facilities plan indicating all land and facilities proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways and other public or semi-public open space uses including any improvements which are to be deeded as part of any common use area. (Such information shall include detailed site designs indicating all intended uses, equipment and facilities along with building or construction plans for the same.) 
iv.  A drainage plan sufficient to meet the requirements of the stormwater management plan adopted by the City. 
v.  A landscaping plan indicating all proposed landscaping and buffers. 
vi.  Information regarding the physical characteristics of the surrounding area and developments within 300 feet of the proposed planned unit development. 
vii.  A plan for each building site showing the approximate location of all lots, buildings, structures and improvements and indicating the open spaces around buildings and structures. Within residential developments, typical building envelopes shall be shown. 
viii.  A plan for proposed utilities including sewers, both sanitary and storm, gas lines, water lines, fire hydrants and electric lines showing proposed connections to existing utility systems. 
ix.  Within nonresidential developments, an off-street parking and loading plan indicating ground coverage of parking areas. 
b.  A detailed land use map and a listing of land uses approved for the development. (Note. For nonresidential sites located within the development, the listing of approved land uses shall include the list of alternative land uses, other than the uses shown on the plan, which were approved within the preliminary planned unit development plan.) 
c.  A tabulation of proposed residential densities to be allocated to various parts of a residential planned unit development. 
d.  Final drafts of all proposed covenants and grants of easement which are proposed for filing with final plats. Such documents shall be in a form approved by legal council. 
e.  Final drafts of all proposed documents establishing a homeowners' association or similar organization created for the purpose of owning and maintaining any common open space or facilities associated therewith. 
f.  A detailed listing of all conditions of approval to which the particular development, or individual sites located therein, are subject. 
If the application is deemed incomplete by the Zoning Administrator, a written request shall be made within ten days after the original submittal, for further information. In such case, the application shall be held in abeyance until deemed complete. No plan shall be formally presented for Planning Commission action until such plan is found complete and ready for review. 
4.  Action on final master development plan. In reviewing a final plan, the function of the reviewing agencies is twofold. First, the plan must be found to be in substantial compliance with the previously approved preliminary development plan. Secondly, all new information must be reviewed to determine its quality and compliance with all substantive requirements of this ordinance. 
a.  Review procedure. 
i.  Application for final approval shall be made to the Planning Commission. 
ii.  The completed final plan must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator ten days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission where the plan is to be presented. Ten copies of the plan and related documents will be required. 
iii.  Within 30 days subsequent to the formal presentation of the final plan to the Planning Commission it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to present data and findings of the various departments and agencies of the government concerning the proposed plan to the Planning Commission. 
iv.  The Planning Commission may approve the final plan if it finds: 
(a)  That the final plan meets the provisions for substantial compliance with the preliminary plan set forth in subsection 8-203.5 (below); and 
(b)  That the plan complies with all other standards for review which were not considered when the preliminary plan was approved. 
5.  Approval with modification. Should the Planning Commission require any modification in the final development plan, or any portion thereof, such modifications shall be agreed to by the applicant in writing prior to formal acceptance and filing of the final development plan. 
6.  Filing of an approved final development plan. Upon formal action by the Planning Commission approving a final development plan, or in the instance of conditional final approval, upon acceptance of the modifications as set forth in subpart 5 of this section, said plan and all maps, covenants and other portions thereof, shall be filed with the following: 
a.  The Zoning Administrator. 
b.  The City Recorder. 
7.  Disapproval. If the Planning Commission finds that the final plan does not meet the test for substantial compliance set forth in subsection 8-203.5, or does not comply with other standards of review it shall disapprove the plan. In the event of disapproval, a written report shall be prepared by the Planning Commission and sent to the applicant. This report shall detail the grounds on which the plan was denied to specifically include ways in which the final plan violated the substantial compliance provisions or other standards of review. 
    8-203.5 Determination of substantial compliance. The final development plan shall be deemed in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan provided modifications by the applicant do not involve changes which in aggregate: 
1.  Violate any provisions of this article; 
2.  Vary the lot area requirement as submitted in the preliminary plan by more than ten percent; 
3.  Involve a reduction of more than five percent of the area shown on the preliminary development plan as reserved for common open space; 
4.  Increase the floor area proposed in the preliminary development plan for nonresidential use by more than two percent; and 
5.  Increase the total ground area covered by buildings by more than two percent; 
6.  Involve any land use not specified on the approved preliminary development plan or the alternative list of uses for nonresidential sites. 
In any instance wherein a final development plan, including minor changes authorized under the provision of subsection 8-203.10, Minor site modifications to an adopted final planned unit development plan, is found not to meet the test of substantial compliance as set forth herein such plan may only be approved upon adoption of appropriate amendments to the adopted plan. 
    8-203.6 Failure to begin planned unit development. If no actual construction has begun in the planned unit development within three years from the date of approval of the final development plan, or section thereof, said approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. No further developmental activity may take place until the existing development plan is reinstated to an active status or a revised development plan meeting all conditions of this ordinance is approved. 
    8-203.7 Maintaining a current development plan. Building permits may be issued only within such portion(s) of a planned unit development for which a current final development plan is in effect. In spite of prior approvals, no action shall be taken in furtherance of any plan for a planned unit development for which a current final development plan is not in effect. In any instance where the approval of such plans may have lapsed due to noncommencement of actual construction, (see subsection 8-203.6) the following actions may be taken: 
1.  Reinstatement of previously approved development plan. In the event that actual construction may not have begun and/or the approval of the final development plan shall have lapsed, such plan may be reinstated by action of the Planning Commission and development may proceed, provided that no change is proposed that would require amendment of the plan. 
2.  Amending a lapsed development plan. In the event that actual construction may not have begun, approval of the development plan shall have lapsed and revisions and/or alterations are proposed that exceed the minor site modifications authorized by subsection 8-203.10, and thus would require amendment of the plan, such action may be accomplished only upon approval of a new preliminary development plan. 
    8-203.8 Enforcement of the development schedule. The construction and provision of all common open spaces and recreational facilities which are shown on the approved preliminary development plan must proceed at no slower rate than construction of dwelling units. From time to time the Planning Commission shall compare the actual development accomplished with the approved development schedule. If the Commission finds that the rate of construction of dwelling units or other commercial or industrial structures is substantially greater than the rate at which common open spaces and recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, then the Planning Commission may take either or both of the following actions: 
1.  Cease to approve any additional final plats; 
2.  Instruct the Zoning Administrator to discontinue issuance of building permits. 
In any instance where the above actions are taken the Planning Commission shall gain assurance that the relationship between the construction of dwellings or other structures of a commercial or industrial nature and the provision of common open spaces and recreational facilities is brought into adequate balance prior to continuance of construction. 
    8-203.9 Building permits and use and occupancy permits. Building permits and use and occupancy permits shall be issued for uses, buildings and other structures in planned unit developments in accordance with this section; otherwise, permits and certificates shall be issued in accordance with the other provisions of this ordinance as applicable. 
1.  Site plans. Site plans shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of article XIV, subsection 14-103.4. (Note. See subsection 14-103.4, for those uses and structures which require site plans.) 
2.  Building permits. Building permits may be issued for structures, buildings, activities, or uses only in strict compliance with the adopted final development plan of the planned unit development, including any conditions of approval. No building permit shall be issued for the area included in a preliminary planned unit development until the final development plan has been approved. 
2.  Use and occupancy permits. A use and occupancy permit may be issued only when the Zoning Administrator determines that the structure, building, activity, or use as a part of a planned unit development conforms with the adopted final development plan, including any conditions of its approval. 
    8-203.10 Minor site modifications to an adopted final planned unit development plan. Minor modifications in the terms and conditions of the adopted final development plan may be made from time to time as provided in the following paragraphs. Any proposed modification not permitted under these provisions may be approved only as an amendment to the adopted final development plan. 
1.  Minor modifications during construction. So long as no modification violates the basic policy and concept or bulk and open space regulations of the planned unit development as presented in the preliminary development plan, the Zoning Administrator may approve minor modifications in the location, siting and height of buildings and structures if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was approved. The total of such modifications approved by the Zoning Administrator shall never in aggregate result in: 
a.  Any increase in the number of residential units; 
b.  An increase of more than three percent in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use of a commercial or industrial nature; 
c.  An increase of more than three percent in the total ground area covered by buildings; or 
d.  A reduction of more than two percent in the area set aside for common open space. 
Minor modifications in the location of streets and underground utilities may be approved under this section. 
2.  Subjects not included for modification. The proposed addition of any use not approved in the final development plan as well as any increases in the number of dwelling units permitted, building height, decreases in the parking requirements and vision clearance area are not subjects for adjustments by the Zoning Administrator. Any proposed modifications of any of the above may be made only as amendments to the adopted final development plan. 
3.  Minimum adjustments only. Any modification must be held to the minimum necessary. Each of the following conditions must be found to apply to the particular circumstances prior to the granting of the adjustment: 
a.  Practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. That strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would result in practical practically difficulties or unnecessary hardships. 
b.  Extraordinary circumstances. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the land, buildings or uses referred to in the application, which circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to other land, buildings or uses in the same district. 
c.  Not detrimental. That granting the application will not be detrimental, to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood of the premises. 
d.  Health or safety not adversely affected. That granting the application under the circumstances of the particular case will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons working or residing in the neighborhood containing the property of the applicant. 
e.  Maintains intent of ordinance and the development plan. That such adjustment is within the intent and purpose of this ordinance and will not adversely affect the community objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
4.  Minor modifications of attached covered patios or covered decks -Subject to the following criteria. 
1.  Comply with all other requirements of the base zoning and the PUD overlay; 
2.  Required approval from the HOA. 
3.  Be accompanied by a to scale site plan drawing that include property boundaries; building setbacks lines; existing easements; existing house locations; and proposed building addition. 
4.  The attached covered patio or covered deck shall be an unconditioned space and not exceed the maximum building lot coverage requirements per lot by more than 200 square feet. 
    8-203.11 Amendments in an approved final development plan during the period of initial construction. During the period of actual development or construction of any planned unit development, (or when developed in stages of any portion of the total development) the provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed modifications which exceed the minor adjustments permitted by subsection 8-203.10. Once a planned unit development, or portion thereof, has been completed, any further changes or alterations shall be governed by the provisions of subsection 8-203.12. 
All proposed additions of uses not approved in the final master development plan as well as any decreases in the number of parking spaces or vision clearance area shall be subject to these amendatory provisions. In addition all minor modifications which exceed the cumulative changes in the ground coverage ratio, etc., permitted under subsection 8-203.10, shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
1.  Addition of uses not authorized in the approved development plan, but allowable within the base zoning district. The proposed addition of any use not authorized within an approved preliminary development plan and listing of alternative nonresidential land uses but allowable within the base zoning district wherein such use is proposed, may be added to the plan only when approved as provided, herein. The Planning Commission shall hear all such proposed amendments. In the course of its consideration of any alteration presented hereunder, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Said hearing is held for the purpose of making a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners as to disposition of the requested change. The Commission's action on the request for change shall be in the form of a resolution submitted to the Board of Commissioners for amendment to the approved preliminary plan. A report detailing the action recommended by the Planning Commission shall accompany the submission to the Board of Commissioners. All additions of uses not approved in the preliminary development plan must be made by the Board of Commissioners under the procedures authorized by this ordinance for amendment of the zoning map. 
2.  Addition of residential density, floor area of nonresidential uses and all other changes, other than changes in use, not authorized in the approved development plan, but allowable within the base zoning district. All proposed additions other than the additions of uses governed by subpart 1 of this section, including addition of residential density or nonresidential use area which exceed the minor changes permitted under subsection 8-203.10, and were not authorized in the approved preliminary development plan, but are allowable within the base zoning district, shall be considered as provided herein. 
All amendments to an approved development plan proposed under this section shall first be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation. In the course of its consideration of any amendment proposed hereunder the Planning Commission may hold a public hearing for all residents and parties who in the judgment of the Planning Commission have an interest in the amendment. 
The Planning Commission shall hear the proposed amendment and shall forward its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners for action. The Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing for all residents and other interested parties prior to any final action on any amendment proposed hereunder. Should the Board of Commissioners concur in the proposed amendment to the development plan, the Planning Commission may adopt said amendment only with an amended preliminary plan as a basis for such action. 
    8-203.12 Control of planned unit development following completion. 
1.  Issuance of certificate of completion. Upon completion of a planned unit development, or when developed in stages, of any portion of said development, the Zoning Administrator shall note completion of the final development plan. 
2.  Changes in the use of land or bulk of structures within a planned development after completion. After a planned unit development, or portion thereof, has been certified as complete, the use of land and construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned development will be governed by the approved final development plan, to the extent that such provisions are applicable. In any instance where a change in the completed development is proposed, the Planning Commission shall review the final development plan and shall provide an evaluation of the proposed change to the agency to whom application for the change has been made. Such evaluation shall as a minimum indicate the Commission's findings concerning consistency of the proposed change with the approved development plan and impact upon the continued successful operation of such development relative to its original purpose and intent. In the course of its consideration of any change proposed hereunder the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for all residents and parties who in its judgment have an interest in the proposed amendment. No changes may be made in the final development plan, unless required for the continued successful functioning of the planned development or unless such are required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was adopted or by changes in the development policy of the community. Changes may be made in the approved final development plan only upon application to the appropriate agency under the following procedure: 
a.  Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning Commission if such extensions, alterations or modifications are determined to be consistent with the purposes and intent of the recorded final development plan. 
b.  Any uses not authorized by the approved final development plan, but allowable as a permitted use, a use permitted with supplemental provisions or a conditional use in the base zoning district within which the applicable portion of the planned development is located, may be added to the recorded final development plan under the procedures provided by this ordinance for the approval of conditional uses. (See subpart 5 of subsection 8-201.1, Jurisdiction of Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.) 
c.  Unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved as set forth below, a building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan. 
d.  Provided that no amendment approved hereunder may act to abrogate or annul any covenant which provides for the use, operation or continuance of the common open space, changes in the use of common open space may be authorized by an amendment to the final development plan. 
e.  All other changes in the final development plan must be made by the Board of Commissioners, under the procedures authorized by this ordinance for amendment of the zoning map. 
f.  No changes in the final development plan which are approved under this section are to be considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting use of land, buildings, structures and improvements within the area of the planned development, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any changes permitted by this section are expressly reserved. 
3.  Resubdivision of a planned unit development after completion. A planned unit development may be subdivided and resubdivided for purpose of sale or lease after the certificate of completion has been issued under the procedures set forth below: 
a.  If the subdivision or resubdivision of planned development will create a new plot line, the applicant shall make application to the Planning Commission for approval of a subdivision or resubdivision. The Planning Commission may approve the subdivision or resubdivision of each section of the subdivided or resubdivided planned development if it meets the provisions of this article governing density, common open space and dimensional requirements. 
b.  All sections of a subdivided or resubdivided planned development are to be controlled by the final development plan rather than by the provisions of the zoning ordinance that otherwise would be applicable. 
c.  The owners or lessees of a subdivided or resubdivided planned development may jointly make application for a conditional use or for an amendment to the adopted final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, 8-12-2002; Ord. No. 2007-32, 8-13-2007; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-203; Ord. No. 2012-35, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 8-204. - Common open space. 
    Any common open space established by an adopted final master development plan for a planned unit development shall be subject to the following: 
8-204.1 Quality, use and improvement of common open space. 
1.  Common open space shall be used for amenity, site protection or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for common open space shall be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned unit development considering its size, developmental density, expected population, topography and other factors. 
2.  No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the approved final development plan, unless such plan has been amended by action of the Board of Commissioners upon recommendation of the Planning Commission to specifically allow the change of use. No matter how authorized, no change may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any use so permitted are expressly reserved. 
3.  Common open space may, subject to approval by the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners, consist of improved or unimproved land. All such land shall be designated as to its intended use upon the final development plan, all site plans and all plats. 
4.  The final development plan shall indicate the intended use of all common open space located within the development. In the case of improved recreational space, such plan shall indicate in detail the design of such spaces along with a listing of all recreation facilities and equipment proposed for location within these spaces. 
8-204.2 Assurance involving the provision of common open space. The Planning Commission shall require adequate assurance, in a form and manner that it approves, that the common open space shown on the final development plan will be provided and developed. The following methods of assurance are illustrative of the types of assurances required. They may be used singly, in combination or in conjunction with other similar methods: 
1.  The City may accept a letter of credit, corporate surety, or other acceptable financial guarantee in an amount sufficient to purchase the common open space shown on the approved development plan or final plat. This surety is to be presented with the final subdivision plat for the lots served by the open space. 
2.  The title to the land shown as common open space may be put in escrow. The escrow agreement shall provide that the land is to be held in escrow until the Planning Commission has certified to the escrow agent that the planned development has been completed, at which time the common open space is to be conveyed as provided in this section. The escrow agreement may provide for release of common open space by the escrow agent in stages. In such instance, the Planning Commission is to certify completion of each stage of the planned unit development to the escrow agent and the escrow agreement must provide that the open space may be conveyed in stages. 
3.  In general, the construction and provision of all common open spaces and public and recreational facilities shown on the master development plan must proceed at no slower rate than the construction of dwelling units. From time to time, the Planning Commission shall compare the actual development with the development schedule. If the Commission finds that the rate of construction of dwelling units or commercial structures is substantially greater than the rate at which common open spaces and public recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, then the Planning Commission may either cease to approve additional final plats and/or instruct the Zoning Administrator to discontinue issuance of building permits. 
8-204.3 Conveyance of common open space. All land and improvements shown on final development plan as common open space shall be conveyed according to a schedule and in the manner set forth herein. 
1.  Schedule for conveyance. A schedule for conveyance of all common open space shall accompany and be an integral part of any preliminary development plan approved under authority of this ordinance. Such plan shall as a minimum provide the following information: 
a.  A listing and description of all real property and any facilities located thereon that is to be conveyed; 
b.  A detailed schedule for development of the open space land and construction of the facilities; 
(Note. This schedule shall be directly linked to the proposed schedule for development of the project as a whole. The schedule shall reference the various phases and sub-phases of the project in such a manner as to clearly indicate when in the overall development of such project all open space land and improvements are to be constructed.) 
c.  A detailed schedule for conveyance of the open space land and improvements; and 
(Note. This schedule shall reference the various phases and sub-phases of the project in such a manner as to clearly indicate when in the overall development of such project all open space land and improvements are to be conveyed. The schedule shall further indicate any improvements that are to be added to open space lands following conveyance.) 
d.  Where any land within an approved PUD, Planned Unit Development District is proposed to be subdivided into residential lots and such site contains improved recreational open space (see definition) the recreational open space and all improvements shall be completed and conveyed either at the time of filing of the final plat or at the time streets and other improvements located within such development are offered for public dedication or acceptance by a maintenance organization created pursuant to subsection 8-204.4. 
2.  Methods of ownership and conveyance. Common open space within a development shall be owned, administered and maintained by the City or some form of owner's organization created pursuant to the provisions set forth herein. The following methods, either individually or in combination, may, subject to approval by the City, be utilized as vehicles of ownership and control of open space: 
a.  Dedication to government agency. The City shall have the first and last offer of dedication of open space. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The City may, but shall not be required to accept open space provided: 
i.  Such land is accessible to the residents of the City; 
ii.  There is no cost of acquisition other than the costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and 
iii.  The City agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. 
Where the City accepts dedication of common open space that contains improvements, the City may require the posting of financial security to ensure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements. Such surety shall run for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication and the amount shall not exceed 15 percent of the actual cost of said improvements. 
b.  Homeowners' association. Open space may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture establishing an association, funded trust, or similar organization meeting the requirements of subsection 8-204.4, below, for the maintenance of the common open space within the planned development. The common open space shall be conveyed to the trustees subject to covenants to be approved by the Planning Commission. Such covenants shall provide for maintenance of the common open space in a manner that ensures its continuing use for its intended purposes specified on the final development plan. 
c.  Condominiums. The common open space and improvements may be controlled through use of condominium agreements, approved by the City. Such agreements shall be in conformance with the State's Horizontal Property Act. All open space land within such developments shall be held as a common element. 
d.  Dedication of easements. The City may, but shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of undeveloped open space land, title of which is to remain in ownership by a condominium or homeowners' association, provided: 
i.  Such land is accessible to City residents; 
ii.  There is no cost of acquisition other than costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and 
iii.  A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the developer, condominium association and the City. 
e.  Transfer of easements to private conservation organization. With the permission of the City, an owner may transfer common open space to a private nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/or natural resources, provided that: 
i.  The organization is acceptable to the City, and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence; 
ii.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter and retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to carry out its functions; and 
iii.  A maintenance agreement acceptable to the City is entered into by the developer and the organization. 
8-204.4 Criteria for creation and operation of maintenance organization. 
1.  Requirement for maintenance organization. In any instance where common open space is to be conveyed to an organization other than a public agency, the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners shall require that the landholder provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of any common open space, and such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common open space, by sale or otherwise except to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain the common open space. 
2.  Mandatory provisions governing organization and operation of maintenance association. The open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners association. The association shall be formed and operated under provisions that are adequate to ensure continued protection and maintenance of the common open space and all improvements located thereon. As a minimum, the legal documents for establishment and operation of such organization shall contain the following: 
a.  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including the bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space. 
b.  The association shall be organized by the developer before the sale of any lots within the development. 
c.  Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be identified. 
d.  The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on open space, enforceable by liens placed by the City on the association. The association shall have the authority to place liens on the homes or houselots of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty and interest charges. 
e.  The members of the association shall share equitably the cost of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws. 
f.  In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of open space land by the homeowners' association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by the City, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development. 
g.  The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer common facilities and properly maintain the undivided open space. 
h.  The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of open space lands, but such lease agreement shall provide: 
i.  That the residents of the development shall at all times have access to the open space contained therein (except croplands during growing season); 
ii.  That the undivided open space to be leased shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this ordinance; 
iii.  That the operation of open space facilities may be for residents only, or may open to the residents of the City, at the election of the developer and/or the homeowners' association, as the case may be; 
iv.  The lease shall be subject to approval of the board of directors of the homeowners' association and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall be further subject to approval by the City. Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded with the County Register of Deeds within 30 days of their execution and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with the City. 
3.  Requirements for notice to homeowners. A written statement in simple terms shall be prepared for use in the sales program to inform all home buyers about the homes association and the rights and obligations of lot owners. Specific information that must be included in the notice is as follows: 
a.  Organizational structure of the association. 
b.  Membership and voting rights of homeowners and the developer. 
c.  Requirements for annexation, merger and dissolution, and an explanation that the total membership of the homes association may be increased. 
d.  The maximum amount of the initial assessments, the assessment lien and the method of enforcement. 
e.  Method of changing the maximum assessment. 
f.  User fees, if any. 
g.  Complete description of all elements of the common property, including improvements. 
h.  Services provided by the association. 
i.  Exterior maintenance of the dwellings, if any. 
j.  The existence and extent of architectural control. 
8-204.5 Maintenance of common open space. 
1.  The ultimate owner of the open space (typically a homeowners' association) shall be responsible for raising all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to the open space through annual dues, special assessments, etc. The homeowners' association shall be authorized under its bylaws to place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues, assessments, etc. 
2.  In the event that the association or any successor organization shall at any time fail to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the adopted master development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner has failed to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable condition. 
8-204.6 Failure of maintenance organization. Failure to adequately maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this ordinance. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain common open space, or any successor organization shall at any time after establishment of the planned unit development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the adopted master development plan, the Zoning Administrator may serve written notice upon such organization and/or the owners or residents of the planned unit development and hold a public hearing. After 30 days when deficiencies of maintenance are not corrected, the Zoning Administrator shall call upon any public or private agency to maintain the common open space for a period of one year. When the Zoning Administrator determines that the original organization does not have the capability to continue maintenance of common open space, the agency appointed under the provisions of this section may continue maintenance for yearly periods. The cost of such maintenance shall be assessed proportionately against the properties within the planned unit development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a special assessment to the property tax or a lien on said properties. 
(Ord. No. 2002-23, 8-12-2002; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-204) 
Sec. 8-205. - Minimum performance standards. 
    In addition to satisfying all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, approval of a master development plan shall be based upon a demonstration that the following design and development objectives have been satisfied: 
8-205.1 Protection of environmentally sensitive areas. Approval of a master development plan for any PUD district shall be based upon a demonstration that the proposed development plan will result in greater protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas than would otherwise result under provisions of the base zoning district. Areas to be protected shall fully comply with all provisions of article XII, pertaining to protection of areas with steep slopes, designated wetlands and floodplain areas along streams, major drains and sinkholes. 
8-205.2 Adequate streets, utilities and drainage. Approval of a master development plan for any PUD district shall be based upon a demonstration that streets, utilities and drainage features will be of adequate capacity to serve the proposed development. As a part of a master development plan proposal, a property owner may offer to improve or otherwise provide adequate facilities to support the proposed intensity of development. Public facilities already included in an adopted capital improvements budget may be considered a demonstration of adequate capacity if the proposed funding is timed with anticipated construction of the development. 
8-205.3 Coordinated vehicular access. Approval of a master development plan for any PUD district shall be based upon a demonstration that the internal traffic circulation system will be adequate to support the operational needs of the development itself in a manner that maintains the integrity and operational capacity of the community's major street network to standards equal to or greater than levels of operation existing at the time such development is approved. 
8-205.4 Preservation of historic and/or archaeological sites. All reasonable measures shall be taken to incorporate features of historic or archaeological significance into the design of any PUD district in a manner which contributes to the protection and preservation of those features. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-205) 
Sec. 8-206. - General development standards. 
    The following provisions shall be applicable as indicated to all planned unit developments: 
8-206.1 Relationship to other requirements. Unless, otherwise, specified in this article, all requirements and standards established by other provisions of this ordinance shall apply to development and use of properties located within any PUD district. In a case of conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provision of this ordinance, the provisions of this article shall apply within PUD districts. 
8-206.2 Landscaping and buffering. Within any planned unit development, landscaping and buffering shall be provided which meets or exceeds the purposes and intents for such established in article X. It is intended, however, that within PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts, alternative means may be employed to achieve an equal level of protection to that resulting from strict application of the provisions of article X. This provision is intended to permit and encourage use of flexible techniques to achieve a transitional character through site design that minimizes the harmful impact of noise, dust and other debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusion, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted on or created by an adjoining or nearby use. 
8-206.3 Parking, loading and access. All planned unit developments shall be subject to the provisions of article IX, Parking, loading and access, provided that the Planning Commission may permit a variance from off-street parking and loading requirements in approving a final development plan. 
8-206.4 Neighborhood relationship. A planned unit development shall be harmonious and not conflict with surrounding residential neighborhoods. It shall be planned, designed and constructed so as to avoid undue traffic congestion in the surrounding residential area and provide a satisfactory relationship of land use with the surrounding residential area, making use of landscaping, screening, open space and placement of buildings where required by accepted land planning principles. 
8-206.5 Architectural compatibility. Architectural features deemed essential to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties shall be incorporated. Architectural compatibility should be limited to those portions of the development which abut adjacent properties or can be seen from the frontage street. Examples of architectural features which may be important for ensuring compatibility include building bulk, height, roof slopes, building orientation, overhangs, porches and exterior materials. 
8-206.6 Permitted land uses. Land uses permitted within any PUD district shall be established based upon the underlying zoning district(s). Any land use classified as a (P) or (SUP) by the land use tables applicable to the underlying district may be permitted within a corresponding PUD district. Any land use classified as a conditional (C) use may be permitted within a PUD district if approved initially as a part of a master development plan, or, upon completion of the development, by the Board of Zoning Appeals (See subpart 5, Jurisdiction of Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals, of subsection 8-201.1) based upon a favorable recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
8-206.7 Preservation of natural features. Mature trees, vegetative cover, watercourses, stone walls, existing relief and other natural site features shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Abrupt changes in natural slope shall be avoided. Preservation shall be directed toward: 
1.  Enhancing the quality of new development; 
2.  Protecting the natural environment; 
3.  Providing buffering between new development and surrounding properties; and 
4.  Preserving the existing neighborhood character. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-206) 
Sec. 8-207. - Residential development standards. 
    Residential planned unit developments (RPUD) shall be subject to the following provisions. Mixed-use developments listed in section I "residential activities" of table 6-102A, shall be subject to the provisions in article VI, including specifically [sections] 6-101.2 "Specific purposes", 6-102 "Uses and structures", and 6-104 "Supplemental design provisions". 
8-207.1 Minimum size of residential PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. No residential planned unit development may contain less than the minimum area as stipulated herein unless the Planning Commission and/or Board of Commissioners find that a tract containing less than this minimum is suitable as a planned unit development by virtue of its historical character, unique scenic qualities, ecological or topographic features. Whenever a residential planned unit development is proposed to be located within two or more zoning districts with different required minimum areas, the largest required minimum area shall control. 
Minimum Gross Area for Formation of Residential Planned Unit Development District Base Zoning District Minimum Area Required AR-40 and RS-40 20 acres RS-30 15 acres RS-20 10 acres RS-15 7 acres RS-10 5 acres R-10 3 acres RM-8 and RM-16 No minimum  
8-207.2 Permitted density. 
1.  Basic density calculations. The overall residential density of a master development plan shall be established by application of the following table to the respective land area within each underlying district classification. A maximum density shall be assigned to each residential component of the master development plan and recorded by plat or equivalent instrument with the first phase of final development. 
Density Permitted Within Residential Planned Unit Development Districts Base Zoning District Maximum Density (see notes 1, 2, 3) AR-40 and RS-40 1.1 RS-30 1.5 RS-20 2.2 RS-15 2.9 RS-10 4.3 R-10 5.8 RM-8 7.9 RM-16 16.1 1. In dwelling units per gross acre. 2. Any fractions of 0.5 or greater shall be rounded to the next whole number. 3. In a residential planned unit development which is especially designed for the use and occupancy of persons of 60 years of age or older or families with one spouse of that age, maximum permitted densities may be increased up to 30 percent over that shown in the districts indicated.  
2.  Assignment of density. Within an RPUD district, the total density permitted according to the calculation presented in subpart 1, above, shall be assigned within the PUD district, as follows: 
a.  The applicant may select a single zoning district or a series of districts from the table presented in subpart 1, above, to which density is to be assigned. 
b.  The maximum density permitted within any portion of the PUD district shall not exceed that indicated in the table above for the district(s) assigned. 
c.  The district classification assigned to each phase shall be noted on the master development plan, each site development plan and all associated subdivision plats. 
8-207.3  Minimum lot sizes. The minimum size of lots permitted within various portions of an RPUD district shall be determined as provided herein. 
1.  Along the boundary of an RPUD district where lots are proposed to directly adjoin the boundary of the development and no open space is provided as a buffer between such lots and the adjoining property such lots shall contain 75 percent of the minimum lot area and 90 percent of the minimum lot width required by the adjoining zoning districts(s) or, in any instance where such property is not presently zoned by the City, the zoning classification recommended in the current edition of the Land Use Plan. 
2.  Elsewhere within the RPUD district minimum lot sizes shall be as approved in the master development plan. 
8-207.4 Bulk and yard provisions applicable to all uses other than residential. For all uses and activities other than residential activities located within any RPUD, the bulk and yard provisions established for the base zoning district wherein such use is to be located shall apply. 
8-207.5 Open space requirements. 
1.  General[ly]. Within any residential planned unit development open space shall be provided which is adequate to: 
a.  Buffer both internal and external activities from objectionable or conflicting characteristics associated with such uses; 
b.  Ensure adequate space, light and air along with visual and acoustical privacy; 
c.  Ensure protection of cultural and environmentally sensitive areas; 
d.  Provide space for recreation and enjoyment of the residents. 
2.  Use of common open space. All open space shown on a development plan of any residential planned unit development shall be indicated as to its intended use. In this regard, common open space may consist of the following: 
a.  Cultural and environmental open space. 
b.  Improved recreational open space. 
3.  Cultural and environmental open space. Except for those portions of a residential planned unit development required for the installation of streets and utilities, the following areas shall be designated as environmental open space and no development shall take place thereon: 
a.  Natural slopes of 18 percent or greater; 
b.  Areas classified as floodplain districts in section 8-301 of this ordinance and located as determined from field run surveys; 
c.  Streams, creeks and major drainageways (specifically including all "blue line" streams); 
d.  Areas classified as wetlands; 
e.  Sites of paleontological, prehistoric, historic and/or archeological significance, specifically including all sites of historic or prehistoric human activity such as, but not restricted to, buildings, stone walls, mounds, forts, earthworks, burial grounds, structures, villages, mines, caves and all locations which are or may be sources of paleontological remains; 
f.  All areas which present geological hazards specifically including those within unstable geological and karst formations (including sinkholes); and 
g.  Areas presenting environmentally or ecologically unique resources, including the habitat of any and all threatened or endangered species of plants or animals. 
4.  Improved recreational open space. In addition to the environmental open space required by subpart 3 (above) open space designed to meet the active and passive recreational needs of the resident population of any residential planned unit development shall be provided. These areas shall meet the requirements set forth herein: 
a.  Plan to reflect anticipated needs of resident population. A recreation plan shall be developed and presented with the master development plan for the proposed residential planned unit development. This plan shall indicate general demographic characteristics of the anticipated market being targeted by the proposed development. The plan shall indicate the recreation facilities proposed and the age groups these facilities are designed to serve. A minimum of seven percent of the gross area of every residential PUD shall be devoted to improved recreational open space. These facilities may be devoted to either: 
(1)  Shared limited use facilities designed so as to ensure privacy and control of access by and for the exclusive use of the intended resident clientele; or 
(2)  Shared general use recreation facilities which are available to all residents of the proposed development. 
b.  Recreational equipment. All recreational equipment provided within any shared general use recreation space shall be durable commercial grade equipment manufactured by Gametime, Inc., Iron Mountain Forge or equivalent manufacturer. All equipment shall meet all Consumer Product Safety Commission Safety Guidelines as well as the ASTM F1487-93, Public Use Playground Standard. 
c.  Recreation facilities. The following land areas and facilities shall, subject to compliance with the stipulated conditions, qualify as shared general use recreation space. Construction details of all improvements shall be shown on all final development plans and will be bonded prior to filing of final subdivision plats. 
i.  Mini-parks and tot lots. Mini-parks and tot lots are specialized facilities that serve a concentrated or limited population or specific age group such as very young children or senior citizens within areas that are in immediate walking distance (i.e., one-quarter mile) of their residences. The minimum total area of a mini-park or tot lot is one-half acre with a minimum dimension of 100 feet. The individual pieces of playground equipment shall be specified on the site plan. All recreational equipment provided shall meet or exceed the requirements of subpart b, Recreational equipment, above. 
ii.  Neighborhood parks. Neighborhood parks are intended as areas of intense active recreational activities for school age and older children and adults. The minimum area included within a neighborhood park shall be five acres. Such space shall be linked to all dwelling units within the planned unit development by a continuous pedestrian circulation system of sidewalks or trails. The park shall serve the population within a one-half mile radius. The recreation facilities will include areas for field games, crafts and playground apparatus along with areas for skating, picnicking and similar activities. 
iii.  Recreational buildings. Recreational open space may be comprised of the area occupied by a multiple-use recreation building and its attendant outdoor recreation facilities, excluding a golf course. 
iv.  Pedestrian open space system. The total area contained in a continuous open space pedestrian system, consisting of permanently maintained walks and trails leading to a natural amenity, recreation facility or commercial use may be included as recreational open space. This system is intended to provide intradevelopment linkage of all elements of the improved recreational open space through a network that is divorced from roads and streets. The minimum width of all portions of this system is 25 feet with a paved surface of five feet. 
Development of all residential sites in the City of Mt. Juliet and within the jurisdiction of the Regional Planning Commission shall include construction of all greenway sections that are included in the current and in any future greenway plans for the city. In any development, all parcels of land which touch or lie within the proposed route of a new greenway shall be constructed by the developer. Construction and related expenses for design, acquisition of right-of-way and construction of the greenways will be the responsibility of the developer. All greenway sections will be constructed per current City of Mt. Juliet, TDOT and FHWA standards and specifications, whichever is greater. Examples of said specifications include, but are not limited to, design, materials, thickness and width of greenway, as well as required signage, meeting ADA requirements, etc. 
Construction of said greenway sections will be completed by ten percent of development build out and all greenway sections will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet. The developer, property owner or their designated agent may request a waiver or variance from this ten percent requirement should the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. Said waiver, variance or adjustment will not adversely affect the community objectives of the comprehensive plan. All greenways designated by current and any future greenway plans will be dedicated to the City of Mt. Juliet and shall not count toward required open space and amenities. 
v.  Specialized facilities. A golf course may be used to satisfy a maximum of 50 percent of the shared general use recreation space requirement, provided that the access meets the standards for shared general use recreational space. Swimming pools, tennis courts and similar facilities principally intended to serve an adult population may be substituted for other recreational facilities within developments marketed to a totally adult population. 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2007-32, 8-13-2007; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-207; Ord. No. 2014-08, § 5, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2014-66, § 1, 10-27-2014) 
Sec. 8-208. - Nonresidential development standards. 
    8-208.1 Uses permitted. 
1.  General[ly]. In general, the uses and activities permitted within the underlying base commercial or mixed-use zoning district may be permitted within commercial planned unit developments (CPUD) which overlay those districts. Provided, however, that such uses may be further restricted as provided in subpart 2 of this section, below. 
2.  Findings of appropriateness. Due to the unique ability of the planned unit development process to tailor individual developments so as to achieve balanced and reasonable use of the land while maintaining an assured measure of protection for surrounding owners, it is necessary that limited discretion be afforded the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners in the process of selecting uses within particular developments. In this regard, it is necessary that the uses permitted within a particular development establish and maintain a high degree of compatibility with the immediately surrounding area. To this end, the selection of uses permitted within each individual commercial planned unit development will be guided by: 
a.  The use provisions established for the base district which the commercial planned unit development overlays. 
b.  The appropriateness of each use given the intended function of each type commercial planned unit development. 
c.  The unique nature of the property surrounding each development. 
d.  Consistency with any adopted area development plan which may be applicable to the proposed site. 
This process may result in limitations, restrictions or the prohibition of particular uses permitted within a base zoning district from a commercial planned unit development which overlays that district. 
    8-208.2 Location and required area of commercial planned unit development. 
1.  Review of adopted long-range general plan required. In no event shall the location, composition, and extent of a proposed commercial planned unit development be approved unless such development is consistent with the actions and policies regarding land development adopted by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Market analysis for commercial planned unit development. The Planning Commission may require a market analysis for any proposed commercial planned unit development. The market analysis will be utilized, among other things, to determine the impact of the proposed development on the long-range development of the commercial land use in the area, to determine the timing of any proposed development, to limit the extent of convenience districts serving a particular residential area; to ascertain the effects of a proposed development upon lands used or zoned for commercial purposes; to form a basis for evaluating the estimated effects on traffic, and other purposes which assist in an understanding of the public interest pertinent in the evaluation of a proposed development. The market analysis, if required, shall be provided by the landholder and the landholder shall provide any other economic data or analysis as may be reasonably requested by the Planning Commission or Board of Commissioners. 
    8-208.3 Bulk, height and building spacing requirements. 
1.  Building coverage ratio. Individual buildings located within a commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District may exceed the maximum lot coverage ratio established for the base zoning district wherein the commercial planned unit development is located. However, in no instance shall the aggregate site coverage of all buildings located within the commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District exceed the coverage provisions established for the base zoning district in which such site is located. Building coverage ratios shall be calculated on a pro rata basis when more than one underlying base zoning district exists within a commercial planned unit development. If land uses are proposed to be redistributed across the boundaries of underlying zoning districts, maximum floor areas shall be assigned to each component of the master development plan and recorded by plat or equivalent instrument with the first phase of the final master development plan. 
2.  Maximum building height. The building height provisions established for the base zoning wherein the commercial planned unit development is located shall apply to all buildings. 
3.  Building spacing and yards. 
a.  Provisions applicable along residential district boundaries. Along all portions of a district boundary where a commercial planned unit development adjoins residentially zoned land not included within the PUD district, all nonresidential buildings shall be located a minimum of 60 feet measured from the site boundary to the nearest building line. 
b.  Provisions applicable along all other district boundaries. Unless, otherwise, specified in the approved master development plan for the commercial planned unit development, all development located along district boundaries shall provide minimum yards and building separations specified for the base zoning district. Within the commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District, such yards shall be landscaped and maintained in a manner appropriate to a residential neighborhood for a distance of ten feet from the lot line adjacent to any street. No such required landscaped area shall be used for off-street parking, loading or storage of any kind. No landscaping adjacent to a street shall be located where it impairs visibility of or from approaching traffic, or creates potential hazards for pedestrians. Where the site plan indicates potential adverse effects (such as automobile lights) of parking or other characteristics of a commercial activity, a wall, fence, or appropriate vegetative screening shall be required to be erected and maintained in such manner as to eliminate such effects or reduce them to an acceptable level. If there is to be parking on the premises after dark, such buffering shall at a minimum prevent lights from automobiles parked or maneuvering incidental to parking from shining across adjacent residential property below a height of five feet. 
c.  Provisions applicable to internal portions of a commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District. Except as provided in subparts a. and b. of this [sub]section, the minimum yard requirements of the base district shall be waived within commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. Minimum building separation shall be as provided herein. Along all sides of buildings where vehicular access is from a public street buildings shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet. In cases where a building wall is not located directly adjacent to an interior side or rear lot line that is not adjacent to an alley, a yard with a minimum width or depth from the lot line of 15 feet or the distance required by applicable building and fire codes shall be provided. Permitted obstructions within such yards shall be limited to those listed in article VI, subsection 6-103.4, subpart 1. 
4.  Outdoor storage or sales activities. Unless, otherwise, specified in the approved master development plan for the commercial planned unit development, all outdoor storage facilities and outdoor sales activities are prohibited in any commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District. This provision shall not be construed to exclude seasonal displays, short-term charitable events of no more than 90 days duration, the outdoor display of new or used automotive vehicles or trailers for sale or rent, or the incidental display of goods or chattels for sale or rent in a commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development District, by an establishment having activities that occur principally within a building. 
5.  Lighting provisions. No direct source of illumination which may be located in a commercial planned unit development shall be visible beyond the boundary of such development. No illumination of any kind shall exceed one footcandle power at or beyond the boundary of such development and shall not flash or blink, or appear to flash or blink, or shall be animated or appear to be animated. 
6.  Landscaping provisions. The provisions of subsection 8-206.2, Landscaping and buffering, shall apply fully within all commercial PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts. In particular, off-street parking areas, service areas for loading and unloading other than passenger vehicles, and areas for storage and collection of refuse and garbage shall be screened. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-208) 
Sec. 8-301. - Floodplain district regulations. 
    8-301.1 Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code Annotated, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mt. Juliet, Tennessee Board of Commissioners, does ordain as follows: 
    8-301.2 Findings of fact. 
1.  The Mt. Juliet, Tennessee Board of Commissioners, wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and in order to do so must meet the requirements of 60.3 of the Federal Insurance Administration Regulations found at 44 CFR ch. 1 (10-1-2004 edition). 
2.  Areas of Mt. Juliet are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
3.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
    8-301.3 Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This ordinance is designed to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers involved in the accommodation floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
    8-301.4 Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are: 
1.  To protect human life, health and property; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodable areas; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize blight in flood areas; 
7.  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodable area; and 
8.  To maintain eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1(8-301), 3-9-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-301) 
Sec. 8-302. - Supplementary definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application given its stated purpose and objectives: 
    Accessory structure [means] shall represent a subordinate structure to the principal structure and, for the purpose of this section, shall conform to the following: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation. 
2.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
3.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
4.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures. 
5.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed. 
    Act means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that are incorporated in 42 USC 4001-4128. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered New Construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the local enforcement officer's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. (Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.) 
    Area of special flood-related erosion hazard means the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as zone E, on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone E, may be further refined. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A, on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A, usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. (See Structure. ) 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Emergency flood insurance program or emergency program means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not per se covered under the program. 
    Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this ordinance which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this ordinance. 
    Existing construction any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing structures. See Existing Construction. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of Flood or flooding. ) 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    Flood-related erosion area management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on the Tennessee Inventory of Historic Places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle, unless such transportable structures are placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the agency. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    100-Year flood. See Base flood. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone[s] A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The [term] "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. ([The term] "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the [term] "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency [means] the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development's Local Planning Assistance Office as designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program for the state. 
    Structure, for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repairs, reconstruction's, rehabilitation's, additions, alterations or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1(8-302), 3-9-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-302) 
Sec. 8-303. - General provisions. 
    8-303.1 Application. This ordinance shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
    8-303.2 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified on the Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, Federal Emergency Management Agency, flood insurance study (FIS) and flood insurance rate map (FIRM), community panel Nos. 470290, 0019, 0127, 0129, 0131, 0132, 0133, 0134, 0140, 0142, 0145, 0151, 0153, 0161 and 0162, dated, May 18, 2009, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
    8-303.3 Land subject to flood. In applying the provisions of this section, land subject to flood shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Along all streams and watercourses identified as having special flood hazards by the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA) appearing on the maps cited in [sub]section 8-303.2, above. 
2.  Along other small streams and watercourses. The lands lying within 100 feet of the top of the bank of the channel measured horizontally, unless the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the property in question is free from the danger of flooding, or that adequate measures have been taken to allow the watercourse to safety accommodate floodwaters. The developer shall submit such data or studies based on the watershed characteristics, probable runoff and other topographic and hydraulic data prepared by a registered professional engineer as the Planning Commission may reasonably require to make its determination of the flood susceptibility of the property. 
3.  Along sinkholes and other low places. All lands lying below the elevation of the lowest point in the watershed boundary, unless a study prepared by a registered professional engineer demonstrates that a lower elevation would be safe from the danger of inundation by the 100-year flood. 
    8-303.4 Requirement for development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformity with this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
    8-303.5 Compliance. No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
    8-303.6 Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
    8-303.7 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Tennessee statutes. 
    8-303.8 Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Mt. Juliet, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
    8-303.9 Application of the district. To enable the district to operate in harmony with the plan for land use and population density embodied in this ordinance, the F-1, Floodplain District is created as a special district to be superimposed on other districts contained in these regulations and is to be so designated by a special symbol for its boundaries on the zoning map. Except where in conflict with the specific requirements of the F-1, Floodplain District, permitted uses, accessory uses, minimum lot requirements, minimum yard requirements, maximum height and requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be determined by the requirements of the basic district regulations contained elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    8-303.10 Proposal for stream channel alteration. When a developer proposes to offset the effects of a development in the floodway or on the flood carrying capacity of any stream by the construction of channel improvements, he shall submit to the Planning Commission an engineering study which fully evaluates the effects of such development. The study shall use the 100-year flood, as herein defined, and the equal degree of encroachment rule as the basis of all such analysis. All adjacent communities and the State of Tennessee, Local Planning Assistance Office, shall be notified by the developer via certified mail of all such intended activities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. In addition, the developer shall ensure the City of Mt. Juliet, in writing, that the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will be maintained such that its flow capacity is not diminished by debris accumulation, silt deposition, or vegetative growth. 
    8-303.11 Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the [City of] Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1(8-303), 3-9-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-303) 
Sec. 8-304. - Administration. 
    8-304.1 Designation of ordinance administrator. The City Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
    8-304.2 Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where base flood elevations (BFEs) are available, or to the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance. (See subpart 2, below.) 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed where BFE's are available, or to the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance. (See subpart 2, below.) 
c.  Design certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in [sub]section 8-304.2. (See subpart 2, below.) 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
2.  Construction stage. Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data are not available, the Zoning Administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. USGS Quadrangle maps may be utilized when no more detailed reference exists to establish reference elevations. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Zoning Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or floodproofing. Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. 
Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Zoning Administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
    8-304.3 Duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator. Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Review of all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
2.  Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such, permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. This shall include section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
3.  Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submission of evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the Federal Emergency Management Agency to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
5.  Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable of the lowest floor including basement of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with [sub]section 8-304.2. 
6.  Record the actual elevation; in relation to mean sea level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with [sub]section 8-304.2. 
7.  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with [sub]section 8-304.2. 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
9.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency then the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in zone A, on the City's FHBM or FIRM maps meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the Zoning Administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in section 8-302). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in [sub]section 8-304.2. 
10.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files. 
(Ord. No. 2008-59, 9-22-2008; Ord. No. 2009-13, 1-26-2009; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1(8-304), 3-9-2009; Ord. No. 2009-24, 5-11-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-304) 
Sec. 8-305. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
    8-305.1 General standards. In all floodprone areas the following provisions are required: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
2.  Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
4.  New construction or substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
6.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
8.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
9.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this ordinance; and 
10.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provision of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not further extended or replaced. 
    8-305.2 Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, including zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH and A99, and where a regulatory floodway has been provided, as set forth in subsection 8-303.3, Land subject to flood, the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential construction. Where base flood elevation data is available, new construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls and to ensure unimpeded movement of floodwater shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 8-304.2. 
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the Zoning Administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in section 8-302, of this article). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in [sub]section 8-304.2. 
2.  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, when BFE data is available, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. 
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the Zoning Administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in section 8-302, of this article). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in [sub]section 8-304.2. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in [sub]section 8-304.2. 
3.  Elevated building. All new construction or substantial improvements to existing buildings that include any fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation, or required height above the highest adjacent grade, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the finish grade; and 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the elevated living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall comply with the provisions of [sub]section 8-305.2 of this ordinance. 
4.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on: 
(1)  Individual lots or parcels; 
(2)  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
(3)  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction, including elevations and anchoring. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either: 
(1)  When base flood elevations are available the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Absent base flood elevations the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements) at least three feet in height above the highest adjacent grade. 
c.  Any manufactured home, which has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood or that has substantially improved, must meet the standards of [sub]section 8-305.2. 
d.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
e.  All recreational vehicles placed on identified flood hazard sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures or additions; 
(3)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this section above if on the site for longer than 180 consecutive days. 
5.  Standards for subdivisions. Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a floodprone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to ensure that: 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are greater than 50 lots and/or five acres in area. 
    8-305.3 Standards for areas of special flood hazard with established base flood elevations and with floodways designated. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in [sub]section 8-303.2, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other developments within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted; provided, however, it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not result in any increase [of] the water surface elevation of the base flood level, velocities or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 8-305. 
    8-305.4 Standards for areas of special flood hazard zones A1-30 and ae with established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in [sub]section 8-303.2, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been designated (zones A1-30 and AE), the following provisions apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with [sub]section 8-305.2. 
    8-305.5 Standards for streams without established base flood elevations or floodways (A zones) and sinkholes. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in [sub]section 8-303.2, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been provided (A zones), or where a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-303, then the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 8-305, only if data is not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2 and 3) shall apply: 
2.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principle. 
3.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction or substantial improvements of existing [buildings] shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of [sub]section 8-305.2 and elevated buildings. 
    8-305.6 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in [sub]section 8-303.2, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of [sub]section 8-305.2 and elevated buildings. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at least one foot above the specified FIRM flood level, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be floodproofed to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance and shall provide such certification to the Zoning Administrator as set forth above and as required in [sub]section 8-304.2. 
3.  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
4.  The Zoning Administrator shall certify the elevation or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
    8-305.7 Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99 zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-303, are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but where base flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 zones) all provisions of section 8-304 and [sub]section 8-305.1, shall apply. 
    8-305.8 Standards for unmapped streams. Located within Mt. Juliet, Tennessee are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no encroachments including fill material or structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the locality. 
2.  When new elevation data is available, new construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 8-304. 
3.  Within any identified sinkholes, the following shall apply: 
a.  All new residential building shall be elevated at least one foot above the lowest point within the rim of the sinkhole and all nonresidential buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above that elevation, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation, assuming conditions of the base flood discharge and only normal ground absorption within the sinkhole, to the rim of the sinkhole. 
b.  In no event, however, shall any residential building be located lower than or any nonresidential building be located or floodproofed to any elevation lower than one foot above the elevation of the 100-year flood. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1(8-305), 3-9-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-305) 
Sec. 8-306. - Variance procedures. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special flood hazard within Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. 
8-306.1 Board of Zoning Appeals. 
1.  The Mt. Juliet Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
h.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and 
i.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
4.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance. 
5.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
8-306.2 Conditions for variances. 
1.  Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
4.  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-306) 
Sec. 8-307. - Legal status provisions. 
    8-307.1 Conflict with other ordinances. In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
    8-307.2 Validity. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
    8-307.3 Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately after its passage, in accordance with the Charter of Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, and the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-307) 
Sec. 8-401. - Adult entertainment districts. 
    8-401.1 Purpose and intent. The [A-E,] Adult Entertainment Overlay District is intended to provide adequate locational opportunities for adult entertainment establishments within the City while reasonably confining such uses to locations that minimize disruptions both to the general community and the specific land uses listed below. 
    8-401.2 Locational standards. All adult entertainment establishments shall be located within the [A-E,] Adult Entertainment Overlay District. The Board of Commissioners may approve this district as an overlay to those base zone districts as indicated by the letter "O" in article VII, table 7-102A. In addition, all adult entertainment establishments shall adhere to the locational criteria as stated in [subsection] 3-104.7(1) within the overlay district: 
1.  No establishment shall be located within 1,400 feet (measured property line to property line) of any church, school ground, college campus or park; and 
2.  No establishment shall be located within 550 feet (measured property line to property line) of another adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-401; Ord. No. 2013-70, § 7, 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 8-500. - Town Center Overlay Districts. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, 4-25-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-500) 
Sec. 8-501. - Village Commercial District Overlay. 
    8-501.1. Intent. It is the intent of the Village Commercial District Overlay to encourage the redevelopment of the original commercial areas of the City that were substantially developed prior to 1972. The CTC commercial zoning allows a wide variety of uses, including retail, professional office, service oriented business, residential and/or combinations of the above uses; the Village Commercial District Overlay encourages a more compact arrangement and a pedestrian-oriented approach for development activity. Within the Village Commercial District Overlay (VCDO) as shown on the zoning map of the City, the regulations set out in this section shall apply. 
    8-501.2. Purpose. Due to smaller, narrower properties within the VCDO and the existing architectural character of the quaint, yet functional smaller retail buildings similar to the original historic Mt. Juliet, it is envisioned that the future character of the VCDO will reinforce and respect these desirable characteristics by incorporating residential architectural features (i.e., pitched roofs, porches). 
    8-501.3. Application of the district. 
a.  General[ly]. The provisions of the VCDO are mandatory and shall be applied to all real property located within the area designated as sub-district A: Village Commercial Sub-District in the map specified in illustration 8-500A which are zoned Commercial Town Center (CTC). 
b.  Relation of CTC [and] VCDO to other regulations. The VCDO regulations that follow shall apply to all CTC zoned property in designated area. Where there are conflicts between these regulations and general; zoning, subdivision, or other regulations, the provisions of the VCDO shall prevail. 
c.  Implementation. The responsibility and jurisdiction for the implementation of and approvals for the VCDO shall be with the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
    8-501.4 VCDO technical standards. For all new development or redevelopment within the VCDO district, the following technical standards shall apply: 
1.  Standard width of building at designated frontage should occupy at least 25 percent of the setback line along the front of the property, to a maximum of 150 feet. Buildings with frontage greater than 150 feet may be approved by the Planning Commission, provided the building is configured and designed architecturally to appear as more than one distinct building. 
2.  Setback line shall be a minimum of 30 feet and a maximum of 50 feet behind the public sidewalk area located in the right-of-way. Any new or renovated building shall maintain, to the greatest extent feasible, a transitional front build-to-line consistent with all storefronts or buildings previously approved or constructed under these standards and located within the same street block. 
3.  Minimum required side setback yard, 20 feet (intended for use as a public utility and drainage easement.) 
4.  Minimum required rear setback yard, ten feet. Side yards between adjoining buildings shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
5.  Building height, a minimum of one story and maximum of two stories, with an overall limitation of 28 feet to the bottom of roof eaves and 35 feet to the top of the roof. 
6.  Maximum lot coverage as provided in CTC zoning. 
    8-501.5 VCDO development standards. For any new development or redevelopment within the VCDO district, the following development standards shall apply: 
1.  Access and parking. On-site parking. The number, size and design of all parking spaces and internal access ways shall comply with the off-street parking requirements set forth in article IX of this ordinance, except as follows: 
a.  On-site parking lots and loading areas shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings. 
b.  Where feasible and practical, no surface parking lot should abut a street intersection. 
c.  Shared parking lots and joint access driveways that serve multiple businesses and land uses are encouraged and shall be located at the rear and/or side of the developments, with common access to the public streets. 
d.  The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for individual loading areas to serve each lot if an acceptable plan and location for the loading and unloading of materials and merchandise is provided. 
e.  Bicycle parking for a minimum of five percent of the total required motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided. 
2.  Sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be constructed by the developer in the right-of-way of the street fronting the property in the VCDO with the minimum width of five feet from the back of the curb. A pedestrian access easement shall be required for the section of sidewalk that extends beyond the right-of-way. The sidewalks in the district shall be constructed to uniform design standard for the VCDO approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Sidewalks should be connected to parking areas and all entrances adjacent to the building. Activity within the area between the public sidewalk and the face of the building should be encouraged (i.e., pedestrian ingress/egress, seating availability, etc.) 
c.  All sidewalks will be compliant with the latest Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
3.  Outdoor lighting. 
a.  Street. To maintain adequate visibility for pedestrians and drivers at night and to provide a distinct identity within the VCDO, the developer or property owner shall be encouraged to install ornamental street lighting in the area of the development fronting a public street where overhead utilities are not in conflict. The lighting should meet the Illuminating Engineers Society of North America (IESNA) and local standards for lighting and shall be installed to a uniform design standard for the VCDO approved by the Planning Commission. The poles shall have a maximum of 25 feet and a minimum of 16 feet in height and be located in the buffer strip of directly behind the sidewalk at intervals sufficient to prevent excessive dark spots for pedestrians and drivers. 
b.  Pole and luminaries. Decorative pole should be metal, traditional in style, durable and cost effective. Poles shall be rated for banners, accommodate banner arms, and meet all standards of the Tennessee Department of Transportation and be of a single uniform design standard and specifications for the VCDO approved by the Planning Commission. Luminaries shall be metal halide or color corrected high-pressure sodium. To reduce light pollution, luminaries should be semi-cutoff. 
4.  Landscaping/beautification. 
a.  Street trees. Trees shall be planted in the sidewalk area, in front of the building, and where possible between the street curb and the travel zone of the sidewalk. The Planning Commission, based on a uniform design standard, shall determine the type, caliper and location of the trees. The trees shall be a minimum of two tree species and suitable for urban conditions and provide minimum interference to the operation of business, pedestrian use of the sidewalk and the effectiveness of street lighting. In areas with overhead utilities, street trees shall not exceed 30 feet and meet the approval of all local agencies. Additionally, street trees shall have an ascending branch pattern, be drought and heat tolerant and noninvasive. 
b.  Street furniture. The Planning Commission may require the developer to provide benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks to serve the business on the right-of-way abutting the business. The type of street furniture shall meet the single uniform design standard and specifications for the VCDO as approved by the Planning Commission and illustrated in the Town Center Master Plan. Benches and trash receptacles should be used sparingly. Bike racks should be encouraged near all entries to developments. 
i.  The type of street furniture shall be traditional in style, durable, cost effective and vandal resistant. 
ii.  The type of street furniture shall meet the uniform design standard as approved by the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
iii.  Bench specifications shall meet all ADA standards. Companion seating areas for wheelchairs should be provided next to at least 50 percent of all benches. 
c.  Landscaping. Attractive low maintenance landscaping geared to scale of development in the VCDO and urban conditions shall be incorporated into the lot and parking areas to the greatest extent feasible. Acceptable plantings shall include trees planted in locations with sufficient growing space to reach full maturity, hedges, flower beds, planters, fountains, etc. An irrigation system shall be provided to ensure long-term survival of the plantings. With the exception of trees, no plant should exceed 30 inches at maturity. 
5.  Signs. The visual transfer of business advertising and other information through the use of external signs in the VCDO shall comply with the sign regulations set forth in article XI of this ordinance, except the Planning Commission shall require the types and sizes of signs to comply with the provisions established in table 8-500B. The Planning Commission shall have the right to grant a variance for size only from the provisions established in table 8-500B; however, no variance may be granted by the Planning Commission to exceed sign size limitation established in article XI of this ordinance. The Planning Commission shall not have the authority to grant a variance as to the type of sign required in table 8-500B. 
6.  Vehicle access control. The location and design of all driveways and accesses that allow vehicles to enter public streets from any lot developed in this zoning district shall comply with vehicle access control regulations set forth in article IX of this ordinance; however, in recognition of a more compact arrangement of mixed-use development in the district, the Planning Commission may grant exceptions to the technical standards related to minimum distance of driveways from intersection and property lines and minimum radius of driveway curves. The use of shared driveways and rear service lanes to access public streets shall be encouraged to the greatest extent feasible and practical. Service entrances and overhead doors shall not be permitted to face or access a public street directly. 
7.  Erosion control and stormwater management. The control of erosion during development and the design of drainage systems suitable to handle the additional stormwater runoff after the site is developed shall comply with the requirements of article XII of this ordinance and the subdivision regulations of the City. Underground stormwater detention facilities should be used when feasible and practical. 
8.  Utility provisions. All new electric, telephone and similar distribution lines and wiring serving the district shall be installed underground. In addition, there shall be no overhead wiring to serve newly developed or redeveloped lots in the VCDO. The placement of any utilities within the public sidewalk shall be coordinated with the locations of proposed street trees. 
9.  Solid waste. The following requirements shall apply to all site plans submitted to the Planning Commission for consideration in the VCDO, including new development and redevelopment of an existing lot: 
a.  Each site shall provide an acceptable method for solid waste storage and disposal either on site or nearby that is screened from direct public view by durable brick or masonry materials that match the exterior treatment of the building. The area shall be maintained in compliance with the County Health Department and City of Mt. Juliet regulations. 
b.  In recognition of a more compact arrangement of mixed use development, a method for shared solid waste and disposal areas among adjoining lots and uses shall be encouraged to improve operational efficiency and convenience and to minimize the number of solid waste storage and disposal areas in the district. 
c.  All solid waste storage and disposal areas shall be located behind the building. 
10.  Screening of equipment. Electrical transformers, heat and air conditioning equipment and similar facilities shall be screened from public view as approved by the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
11.  Noise. In instances where the Planning Commission determines that a new commercial development site plan or redevelopment or reuse of the existing building and lot may create objectionable noise or a nuisance to any adjacent property, additional sound buffers or other physical features may be required by the Planning Commission to mitigate noise. 
    8-501.6 Design standards. For all new development or redevelopment within the VCDO district, the following design standards shall apply: 
1.  Height variation. All buildings should be similar in height to the greatest extent feasible. The Planning Commission may require the upper stories of a building that will be taller than the average building height on a block to be recessed further back from the front build-to-line. The above height limitations and restrictions do not prohibit the use of an architectural feature such as a tower, cupola, etc., located above the roofline, provided the feature is in character with the architecture of the building and area; the total height of the building and feature does not exceed two stories, plus mechanical/elevator penthouse; and the feature is not designed or used for placement of elevated wall signs. 
2.  Scale/massing. Individual buildings should use human-scaled/pedestrian oriented architectural features. Individual building should clearly articulate the first story and primary entrances, with display windows encouraged for retail stores. The ground floor should be clearly delineated from the upper stories and the upper floors from the top of the front facade roofline. Large blank walls greater then 25 feet in length and large monolithic box-like structures shall be avoided. Larger buildings should be designed to divide the mass of the facility to create a visual impression of a series of smaller building or sections. Windows, doors, shutters, columns, masonry detailing and variations in the roofline, building wall recesses and variations in colors and materials should be used in areas of over 25 feet in length to break up the mass of a single building. 
3.  Exterior materials and details. High quality materials which are durable and attractive shall be used on all buildings. The building shall have an exterior facade (excluding windows, trim and doors) covered in wood, brick, cast stone, cultured stone or an alternative masonry material acceptable to the Planning Commission. Wood accents shall be used for brick and wood construction. Use of vinyl or aluminum siding is prohibited. 
4.  Roofing. All new buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch ratio of 4:12 (four inch[es of rise] for every 12 inches of length). 
5.  Window/door openings. Each floor facing a public street shall have windows covering a minimum of 20 percent and a maximum of 40 percent of the wall area. Buildings should have clearly defined and highly visible customer entrances, which should be recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an overhang, canopy, awning or other roof form. Individual framed windows and doors should be residential in style, instead of continuous horizontal "ribbon or band" type. Reflective glass, overly tinted glass and glass curtain walls and other continuous, floor-to-ceiling windows shall be avoided. The patterns of window openings and details of bays should be used to create a sense of scale and add visual interest to building facades. Wall openings should not span vertically more than one story. 
6.  Awnings. The design of awnings, including the selection of material and color, should complement the architectural style and character of the building. Canvas awnings are preferable. The use of plastic, metal and aluminum awnings should be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, 4-25-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-501) 
Sec. 8-502. - Main Street District Overlay. 
    8-502.1 Intent. It is the intent of the Main Street District Overlay (MSDO) to encourage the development of a traditional main street environment that includes internal streets, outdoor dining and a mixture of uses such as retail, restaurant, office and residential in order to create a synergy that will attract users and future investment. 
    8-502.2 Application of the district. 
a.  General[ly]. The provisions of the MSDO are mandatory and shall be applied to all real property located within the area designated as sub-district B: Main Street Sub-District in the map specified in illustration 8-500A which are zoned Commercial Town Center (CTC). 
b.  Relation of CTC [and] MSDO to other regulations. The MSDO regulations that follow shall apply to all CTC zoned property in the designated area. Where there are conflicts between these regulations and general zoning, subdivision or other regulations, the provisions of the MSDO shall prevail. 
c.  Implementation. The responsibility and jurisdiction for the implementation of and approvals for the MSDO shall be with the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
    8-502.3 MSDO technical standards. For all new development or redevelopment within the MSDO district, the following technical standards shall apply: 
1.  Standard width of building at designated frontage should occupy at least 50 percent of the build-to-line along the front of the property, to a maximum of 150 feet. Buildings with frontage greater than 150 feet may be approved by the Planning Commission, provided the building is configured and designed architecturally to appear as more than one distinct building. 
2.  Build-to-line shall be 25 feet behind the public sidewalk area located in the right-of-way. Any new or renovated building shall maintain, to the greatest extent feasible, a transitional front build-to-line consistent with all storefronts or buildings previously approved or constructed under these consistent standards and located within the same street block. 
3.  Minimum required rear setback yard, 20 feet (intend for use as public utility and drainage easements). 
4.  Side yards between adjoining buildings shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible, zero to 12 feet. 
5.  Building height maximum is 35 feet with [a] 14-foot first floor-to-floor height. 
6.  Maximum impervious area is 1.0 (100 percent of surface area) if underground detention design is used. 
    8-502.4 MSDO development standards. For any new development or redevelopment within the MSDO district, the following development standards shall apply: 
1.  Access and parking. On-site parking. The number, size and design of all parking spaces and internal access ways shall comply with the off-street parking requirements set forth in article IX of this ordinance, except as follows: 
a.  On-site parking lots and loading areas shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings. Parking shall not be permitted in front of buildings. 
b.  Where feasible and practical, no surface parking lot should abut a street intersection. 
c.  Shared parking lots and joint access driveways that serve multiple businesses and land uses are encouraged and shall be located at the rear and/or side of the developments, with common access to the public streets. 
d.  The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for individual loading areas to serve each lot if an acceptable plan and location for the loading and unloading of materials and merchandise is provided. 
e.  Bicycle parking for a minimum of five percent of the total required motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided. 
f.  Parking requirements shall be reduced by five percent for those developments that are within one-quarter mile of a commuter rail station or bus stop. 
2.  Sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be constructed by the developer in the right-of-way of the street fronting the property in the MSDO with the minimum width of five feet from the back of the curb. A pedestrian access easement shall be required for the section of sidewalk that extends beyond the right-of-way. The sidewalks in the district shall be constructed to a uniform design standard for the MSDO approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Sidewalks should be connected to parking areas and all entrances adjacent to the building. Activity within the area between the public sidewalk and the face of the building should be encouraged (i.e., outdoor dining, etc.). 
c.  All sidewalks will be compliant with the latest Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. 
d.  The developer shall construct a wider secondary sidewalk with paved frontage zone fronting each public street. A landscaped buffer strip shall be constructed between the public sidewalk and secondary sidewalk. 
3.  Outdoor lighting. 
a.  Street. To maintain adequate visibility for pedestrians and drivers at night and to provide a distinct identity within the MSDO, the developer or property owner shall be encouraged to install ornamental street lighting in the area of the development fronting a public street where overhead utilities are not in conflict. The lighting should meet the Illuminating Engineers Society of North America (IESNA) and local standards for the MSDO approved by the Planning Commission. The poles shall have a maximum of 25 feet and a minimum of 16 feet in height and be located in the buffer strip or directly behind the sidewalk at intervals sufficient to prevent excessive dark spot for pedestrians and drivers. 
b.  Poles and luminaries. Decorative poles should be metal, traditional in style, durable and cost effective. Poles shall be rated for banners, accommodate banner arms and meet all standards of the Tennessee Department of Transportation and be of a single uniform design standard and specifications for the MSDO approved by the Planning Commission. Luminaries shall be metal halide or color corrected high-pressure sodium. To reduce light pollution, luminaries should be semi-cutoff. 
4.  Landscaping/beautification. 
a.  Street trees. Trees shall be planted in the sidewalk area, in front of the buildings and where possible between the street curb and the travel zone of the sidewalk. The Planning Commission, based on a uniform design standard, shall determine the type, caliper and location of the trees. The trees shall be a minimum of two tree species and suitable for urban conditions and provide minimum interference to the businesses, pedestrian use of the sidewalk and the effectiveness of street lighting. In areas with overhead utilities, street trees shall not exceed 30 feet and meet the approval of all local agencies. Additionally, street trees shall have an ascending branch pattern, be drought and heat tolerant and noninvasive. 
b.  Street furniture. The Planning Commission may require the developer to provide benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks to serve the businesses on the right-of-way abutting the business. The type of street furniture shall meet the single uniform design standard and specifications for the MSDO as approved by the Planning Commission and illustrated in the Town Center Master Plan. Bike racks should be encouraged near all entries to developments. 
i.  The type of street furniture shall be traditional in style, durable, cost-effective and vandal resistant. 
ii.  The type of street furniture shall meet the uniform design standard as approved by the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
iii.  Bench specifications shall meet all ADA standards. Companion seating for wheelchairs should be provided next to at least 50 percent of all benches. 
iv.  Where possible, street furniture should be located in buffer strip between the public sidewalk and secondary sidewalk. 
c.  Landscaping. Attractive low maintenance landscaping geared to scale of development in the MSDO and urban conditions shall be incorporated into the lot and parking areas to the greatest extent feasible. Acceptable plantings shall include trees planted in locations with sufficient growing space to reach full maturity, hedges, flower beds, planters and fountains etc. An irrigation system shall be provided to ensure long-term survival of the plantings. With the exception of trees, no plant should exceed 30 inches at maturity. 
5.  Signs. The visual transfer of business advertising and other information through the use of external signs in the MSDO shall comply with the sign regulations set forth in article XI of this ordinance, except the Planning Commission shall require the types and sizes of signs to comply with provisions established in table 8-500B. The Planning Commission shall have the right to grant a variance for size only from the provisions established in table 8-500B, however no variance may be granted to exceed sign size limitation established in article XI of this ordinance. The Planning Commission shall not have the authority to grant a variance as to the type of sign required in table 8-500B. 
6.  Vehicle access control. The location and design of all driveways and accesses that allow vehicles to enter public streets from any lot developed in this zoning district shall comply with vehicle access control regulations set forth in article IX of this ordinance; however, in recognition of a more compact arrangement of a mixed use development in the district, the Planning Commission may grant exceptions to the technical standards related to minimum radius of driveways from intersections and property lines and minimum radius of driveway curves. The use of shared driveways and rear service lanes to access public streets shall be encouraged to the greatest extent feasible and practical. Private streets connecting adjacent parcels to facilitate movement are allowable and encouraged. All private streets shall be built to Mt. Juliet road standards. Service entrances and overhead doors shall not be permitted to face or access a public street directly. 
7.  Erosion control and stormwater management. The control of erosion during development and the design of drainage systems suitable to handle the additional stormwater runoff after the site is developed shall comply with the requirements of article XII of this zoning ordinance and the subdivision regulations of the City. Underground stormwater detention facilities should be used when feasible and practical. 
8.  Utility provisions. All new electric, telephone and similar distribution lines and wiring serving the district shall be installed underground. In addition, there shall be no overhead wiring to serve newly developed or redeveloped lots in the MSDO. The placement of any utilities within the public sidewalk shall be coordinated with the locations of proposed street trees. 
9.  Solid waste. The following requirements shall apply to all site plans submitted to the Planning Commission for consideration in this zoning district, including new development and redevelopment of an existing lot: 
a.  Each site shall provide an acceptable method for solid waste storage and disposal either on-site or nearby that is screened from direct public view by durable brick or masonry materials that match the exterior treatment of the building. The area shall be maintained in compliance with County Health Department and City of Mt. Juliet regulations. 
b.  In recognition of a more compact arrangement of mixed-use development, a method for shared solid waste and disposal areas among adjoining lots and uses shall be encouraged to improve operational efficiency and convenience and to minimize the number of solid waste storage and disposal areas in the district. 
c.  All solid waste storage and disposal areas shall be located behind the building. 
10.  Screening of equipment. Ground and roof level electrical transformers, heat and air conditioning equipment and similar facilities shall be screened from public view as approved by the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. Roof parapets shall be a minimum 42 inches high when used to screen roof-mounted devices. 
11.  Noise. In instances where the Planning Commission determines that a new commercial development site plan or redevelopment or reuse of the existing building and lot may create objectionable noise or nuisance to any adjacent property, additional sound buffers or other physical features may be required by the Planning Commission to mitigate the noise. 
    8-502.5 MSDO design standards. For all new development or redevelopment within the MSDO, the following design standards shall apply: 
1.  Height variations. All buildings should be similar in height to the greatest extent feasible. The Planning Commission may require the upper stories of a building that will be taller than average building height on a block to be recessed further back from the front build-to-line. The above height limitations and restrictions do not prohibit the use of an architectural feature such as a parapet, tower, cupola, etc., located above the roofline, provided the feature is in character with the architecture of the building and area; the total height of the building and feature does not exceed 35 feet and three stories, plus mechanical/elevator penthouse; and the feature is not designed or used for placement of elevated wall signs. 
2.  Scale/massing. Individual buildings should use human-scaled/pedestrian oriented architectural features. Individual buildings should clearly articulate the first story and primary entrances, with display windows encouraged for retail stores. The ground floor should be clearly delineated from the upper stories and the upper floors from the top of the front facade roofline. Large blank walls greater than 25 feet in length and large monolithic box-like structures shall be avoided. Larger buildings should be designed to divide the mass of the facility to create a visual impression of a series of smaller buildings or sections. Windows, doors, shutters, columns, masonry detailing and variations in the front roofline, building wall recesses and variations in colors and materials should be used in areas of over 25 feet in length to break up the mass of a single building. 
3.  Exterior materials and details. High quality materials which are durable and attractive shall be used on all buildings. The building shall have an exterior facade (excluding windows, trim and doors) of brick with accents of cast stone, cultured stone, an alternative masonry material, or wood. Use of vinyl or aluminum siding is prohibited. 
4.  Roofing. All new buildings shall have a flat roof. Stepped parapets are encouraged. 
5.  Window/door openings. Each building facing a public street shall have windows of transparent glass covering a minimum on 55 percent and a maximum of 85 percent of the wall area on the first floor, and a minimum of 25 percent and a maximum of 65 percent of the wall area on upper floor(s). Buildings should have clearly defined and highly visible customer entrances, which should be recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an overhang, canopy, awning or other roof form. Individual framed windows and doors should be of vertical orientation and alignment reflecting the character similar to a historic main street. Reflective glass and overly tinted glass shall be avoided. The patterns of window openings and details of bays should be used to create a sense of scale and add visual interest to building facades. Wall openings should not span vertically more than one story. 
6.  Awnings. The design of awnings, including the selection of material and color, should complement the architectural style and character of the building. Canvas awnings are preferable. The use of plastic, metal and aluminum awnings should be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, 4-25-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-502) 
Sec. 8-503. - Planning Commission approval; administrative approval. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, within the zoning district established in this division, no construction of any building or alteration of the exterior of any building shall begin until the plan for such construction or alteration has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
8-503.1 Preliminary concept development plan. Prior to formal submission of a detailed site development plan, the applicant may submit a preliminary concept development plan to the planning and codes department for initial review and comment by the Planning Commission. The purpose for review of a preliminary concept development plan is to provide guidance to the applicant on the overall worthiness and the direction of the proposed plan prior to the applicant making a significant financial investment in the preparation of a detailed site development plan. In no event shall positive guidance from the Planning Commission be construed as official endorsement or approval of the plan. 
8-503.2 Information required for approval. At a minimum, a site plan drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 20 feet shall first be submitted to the Planning Department for staff review and recommendations prior to consideration by the Planning Commission. The site plan shall contain the following additional information: 
1.  Name, address and phone number of owner, developer and/or applicant. 
2.  Small scale location map of the on site and the acreage involved. 
3.  Zoning classification of the proposed site. 
4.  Topographical contours at two-foot intervals. 
5.  Floodplain information as per Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps. 
6.  Erosion and sediment control measures. 
7.  Location and dimension of internal driveways, internal traffic circulation patterns, sidewalks, proposed vehicle access points to public street, off-street and on street parking spaces and loading areas (including required parking spaces requested for reduced parking approval) and solid waste disposal areas. 
8.  Required street, sidewalk and other public improvements in the right-of-way and/or alternative plan to compensate the City for improvements as a part of a broader improvement plan for the area. 
9.  Drainage calculations and stormwater management plan. 
10.  Landscaping plan including calculations of open space areas, landscaping/screening features including the type, number, caliper and location of plantings, screenings and provisions or agreements for the maintenance of open space. 
11.  Location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer lines, other underground utilities, storm drainage and any existing easements. 
12.  Land use table outlining proposed uses and overall densities including floor area ratio (FAR). 
13.  Development schedule generally setting forth when the applicant intends to commence construction and the anticipated completion date. 
14.  All structures and accesses on adjacent properties within 500 feet. 
15.  Building footprint, applicable build-to-lines and other setbacks, uses of public sidewalk area, color elevation drawings showing height and design of buildings and exterior treatment relative to the design standards in this district. 
16.  Location and illumination patterns of exterior lighting and any sound impact from the land use, if applicable. 
17.  Location of any temporary construction trailers. 
18.  Street graphics (signage plan). 
19.  Historically significant sites and significant natural and manmade features or resources, including hillsides in excess of 25 percent grade. 
20.  Type of construction including all exterior materials. A written statement from the property owner, if other than the applicant, stating that the applicant is acting on the property owner's behalf in the submission of this development plan. 
21.  Any requested variances or exceptions to the technical, development and design standards in this district and the rationale to support the request. 
22.  Any additional information that the Planning Commission may require for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
8-503.3 Time limitation. A site plan approval by the Planning Commission shall be valid for a period not to exceed 24 months. If substantial construction on the principal structure, including but not limited to foundations, walls and roofs, has not begun within 24 months, the approval shall expire and the applicant shall be required to resubmit plans to the Planning Commission for approval based on the latest technical and development standards in this zoning ordinance. 
8-503.4 Minor site development activities and uses. Within the overlay zoning districts established in this division, the following minor site development activities and uses shall require the approval of the Zoning Administrator, provided that the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to refer applications for such activities or uses to the Planning Commission for consideration and approval when unique or unusual conditions warrant. Furthermore, any application or request denied by the Zoning Administrator under this section shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and final decision if the applicant chooses to appeal the decision: 
1.  The repair and repainting of an existing building or structure that is consistent with the originally approved plan or design for the building and structure, including replacement of awning treatments. 
2.  Minor modifications to a site plan approved by the Planning Commission, provided the change is consistent with the overall intent of the approved site plan, meets the requirements of the underlying zoning district and does not decrease the approved open space areas adjacent to other properties or the public right-of-way. Minor modifications which may be approved by the Zoning Administrator shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  Adjustments to internal access drives. 
b.  Placement of less than five percent of the sites parking spaces. 
c.  Shifts or expansion of open space areas. 
d.  Expansions/reductions of the floor area ratio of the building not exceeding five percent. 

Illustration 8-500A. Town Center Overlay Sub-District Map 
Table 8-500B. Town Center Overlay Signage Guidelines Type of Sign Size Village Main Street Applied letters to facade 5% of building facade or 30 sq. ft. maximum • • Canvas awning sign 5% of building facade or 30 sq. ft. maximum • • Ground-mounted signs 12 sq. ft. area; 3.5 ft. high, set to build-to-line • Facade-mounted signs 5% of building facade or 30 sq. ft. maximum • • Facade-painted signs 5% of building facade or 30 sq. ft. maximum • • Horizontal projecting signs 9 sq. ft. maximum area, 7 ft. minimum height, 6 ft. maximum pole length • • Window sign 25% of window area • •  
(Ord. No. 2005-09, 4-25-2005; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 8-503) 
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9-101. - Purposes and applicability. 
    9-101.1 Purposes. The following regulations on accessory off-street parking spaces are adopted in order to provide needed spaces off the streets for parking in connection with all activities which may be located in the City to reduce traffic congestion resulting from use of the streets as places of storage for automobiles, to protect the character of neighborhoods, to provide for a higher standard of development within the area and thus promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    9-101.2 Applicability. 
1.  General[ly]. For every use, activity, or structure permitted by this ordinance and for all buildings or structures erected in accordance therewith, there shall be provided sufficient space for access and off-street standing, parking, circulation, unloading and loading of motor vehicles that may be expected to transport its occupants, whether as patrons, residents, customers, employees, guests, or otherwise, to an establishment, activity, or place of residence at any time under normal conditions for any purpose. When a use is expanded, accessory off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the regulations herein for the area or capacity of such expansion in combination with the previously existing uses, structure, or activity. 
2.  New and complying development. New development occurring after the effective date of this ordinance and development existing on the effective date of this ordinance and complying with the number of off-street parking spaces required by this article shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Every use of a building or land hereafter established shall provide the minimum off-street parking and loading spaces as required by this article. 
b.  The number of parking and loading spaces required by this article may be reduced when the land use or floor area of a building is changed or reduced to a use or floor area for which fewer parking or loading spaces are required. 
c.  When a building is expanded or a land use is changed so as to increase the number of spaces required, the number of such spaces shall be increased. 
3.  Existing noncomplying development. Developments with legally noncomplying parking and loading areas shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No reduction below requirements. Existing parking and loading spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required by this article. 
b.  Redevelopment not increasing parking requirements. Zoning permits and certifications of zoning compliance may be issued for a change of use or remodeling or structural alterations in developments containing legally noncomplying parking and loading areas, without requiring compliance with this article, provided that such redevelopment does not result in an increase in the number of required parking or loading spaces. 
c.  Redevelopment increasing parking requirements. Developments with legally noncomplying parking and loading areas shall be subject to the following provisions: 
i.  Minor change. Any building expansion or change of use that results in an increase of 25 percent or less over the number of parking spaces that would be required under this article for the lot prior to the redevelopment activity shall be required to provide only the additional parking or loading spaces in excess of the number that would be required under this article for the previous development. Only the expanded portion of the parking or loading area shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
ii.  Major change. Any building expansion or change of use that results in an increase of more than 25 percent over the number of parking spaces that would be required under this article for the lot prior to the redevelopment activity shall be required to bring the entire development on the lot into full compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-101) 
Sec. 9-102. - General provisions. 
    9-102.1 Use of residential parking facilities. Facilities accessory to a residential use which are developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be used solely for parking of passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles of not more than ten tons [of] gross weight owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory, or by guests of such occupants. 
    9-102.2 Repair, service or sales use of parking facilities. It shall be unlawful to use any required off-street parking or loading facilities for motor vehicle repair work, service, display or sales of any kind, except as expressly permitted elsewhere in this article. 
    9-102.3 Use of required parking as commercial or public lot. No area designated as a required parking area in connection with any designated building or use shall be operated as a commercial or public parking lot providing parking spaces for the general public or for the occupants, tenants, customers, clients or residents of any other use or activity for a fee or other compensation. 
    9-102.4 Ingress and egress. All entrances and exits to parking and loading areas from a public right-of-way shall be subject to specific approval of the Planning Commission by approval of a site development plan in accordance with article XIV, subsection 14-103.4. In no event shall parking and loading spaces be provided in a manner requiring the backing out of vehicles into public rights-of-way. 
    9-102.5 Location of parking or loading space. All required off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided on the same parcel of land occupied by the use or building to which it is appurtenant. Provided, however, that where there are, in the judgment of the Planning Commission, practical difficulties in satisfying the requirement for parking space and/or if the public safety or convenience would be better served by another location, the Planning Commission may authorize subject to the following conditions an alternative location: 
1.  Required accessory off-street parking facilities may be provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use served is located, provided that the property occupied as parking is in the same possession, either by deed, by easement, or by long-term lease which has a term equal to or exceeding the projected life of the facility occupied by the principal use, and further provided that the owner shall be bound by covenants filed on record in the Office of the County Clerk, requiring the owner and his heirs and assigns, as well as subsequent owners, heirs or assigns, to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces during the existence of such principal use. 
2.  Pedestrian access shall be available within a walking distance of not more than 500 feet measured from the nearest point of public access to the building to the nearest part of the accessory parking area. 
3.  Such separated parking space shall be usable without causing unreasonable traffic congestion, detriment to any residential neighborhood, or hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
    9-102.6 Phasing of parking facilities within industrial developments. When any manufacturing activity is located within any industrial district, the construction of required parking spaces may be phased as required by occupant loading facilities. 
    9-102.7 Zoning of accessory parking. All accessory parking facilities, whether provided in fulfillment of or in excess of the requirements of this article, and whether located on the same or on a different lot from the principal use, shall be located on property zoned within the same or a less restrictive zoning district as the principal use served by the parking. 
    9-102.8 Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any zoning district in which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  A legally sufficient written agreement assuring perpetual joint usage of said common parking for the combination of uses or buildings is properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the City Attorney, and filed with and made part of the application for a building permit. 
2.  Up to 25 percent of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment, for a church, for multifamily dwelling units, or for a school, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours, if specifically approved by the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners; provided, however, that written agreement assuring the retention for such purpose shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and execution by the City Attorney, filed and made part of the application for a building permit. Such approval may be rescinded by the Board of Commissioners of the City and additional parking shall be obtained by the owners in the event that the Board determines that such joint use is resulting in a public nuisance or otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
    9-102.9 Variance in the required number of parking and loading spaces. The number of parking and loading spaces to be constructed may be less than the number of spaces required herein in the event that the following conditions are met to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission: 
1.  Evidence is submitted firmly documenting that the special nature of the use, activity, or building proposed requires less parking area or spaces than required by this ordinance for the same. 
2.  The site development plan submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with article XIV, subsection 14-103.3, indicates that the location and layout of that portion of the parking requirement deemed unnecessary can and will be constructed accordingly in the event that the Planning Commission determines at any time that all or any portion of this parking is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
3.  In no event shall that portion of the required parking or loading which is so designated, but not constructed as provided herein be counted as open space or other nonpaved area required by other provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-102) 
Sec. 9-103. - Off-street parking space requirements. 
    9-103.1 Computing parking requirements. The number of parking spaces required for a specific development proposal shall be based on the requirements listed in subsection 9-103.2, Number of parking spaces required, and the following provisions: 
1.  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the parking requirements specified for a listed use most similar to the use for which said permit is requested. 
2.  Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one use shall provide parking in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses, unless a shared parking arrangement is approved pursuant to subsection 9-102.6, Joint parking facilities. 
3.  Fractions. When measurements determining the number of required spaces result in fractions, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall be rounded upward to the next highest full number. 
4.  Bench seating. Where seating consisting of benches or pews, the equivalent number of seats shall be determined using the standards of the City's building code. 
5.  Floor area. For the purpose of computing parking requirements that are based on the amount of square footage in buildings, calculations shall be on a gross floor area basis, unless otherwise specifically indicated. 
    9-103.2 Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the specific unit of measure for the following specified uses within the activity types indicated: 
1.  Residential activities. 
a.  Permanent activities. 
i.  One-family detached, two-family detached dwellings: two spaces per dwelling unit. 
ii.  Multifamily dwelling: 11/2 spaces for each dwelling unit with one bedroom; two spaces for each dwelling unit with two or more bedrooms. 
iii.  Manufactured homes: two spaces per manufactured home. 
iv.  Where occupancy is to be primarily by persons over the age of 60: the number of developed spaces may be reduced to one space per dwelling unit. There must be room on the lot to provide 11/2 spaces per dwelling unit in the future. 
b.  Semi-transient activities. 
i.  Boarding[house] or roominghouse, apartment, hotel: one space for each dwelling or rooming unit. 
2.  Community facility activities. 
Activity Type Unit of Measurement Administrative services One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one for each three employees. Child care facilities Child care center One space per five persons accommodated for the first 50 persons, plus one space for each additional ten persons accommodated over 50. Family child care and group child care homes One space for each nonresident or nonfamily member employee (such spaces are in addition to spaces required for the dwelling). Community assembly One space for each two seats or one-half of the capacity in persons, whichever is greater. Cultural and recreation services Art galleries, libraries, museums, 
zoological and botanical gardens, 
planetariums and aquariums One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. Swimming pools 30 percent of capacity. Parks, playgrounds and playfields Ten spaces for each acre of land devoted to recreation, plus one space for each four 
spectator seats. Recreation centers and gymnasiums 50 percent of the capacity, plus one space for each two employees. Educational facilities Kindergarten and nursery One space for each employee, plus one space for each four students. Elementary and middle schools, grades 1-7 Two spaces for each classroom or one space for each five seats in the auditorium or one space for each eight students, teachers and 
employees, whichever is greater. High school, grades 8-12 Four spaces for each classroom or one space for each given five seats in the auditorium or one space for each four students, teachers and employees, whichever is greater. Vocational or trade schools One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each six seats in any associated auditorium. Essential public transport Communication and utility services Two spaces per facility. Extensive impact facilities, airports, air cargo terminals, heliports or 
aeronautical devices One space for each two employees, plus one space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area. Correctional or detention 
institutions One space for each two employees, plus one space for each patrol car. Bus and transit terminals One space for each 100 square feet of waiting room. Railroad yards and other trans- 
portation equipment marshaling 
and storage yards One space for each two employees. Stadiums, sports arenas, 
auditoriums and bandstands One space for each four seats. Water and sewage treatment plants One space for each employee. All other activities See note 1. Health care facilities Centers for observation or rehab- 
ilitation, convalescent homes One space for each four beds, plus one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Hospitals 11/2 spaces for each bed. Medical or dental clinics Five spaces for each staff member or doctor or dentist or two spaces for each treatment or examination room, whichever is greater. Intermediate impact, colleges, 
junior colleges and universities One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area suited for academic purposes, plus one space for each six seats in an auditorium, arena, or stadium on the same lot. All other activities See note 1. Religious facilities All activity types One space for each three seats. Special institutional care 
facilities See note 1. Special personal and group care 
facilities Associations for [the] physically or mentally handicapped One space for each employee. Day care facilities for elderly 
persons One space for each employee, plus one space for each four elderly persons receiving care. Nursing homes One space for each employee, plus one space for each two patients.  
3.  Commercial activities. 
a.  Uses located on freestanding sites. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to uses which are located on individual lots of record where no parking is shared with any other use or activity. 
Activity Type Spaces Required (area in sq. ft.) (One parking space is required per unit of gross floor area indicated) i. Adult entertainment One space per four permanent seats, plus one space for every 25 square feet of area where temporary seats are used. ii. Animal care and veterinarian services 300 iii. Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair 500 iv. Banking, financial, insurance and real estate services 300 v. Convenience retail sales and services 150 vi. Entertainment and amusement services, limited: (a) Art galleries (commercial) 400 (b) Motion picture theaters For (b) and (c), one space per four permanent seats, plus one space for every 25 square feet of area where temporary seats are used. (c) Theaters (legitimate) For (b) and (c), one space per four permanent seats, plus one space for every 25 square feet of area where temporary seats are used. (d) Bowling alleys and billiard parlors See note 1. (e) Coin-operated amusement See note 1. (f) Commercial sporting facilities See note 1. (g) Dance, studios and schools See note 1. (h) Exhibition halls and commercial auditoriums See note 1. (i) Gardens (botanical and zoological) See note 1. (j) Marinas, boat docks and boat rental See note 1. (k) Recording and motion picture 
production studios See note 1. (l) Theatrical producers, band, 
orchestras and entertainers See note 1. vii. General business and communications services 400 viii. General retail sales and services 250 ix. Group assembly and outdoor recreation One space per four permanent seats, plus one space for every 25 square feet of area where temporary seats are used or as may be determined by the Planning Commission. See note 1. x. Outdoor material and equipment sales and repair yards 1,000 xi. Professional services, medical 300 xii. Professional services, nonmedical 400 xiii. Restaurant, full-service 150 (or one space for each four seats, whichever is greater) xiv. Restaurant, take-out 100 (or one space for each four seats, whichever is greater) xv. Scrap operations See note 1. xvi. Self-service storage One space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus two spaces for the rental office and one space for each employee. xvii. Transient habitation One and one quarter (1.25) spaces for each unit in a building serving transient guests. xviii. Warehousing goods, transport and storage One space per 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per 7,000 square feet of open storage area. xix. Wholesale sales One space per 1,000 square feet of open storage or gross floor area devoted to storage, plus one space per 300 square feet of office and display area.  
Note- 1. Due to the extreme variability of parking requirements for certain uses, the requirements for all new structures shall be determined by the Planning Commission as part of the review process of a site development plan based upon pertinent factors with each individual situation. In the case of existing structures the Zoning Administrator shall determine the parking requirements. 
4.  Manufacturing activities. One space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area or one space for each three employees during the largest shift, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-103; Ord. No. 2017-28, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-2017) 
Sec. 9-104. - Off-street parking lot design standards. 
    9-104.1 Design objectives. Parking areas shall be designed with careful regard given to orderly arrangement, topography, amenity of view, ease of access and as an integral part of the overall site design. For reasons of use and appearance, it is desirable that parking areas be level or on terraces formed with the slope of the land. Changes in level between such terraces should be formed by retaining walls or landscaped banks. Efforts shall be made to ensure that a parking area does not dominate a site or building. Such efforts may include depressing the level of the parking area, construction of earth berms, dividing large lots into smaller sub-lots and other similar techniques. Wherever possible, the size of parking areas visible from public streets shall be minimized. 
    9-104.2 Submission of site plan. Any application for a building permit, or for a conditional use permit where no building permit is necessary, that requires five or more accessory off-street parking spaces to be provided on a zone lot, shall be accompanied by a site development plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned. Said plan shall show the location design and layout of such parking facilities and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission. A site plan drawn to meet the requirements of article XIV, subsection 14-103.3, will comply. There shall be included either as a part of the parking area site plan or as a separate plan a landscaping plan for the parking area. Such landscape plan shall show any trees, shrubs, flowers, or ground covers together with; retaining walls or screens; walkways; and traffic barriers. (See article X.) 
    9-104.3 Design of parking stalls and maneuvering spaces. 
1.  Dimensions of parking spaces. Except as otherwise provided by this subsection, the minimum dimensions of parking stalls and maneuvering spaces shall be as shown in table 9-104.3. 
Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions 
DIMENSIONS IN FEET Parking 
Angle 
A Stall 
Width 
B Stall 
Depth 
C Aisle 
Width 
D Curb 
Length 
E Wall 
Module 
Width 
F Interlock 
Module 
Width 
G Stall 
Depth to 
Interlock 
H 90 Degree Parking Angle, Two-Way Aisle 90 9.00 17.5 26.0 9.00 61.00 61.0 17.5 60 Degree Parking Angle, Two-Way Aisle 60 8.5 18.0 26.0 9.7 62.0 59.0 19.7 75 Degree Parking Angle, One-Way Aisle 75 8.5 18.0 22.0 10.4 59.0 57.0 17.5 60 Degree Parking Angle, One-Way Aisle 30 98.5 18.0 18.0 17.0 54.0 51.0 16.5 45 Degree Parking Angle, One-Way Aisle 45 8.5 18.0 15.0 12.7 48.0 44.0 18.6 Parallel 8.0 22.0 15.0 22.0 23.0 23.0 23.0  

2.  Parallel parking. Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum length of 20 feet and a minimum width of eight feet. A minimum width of ten feet shall be required if any structure or obstacle that would impede the opening of a car door is within two feet of the curbside of a parallel parking space. 
3.  Residential parking. Parking areas designed solely for a single dwelling unit and not sharing a common parking area shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and 20 feet long. Such parking spaces may be located on a driveway or in an enclosed garage and may be placed end to end, but no portion of any parking space shall be located with the right-of-way of a public street or a public alley. 
4.  Layout. All off-street parking spaces, other than those designed solely for a single dwelling unit and not sharing a common parking area, shall comply with the following design requirements: 
a.  Each off-street parking spaces shall open directly onto an aisle or driveway that is not a public street or a public alley. 
b.  Aisles and driveways shall not be used for parking vehicles. 
c.  Parking spaces shall be designed to permit entry and exit without moving any other vehicle. 
d.  No parking space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. 
e.  No off-street parking spaces shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street, public alley or required joint access easement. 
f.  For parking areas including ten or more spaces, a minimum queuing distance of 20 feet shall be provided along all access drives between the street right-of-way line and the nearest parking space. 
5.  Paving standards. All parking spaces and access drives of parking areas with five or more spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete, or other hard-surfaced dustless materials and shall be constructed to provide for adequate drainage. 
6.  Marking. Parking areas containing five or more spaces shall delineate each space by single or double stripes on each side of the space. Except for parallel parking spaces, stall width shall be measured from the centerline of one stripe to the centerline of the other stripe. 
7.  Curbs. Curbs shall be provided to prevent any vehicle using a parking area from encroaching on any public right-of-way, required landscaping area or adjacent property. 
    9-104.4 Handicapped parking. Refer to the latest adopted version of the ICC/ANSI A117.1 and Chapter 11 of the International Building Codes (IBC). 
    9-104.5 Queuing requirements for drive-through facilities. In addition to meeting the off-street parking requirements of this section, drive-through facilities shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Minimum dimensions. Each queue space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet in size. Unless otherwise indicated, queuing shall be measured from the point of ultimate service to the end of the queuing lane. 
2.  Design. Each queue lane shall be clearly defined and designed so as not to conflict or interfere with other traffic using the site. A bypass lane, a minimum of 12 feet wide, shall be provided if a one-way traffic flow is used in the parking lot. The bypass lane shall be clearly designated and distinct from the queuing area. 
3.  Number of queue spaces. The minimum number of queue spaces, including the vehicle being serviced, shall be provided as indicated in [following] table 9-104.5: 
Table 9-104.5 Required Queuing Spaces Activity Type/Land Use Minimum Queue Spaces Bank teller lane 5 Automated teller machine 3 Restaurant drive-through 5 Carwash stall, automatic 5 Carwash stall, self-service 3 Oil change station 4 Dry cleaning or laundry 3 Photo lab 4 General retail 4 Gasoline pump island 30 feet from each end of pump island  
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-104; Ord. of ; Ord. No. 2011-70, § 1, 12-12-2011) 
Sec. 9-105. - Off-street loading. 
    9-105.1 Computing loading requirements. The number of loading spaces required for a specific development proposal shall be based on the requirements listed in subsection 9-105.2, Off-street loading space requirements, and the following provisions: 
1.  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the loading requirements specified for a listed use most similar to the use for which said permit is requested. 
2.  Multiple uses in a building. When a building contains more than one use, and the floor area used for each use is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate total floor area is greater than the minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building was used for that use in the building for which the most spaces are required. 
3.  Fractions. When measurements determining the number of required additional loading spaces beyond the floor area ranges given in subsection 9-105.2, Off-street loading spaces requirements, result in fractions, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall be rounded upward to the next highest full number. 
    9-105.2 Off-street loading space requirements. The minimum number of off-street loading spaces to be provided for a building shall be as indicated in table 9-105A. 
    9-105.3 Loading area design standards. 
1.  Size of required berths. The minimum required dimensions of loading spaces, open or enclosed, shall be 12 feet in width by 55 feet in length, with a minimum vertical clearance of 15 feet. Where tractor-trailer units will be using the facility, the minimum length shall be 65 feet. 
2.  Paving standards. All open off-street loading spaces shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete, or other hard-surfaced dustless materials, and shall be constructed to provide for adequate drainage. 
Table 9-105A. Required Off-Street Loading Spaces Activity Type/Land Use Gross Floor Area 
(in square feet) Loading Spaces Outside material and equipment sales; restaurant, full-service; restaurant, fast food; warehousing goods, transport and storage Less than 2,000 None 2,001 to 10,000 1 10,001 to 25,000 2 25,001 to 40,000 3 40,001 to 60,000 4 60,001 to 100,000 5 Each additional 80,000 1 All manufacturing Less than 5,000 None 5,001 to 20,000 1 20,001 to 40,000 2 40,001 to 60,000 3 40,001 to 100,000 4 Each additional 80,000 1 Automotive and marine craft sales, service and repair Less than 10,000 None 10,001 to 25,000 1 25,001 to 40,000 2 40,001 to 60,000 3 60,001 to 100,000 4 Each additional 80,000 1 Convenience retail sales and services, general; retail sales and services; group assembly; commercial outdoor recreation Less than 10,000 None 10,001 to 25,000 1 25,001 to 40,000 2 40,001 to 60,000 3 60,001 to 100,000 4 Each additional 150,000 1 Health care facilities; professional services, medical and nonmedical Less than 10,000 None 10,001 to 100,000 1 100,001 to 300,000 2 Each additional 300,000 1 Community assembly; transient habitation Less than 20,000 None 20,001 to 100,000 1 100,001 to 300,000 2 Each additional 300,000 1 Scrap operation Less than 25,000 None 25,001 to 60,000 1 60,001 to 100,000 2 Each additional 100,000 1  
3.  Use of loading area. Required off-street loading spaces and associated aisles and maneuvering areas shall be used for vehicle loading only. No sales, storage, display of merchandise (including automobiles), repair work or dismantling shall be permitted in such areas. 
4.  Layout. All off-street loading spaces shall comply with the following design requirements: 
a.  No off-street loading space shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street. Any loading dock or door shall be set back far enough from the right-of-way so that no portion of the right-of-way is occupied by trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading. 
b.  The location of the loading area shall not interfere with the free circulation of vehicles in the off-street parking area. Where loading areas are directly adjacent to or integrated with an off-street parking lot, the city may require installation of physical barriers or other means of separating loading areas from parking areas and pedestrian traffic. 
c.  No loading space shall be located so as to block access by emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-105) 
Sec. 9-106. - Access management. 
    9-106.1 Traffic impact studies. See the Subdivision Regulations for details and requirements regarding traffic study requirements for development or redevelopments. 
    9-106.2 Protection of residential areas. In order to minimize the destabilizing effects on residential areas, access to commercial and industrial activities shall be designed so as to minimize the intrusion of nonresidential and nonlocal traffic onto local residential streets. 
    9-106.3 Access control. In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the points of contact, the following access control regulations shall apply (see illustration 9-106A): 
Illustration 9-106A 

1.  Access from arterial or collector public ways. The city may require: 
a.  That corner lots or double frontage lots not derive access from arterial or collector public ways. 
b.  That access to residential lots from collectors and minor arterial shall be provided by joint driveways. 
c.  That direct access to residential lots from major arterial highways designated in the major thoroughfare plan not be permitted. 
2.  Minimum separation between driveways. For each permitted nonresidential driveway, there shall be a corresponding minimum road frontage of: 
a.  At least 200 feet along routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan as rural arterial highways and six lane urban arterial highways. 
b.  At least 150 feet along routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan as five lane and three lane urban arterial highways. 
c.  At least 100 feet along routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan as four lane urban arterial highways and two lane collector highways. 
The City will consider requests for modifications to this standard to permit the construction of double driveways, serving the same property from the same street, on a case by case basis. Double driveways shall be allowed only on lots with more than 150 feet of road frontage. In all cases, the separation between double driveways shall be at least 25 feet and shall also be greater than the width of the wider adjoining driveway. The City may require that access to proposed new lots be provided indirectly via cross connections, joint access easements, or local access roads. Nonresidential lots of record as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance shall have direct access to at least one public way. 
3.  Minimum clearances. The minimum corner clearance between proposed new driveways and existing or proposed thoroughfares shall be at least 50 feet. In order to ensure adequate storage space for vehicles stopped at a signalized intersection, the City may require that the nearside corner clearance shall be at least 100 feet. Corner clearances shall be as defined in the Rules and Regulations for Constructing Driveways on State Highway Rights-of-Way, adopted by the Tennessee Department of Highways and effective April 3, 1967. Except when access is via a joint driveway, the distance between the frontage property line and the tangent projection of the nearest edge of each driveway, measured along the edge of the public way, shall be at least 15 feet for nonresidential driveways and at least five feet for residential driveways. 
4.  Design standards for nonresidential driveways. 
a.  For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 35 mph, or less, all nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with a minimum return radius of 15 feet and a minimum horizontal width of 25 feet. 
b.  For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 40 mph, nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with: 
i.  A minimum return radius of 20 feet and a minimum driveway width of 30 feet. 
ii.  A minimum return radius of 25 feet and a minimum driveway width of 25 feet. 
c.  For access to thoroughfares where the posted speed limit is 45 mph, nonresidential driveways shall be constructed with a right turn deceleration lane and: 
i.  A minimum return radius of 25 feet and a minimum driveway width of 40 feet. 
ii.  A minimum return radius of 30 feet and a minimum driveway width of 30 feet. 
d.  The City will review proposed driveway designs for access to other thoroughfares on a case-by-case basis. 
e.  Where required, deceleration lanes shall be designed to provide for sufficient reduction in travel speeds as well as for vehicle storage. 
f.  Driveway openings shall be no wider than necessary to ensure conformance with this standard. 
g.  All nonresidential driveways shall be permanently paved. Lanes shall be clearly designated and lane uses shall be clearly and permanently marked. 
h.  The centerline of every nonresidential two way driveway shall intersect the centerline of the public way at an angle between 75 and 90 degrees. 
i.  For other nonresidential driveways, the intersection angle shall be subject to the approval of the City. 
5.  Design standards for residential driveways. Where permitted, residential driveways fronting collector and arterial routes designated in the major thoroughfare plan shall be designed so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back onto these highways. 
6.  Relationship to state standards. Where the driveway design and location standards listed above are not in conformance with the standards of the Tennessee Department of Transportation, the City may require conformance with whichever standard is more restrictive. 
    9-106.4 Joint and shared accessways. 
1.  Joint use driveways. Wherever feasible, the City may require the establishment of a joint use driveway to serve two or more properties. If a proposed development abuts an existing development that contains an existing joint access driveway, the vehicular circulation of the proposed development shall be designed to connect to the abutting access and circulation areas. If a proposed development abuts existing undeveloped property, the vehicular circulation of the proposed development shall contain a joint access driveway which is designed to connect to the abutting property when such property is developed. 
2.  Cross access corridors. The Planning Commission, in conjunction with the City Engineer shall be authorized to designate cross access corridors on properties adjacent to arterial and major collector streets. All developments within the affected area shall be designed so as to provide for mutual coordinated parking, access and circulation systems. 
3.  Recording access easements. Whenever joint access driveways or cross access corridors are provided in accordance with the provisions of this section, no development plan shall be approved unless such plan grants an easement for cross access to and from abutting properties. Such designation shall be referenced on all plats of subdivision for any affected property. 
4.  Closing of interim driveways. Whenever a permanent joint use driveway and/or a cross access corridor is constructed as required by the provisions of this section, all preceding temporary or interim driveways shall be closed and eliminated. The owner(s) of all properties which involve the use of a permanent joint use driveway and/or a cross access corridor shall enter into a written agreement with the City to be recorded in the public records of the County and running with the land, that existing temporary and/or interim driveways shall be closed and eliminated following construction of both sides of a joint access. 
    9-106.5 Visibility areas. In order to safely accommodate vehicular movements to and from public streets, the following sight distance and visibility provisions shall be required: 
1.  Street intersections. At all points of intersection of public and private streets no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or structure that will obstruct vision at any point above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the said right-of-way lines and a straight line joining said right-of-way lines at points where they are 35 feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines and measured along said right-of-way lines. 
2.  Driveway intersections. In all zone districts, no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or structure that will obstruct vision at any point where any private driveway intersects a public street shall be erected, placed or maintained within 35 feet in all directions measured from all points along the property line across vehicles are intended to pass. 
    9-106.6 Measurement. For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in the following manner: 
1.  Distance between driveways. Distances between driveways shall be measured along the right-of-way line from the nearest points of intersection of the driveways with the right-of-way line. In the event that the curb return of a driveway begins outside of the right-of-way, the point of intersection of the extension of the driveway curb or edge shall be used for measurement purposes. 
2.  Distance from intersection. The distance from street intersections shall be measured from the nearest intersection of the existing right-of-way lines or extension thereof. For streets designated to be widened at a future time by the adopted major thoroughfare plan, measurement shall be made from the ultimate right-of-way. 
3.  Distance from ramps of limited access highways. The distance from ramps for limited access highways shall be measured from the point where the right-of-way for the ramp intersects the right-of-way for the street serving the lot. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 9-106; Ord. No. 2015-4, § 1, 1-12-2015) 
ARTICLE X. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-101. - Purposes and intents. 
    The purposes and intents of this article are to preserve and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public; to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; to conserve natural resources including air and water; to conserve properties and their values; to preserve the character of an area by preventing the harmful effects of prejudicial uses; and to encourage the appropriate use of land. More specifically, this article is intended to reduce the friction between incompatible uses by requiring a screen or buffer between the uses in order to minimize the harmful impact of noise, dust and other debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusion, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted on or created by an adjoining or nearby use. Additionally, this article is intended to require landscaping of parking lots in order to reduce the harmful effects of wind and air turbulence, heat and noise and the glare of motor vehicle lights; to preserve underground water reservoirs and to permit the return of precipitation to the groundwater strata; to act as a natural drainage system and ameliorate stormwater drainage problems; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide and return pure oxygen to the atmosphere; to prevent soil erosion; to provide shade; and to enhance the blighted appearance of parking lots. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-101) 
Sec. 10-102. - Emergency and/or disastrous situations. 
    In the event of emergencies and/or disastrous situations, which may include, but are not limited to, ice and rain storms, tornadoes, floods and similar natural disasters which cause excessive tree and landscape damage throughout the community, the Mayor may suspend these landscaping regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-102) 
Sec. 10-103. - Applicability. 
    10-103.1 General[ly]. The provisions of this article shall apply to all new public, private and institutional land development or building construction within the city, except as specified below: 
1.  Except as provided in section 10-111, Transitional screening and barriers, no portion of these provisions shall apply to one- and two-family detached dwellings situated on individual lots or parcels of ground. 
2.  Any addition to an existing building which is less than ten percent of the gross floor area of the building or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall not be subject to the buffering and screening provisions of section 10-111, but may be subject to the vehicular use areas landscaping as specified in subsection 10-103.2. Repeated expansions of the building over a period of time commencing with the effective date of this ordinance shall be combined in determining whether the threshold has been reached. 
3.  The following categories of landscaping are required to be provided as specified within subsections 10-103.2 through 10-103.4. 
4.  This article is intended to establish minimum standards to meet the stated purposes and intents as set forth in section 10-101. In anomalous or unusual topographic situations or applications, the Planning Commission may, upon an affirmative finding that the application of these regulations does not meet the purposes and intents of this article, require, permit or allow alternative applications. 
    10-103.2 Vehicular use area landscaping. The provisions of section 10-109, Vehicular surface area landscaping, shall apply to all developments as indicated below: 
1.  New sites. No new site development or building shall hereafter be constructed or vehicular use area created or utilized, unless landscaping as required by the provisions of section 10-109, is provided. 
Note. Vehicular use area as used in this ordinance shall mean any ground surface area, except public rights-of-way, used by any type vehicle whether moving or at rest for the purpose of driving, parking, loading, storage or display (automotive sale lots). Also, included are activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, filling stations and grocery stores. 
2.  Existing sites. When the square footage of vehicular use area of an existing site is increased, compliance with the provisions of section 10-109, is required as follows: 
a.  Expansion by 25 percent or less. When the vehicular use area is expanded by 25 percent or less, only the expansion area must be brought into compliance with subsection 10-109.3, Interior plantings. 
b.  Expansion by more than 25 percent. When the vehicular use area is expanded by more than 25 percent, the entire vehicular use area shall be brought into compliance with subsection 10-109.3, Interior plantings. In addition, the preexisting vehicular use area shall be brought into compliance with the perimeter vehicular use area landscaping requirements of subsection 10-109.2, Street yard vehicular surface plantings. 
c.  Repeated expansions. Repeated expansions of the vehicular use area over a period of time commencing with the effective date of this ordinance shall be combined in determining whether the 25 percent threshold has been reached. 
3.  Change of use. No use shall be changed to another use for which the zoning ordinance requires additional parking over and above that required for the previous use, unless, vehicular use area landscaping, as required by this article is provided for such additional parking. The provisions of this section shall be effective regardless of whether or not new construction is necessary to meet the parking requirements for the new uses. 
    10-103.3 Buffering and screening. 
1.  Application. No new use of land, nor any change in the type of occupancy, nor any expansion or addition of an existing land use which singly or collectively exceeds ten percent of the gross floor area of the building or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less, or 25 percent of the land surface area of the existing use at the time this section becomes applicable to the property shall occur without first providing a landscaped transitional protective yard which complies with the requirements of section 10-111, Transitional protective yard requirements, of this article. Such transitional protective yard shall be located on the developing property or on a continuous planting easement on the adjacent or adjoining property, which is to be screened. When new nonresidential development is placed adjacent to: 
a.  Vacant land zoned for residential use, the new nonresidential development shall provide 100 percent of the required buffer; 
b.  Vacant land zoned for nonresidential use, the new residential development shall provide 50 percent of the required buffer; 
c.  Existing residential development, the new residential development shall provide 100 percent of the required buffer; and 
d.  Vacant land zoned for residential use, the new residential development shall provide 50 percent of the required buffer. 
2.  Relationship to plan approval. Following adoption of this article: 
a.  No application for a zoning change shall be recommended for approval by the Planning Commission nor approved by the Board of Commissioners, unless such application acknowledges that the provisions set out in section 10-111, Transitional protective yard requirements, will be met. 
b.  No master development plan or site plan required by article XIV, subsection 14-103.2 or 14-103.3, respectively, may be approved for any use unless such plan is in compliance with the provisions set out in section 10-111. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall not recommend nor shall the Board of Zoning Appeals approve any request for a conditional use permit, unless and until such request demonstrates that the provisions set out in section 10-111 can be met. 
    10-103.4 Street yards. 
1.  Application. No new use of land, nor any change in the type of occupancy, nor any expansion or addition of an existing land use which singly or collectively exceeds ten percent of the gross floor area of the building or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less, or 25 percent of the land surface area of the existing use at the time this section becomes applicable to the property shall occur without first providing street yards in accordance with the requirements of section 10-112, Street yard landscape regulations for both the existing and additional facility as specified in subpart 2 of this section. 
2.  Specific requirement. The street yard landscape regulations of section 10-112 shall be met for the entire property, except those portions of the lot used for driveways are exempted from all street yard requirements. This street yard may be arranged in any manner chosen by the owner so long as: 
a.  The total square footage of area within the street yard equals five times the length in feet of frontage adjoining the public rights-of-way; and 
b.  The minimum dimension of any street yard used to satisfy this requirement is two feet measured perpendicular to the public right-of-way; and 
c.  The street yard is contiguous with the rights-of way; and 
d.  No portion of the street yard used to meet these requirements is more than 25 feet from the recorded public right-of-way as measured perpendicular to the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-103) 
Sec. 10-104. - Landscaping procedures. 
    When an application is made for a permit on any land where the landscaping requirements of this article are applicable, such permit application shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or landscape contractor licensed by the State of Tennessee. Such plan shall contain the information indicated in subsection 10-104.1, or any additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator to enable a determination to be made as to whether the permit application is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. When a site plan is required by article XIV of this ordinance, to be approved on land where the provisions of this article are applicable the landscape plan shall accompany such site plan. 
10-104.1 Plan content. Landscape plans shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances, and shall clearly delineate: 
1.  Location, general type and quality of existing vegetation, including all trees which are five inches or greater in caliper, tree masses composed of trees smaller than five inches in caliper, as well as smaller trees which may be retained to fulfill the requirements of section 10-112, Street yard landscape regulations; 
2.  The number, location, species and caliper of existing trees located between the principal building and the public street right-of-way which are to be maintained or preserved for credit as per subsection 10-112.6, along with other existing vegetation proposed to be saved; 
3.  Methods and details for protecting existing vegetation during construction; 
4.  Schedules with the botanical and common name, size (at the time of planting), quantity and spacing of all proposed landscape material; 
5.  Plant lists or schedules showing both the required and proposed quantities of plants; 
6.  Plans, shown over a base map which displays existing and proposed topography, indicating the proposed location of plants and the location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, lights, parking and vehicular use areas, including existing and proposed parking spaces, access aisles, driveways, loading and storage areas; 
7.  Planting and installation details and notes necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards; 
8.  Means for supplying water including irrigation systems, or the location of hydrants or other sources of water supply. A source of water must be available to meet the requirements of this article; 
9.  Any other information which the City may require to clarify the applicant's plan and it's ability to meet the stated purposes and intents of this article. 
10-104.2 As-built certification. Upon completion of the landscaping required by this ordinance, the designer shall certify that the plan has been followed in the installation. (See subsection 14-103.6, Construction to be in accordance with approved plans.) The designer shall note any areas where the installation deviates from the approved plan and the approvals, secured under the provision of subsection 10-114.4, to allow that deviation. Any and all such approvals of variance shall be obtained prior to issuance of a use and occupancy permit. 
10-104.3 Enforcement of landscaping plans. In no event shall a permanent use and occupancy permit be issued, unless and until all elements of landscaping have been installed and such installation has been certified by the City as complete and in accordance with the approved landscape plan. If, at the time application is made for a use and occupancy permit, required nonstructural landscaping (i.e. plant material) is not in place and it can be determined by the City that because of the unavailability of plant material or that requiring completion of the landscaping at the time of such request would jeopardize the health of the plant material or weather conditions prohibit the completion of planting, the developer/owner shall make the following arrangements to secure a temporary use and occupancy permit: 
1.  The developer/owner shall produce an agreement in the form of a legally binding contract between the developer and a landscaping installer/contractor specifying the manner and the date by which the landscaping, as shown on approved plans, is to be installed. The maximum period for installation of the required landscaping shall be the lesser of one year or one growing season from the date of application for a temporary use and occupancy permit. The City shall be a third party beneficiary to said contract. This agreement shall be secured by a bond or letter of credit made payable to the City in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the landscaping plus 50 percent. In the event of the failure of the developer to execute this contract and thereby perform the work specified in the plan, the City shall call the bond or letter of credit and fund the contract to have the work accomplished. 
2.  The developer shall also agree in writing that he, or his successors or assigns shall provide the required planting as specified in the contract required in [subpart] paragraph 1, above, as a condition for issuance of a permanent use and occupancy permit and that no permanent use and occupancy permit shall be issued unless and until such landscaping is installed. The developer/owner shall also agree that the principal use shall be discontinued should the required planting not be provided as specified in [subpart] paragraph 1, above. Violations of these provisions shall constitute an unauthorized illegal occupancy of the principal use and no further permits of any type shall be approved until the landscaping is installed. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-104) 
Sec. 10-105. - Definitions. 
    10-105.1 Application. The following definitions shall apply where within this article. Where words have not been defined, the standard dictionary definition shall prevail. 
    10-105.2 Terms defined. 
    Berms and earth mounds [means] earthen barriers which aid in blocking or screening the view similar to a hedge, fence or wall. 
    Caliper this is a term used to describe the size or cross sectional area of various plants. Caliper is measured in different ways depending on the type and nature of the plant being measured. (See the publication American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1, latest edition, for details of specific application.) 
    Canopy tree [means] a major shade tree, expected to grow to a mature height of 25 feet or more in Middle Tennessee. (Ex: oaks, maples, ash, sycamore, tulip poplar and similar trees.) 
    Deciduous trees [means] trees which shed their leaves and remain barren through the winter months. 
    Display area [means] any portion of a lot used for the exterior display of goods for sale. The term includes exterior display of motor vehicles. 
    Evergreen trees [means] trees whose branches generally remain covered with thriving leaves/needles throughout the year. 
    Exterior facing retaining wall [means] any wall which will hold earthen material such as soil, gravel, etc., back from the exterior of a site. The face of the wall faces away from the major structure and/or use of the site. 
    Freestanding wall or fence [means] any portion of a wall or fence which is constructed to stand above ground; the purpose of which is privacy, visual screening, odor and/or noise retention, etc. 
    Grass [means] any turf vegetation which is commonly planted and hardy in Middle Tennessee. 
    Ground cover [means] any low growing plant species which is generally used for coverage within planting beds at the turf level and/or for erosion control on steep slopes. These plant species shall generally be viewed as tolerant of the local climate by landscape professionals within the region. 
    Interior facing retaining wall [means] any wall which will hold earthen material such as soil, gravel, etc., back from the exterior of a site. The exposed face of the wall faces toward the major structure and/or use of the site. 
    Shrubs and hedges [means] any plant, deciduous or evergreen, which acts as a visual and physical border, is multi-trunked and/or multi-stemmed, and having a mature height which generally falls within the range of two and 12 feet in planted mature height. 
    Transitional protective yard [means] an area on the perimeter of a property which is reserved for plantings and/or other barriers which may be required to screen development from abutting properties. 
    Understory trees [means] trees which are typically between ten and 25 feet in height at maturity in Middle Tennessee plantings and having a particularly notable ornamental or aesthetic quality. (Ex: dogwoods, redbuds, goldenrain trees, Foster hollies, crepe myrtles and Japanese black pines) These plant species shall generally be viewed as tolerant of the local climate by landscape professionals within the region. 
    Vehicular use area [means] any ground surface area, except public rights-of-way, used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest for the purpose of driving, parking, loading, storage or display (automotive sales lots). Also, included are activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, automobile service stations and grocery stores. 
    Vines [means] any plant which is generally used in conjunction with walls, fences, trellis-work and/or trees for its climbing nature. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-106) 
Sec. 10-106. - General provisions. 
    10-106.1 Vision triangles protected. Landscaping shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisle or approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety upon any such street, driveway, parking aisle or street intersection, or violate the provisions of article IX, subsection 9-106.5, Visibility areas, of this ordinance. 
    10-106.2 Protection of plantings. All plantings required by the provisions of this article shall be protected and maintained as provided herein. 
1.  Whenever any planting areas required by this article are adjacent to parking or vehicular circulation areas, the planting shall be protected from vehicular intrusion or damage from excessive vehicular lubricants or fuels. 
2.  All landscaped areas shall be stabilized from soil erosion immediately upon planting and erosion control shall be maintained for the duration of the premises. 
3.  The property owner is responsible for maintaining all required plant material in good health. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants shall be replaced with locally adapted vegetation which conforms to the standards of this ordinance. 
    10-106.3 Replacement of plantings upon condemned property. Whenever any governmental agency or utility operated by any public or quasi-public agency acquires property by condemnation action and said property complies with the provisions of this article at the time of acquisition, it shall be the responsibility of the condemner to replace, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, any landscape materials which were required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-106) 
Sec. 10-107. - Alternative methods of compliance. 
    Although certain material or a particular method of construction is specifically prescribed by this article, it is not intended, especially whenever a stream, natural rock formation or other physiographic condition exists, to prevent the use of materials or methods of construction different from the materials or methods of construction specifically prescribed by this article; provided, any such alternative material or method of construction has been approved in writing or in plan and its use authorized by the body or department authorized to approve the original plan. 
    The body or department may approve in writing or in plan any such alternate material or method of construction; provided, it is found that the proposed material or method of construction is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that specifically prescribed by this article in quality, effectiveness, durability, hardiness and performance and that such alternative measure better preserves the existing natural condition. The body or department may require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding its use. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-107) 
Sec. 10-108. - Landscape standards and specifications. 
    10-108.1 Walls and fences. 
1.  Materials and construction standards. Walls shall be constructed of natural stone, brick or other weatherproof materials arranged in a linear, serpentine, or other alignment. Fences shall be constructed of wood or other weatherproof, durable materials generally used in the exterior construction of buildings. Fence posts shall be structurally stable based on the material used, and shall have a maximum spacing of eight feet o.c [on center]. If wood is used, the posts shall be four inches by four inches minimum. Posts shall be set in or anchored to crowned concrete footings. The base of the footings shall be at least 24 inches below finished grade. If wood is used for any member, it shall be softwood treated with water-borne preservative to the American Wood Preservers Institute Standard LP-2, for aboveground use or LP-22, for ground contact use, or all heart redwood, or all heart cedar. All cut surfaces of pressure treated lumber shall be waterproofed. If another material is used, it shall be weatherproof. Slats are to be minimum one-half inch in thickness and are to be placed on the outside of the fence, unless the design is two-sided (shadowbox, etc.). All hardware is to be galvanized or otherwise rustproofed. Wood horizontal members shall be installed bark-side up. Chainlink fencing may not be used to meet the requirements of this article. Chainlink fencing may be installed in the required landscape area only if it is in addition to the required continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or earth mound. In industrial zones, there shall be no maximum height limitation on walls or fences; in all other zones, however, there shall be a six-foot height restriction when such fences are located within side and rear yards. All walls or fences used to meet the requirements of this article shall have a minimum opacity of 80 percent and shall not be used for erection or display of any sign or other advertising device. 
2.  Height and landscaping standards. The provisions of this section shall apply to walls constructed to fulfill the requirements of this article. 
a.  Freestanding walls. Any freestanding walls (except those directly surrounding trash containers) constructed to stand above ground, the purpose of which is privacy, visual screening, odor and/or noise retention, etc., shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
b.  Interior facing retaining walls. Walls holding earthen material such as soil, gravel, etc., back from the interior of a site shall be unrestricted as to height. 
c.  Exterior facing retaining walls. Walls holding earthen material such as soil, gravel, etc., back from the exterior of a site shall be designed and stamp certified as to design and drainage characteristics by a licensed engineer. All walls shall be landscaped as follows: 
i.  A minimum of one ornamental tree or large shrub shall be installed for each 150 square feet of terraced area. These trees are to be evenly distributed across the length of the terrace. 
ii.  A minimum of three shrubs shall be placed between each two trees. 
iii.  A planting of grass or groundcover that is deemed to provide sufficient coverage shall be placed along the entire land surface area at the top of the wall to cover and to stabilize the earth from erosion. 
    10-108.2 Earth berms. Berms shall have a minimum height of 11/2 feet, a minimum crown width of two feet, a side slope no greater than 2:1 and shall be planted and covered with adequate plant material to prevent erosion. A difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute a berm. Berms which are at slopes greater than 3:1 or greater than three feet in height shall be planted with permanent vegetation which will cover the surface to prevent erosion and which does not require mowing to maintain a neat appearance. 
    10-108.3 Plants. All plant materials shall be living plants (artificial plants are prohibited) and shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Quality. Plant materials used to meet the provisions of this ordinance shall comply with the standards of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1), American Association of Nurserymen, for size, quality and form and shall have passed any inspections required under state regulations. Bare root trees are prohibited. 
2.  Deciduous trees. Deciduous trees shall be species having an average mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet in Middle Tennessee and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with over five feet of clear trunk in areas which have visibility requirements. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping of the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. Trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in overall height and at least 13/4 inches in caliper at the time of planting. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior container dimensions shall be five feet square and five feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be four inches thick, reinforced concrete. 
3.  Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet high. 
4.  Understory trees. Trees and shrubs which are typically between ten and 25 feet in height at maturity in Middle Tennessee plantings and having a particularly notable ornamental or aesthetic quality. Ex: dogwoods, redbuds, goldenrain trees, Foster hollies, crepe myrtles, Japanese black pines. 
5.  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and hedges shall be at least two feet in average height with three canes when installed. All plants shall conform to opacity, mature height and other requirements within four years after the date of final approval of each planting or replanting. Privet (ligustrum species) cannot meet the opacity requirements and may not be used to satisfy the requirement of this article. The height of the planting shall be measured from the level of the vehicular use area at the edge closest to the screening. 
6.  Vines. Vines shall be at least 12 inches high at planting and shall be trained to grow upon walls or fences. 
7.  Grass or ground cover. Grass shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Middle Tennessee and may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion control, or suitable mulch shall be used. Temporary "nurse-crop" grass seed shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage, otherwise, is achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Grassed areas shall be planted in such a manner as to provide 100 percent coverage after two full growing seasons. 
8.  Existing landscape material. Existing landscape material which to be retained to fulfill landscape requirements shall be shown on the required plan, and any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy these requirements in whole or in part when, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator such material meets the requirements and achieves the objectives of this article. Existing healthy trees may be substituted for trees required for property or vehicular use area perimeter landscaping, or for interior landscaping by using the following criteria: A six-inch to 12-inch caliper tree surrounded by a minimum of 150 square feet of landscape area may be substituted for two new trees of the required minimum size; a 12-inch to 24-inch caliper tree surrounded by a minimum of 250 square feet of landscape area may be substituted for three new trees of the required minimum size; a 24-inch or greater caliper tree surrounded by a minimum of 300 square feet of landscape area may be substituted for four trees of the required minimum size. The Zoning Administrator shall reinspect the condition of existing vegetation upon completion of construction, at which time the Administrator may require removal of any vegetation deemed by the officer to be damaged beyond repair and the applicant shall replant the area with trees to meet the conditions, otherwise, in force. 
9.  Recommended listing of plants to be developed. A listing of plants recommended for use in meeting the various standards and requirements established by this article is to be developed and maintained by the City. Such listing shall also indicate plants with characteristics considered undesirable and not to be utilized in plantings required by this article. 
    10-108.4 Landscaping in easements. Landscaping may be located in areas reserved for utility or other easements as long as all the landscape requirements can be fully met. Otherwise, landscape buffer plantings shall be provided in addition to, and separate from, any easement. (See subsection 10-111.3, [subpart] paragraph 4.) 
    10-108.5 Landscaping at driveway and street intersections. To ensure that landscape materials do not constitute a driving hazard, a sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections and intersections of driveways with streets. 
    10-108.6 Joint driveways and common vehicular use areas. Vehicular use area screening shall not be required between a vehicular use area and the adjoining property where a property line divides a driveway used for common access to two or more properties nor when both of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The vehicular use areas are for the required parking for the properties or the common use of the properties (as substantiated by a reciprocal parking and access agreement); and 
2.  A site development plan for the properties has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-108) 
Sec. 10-109. - Vehicular surface area landscaping. 
    10-109.1 Intent, purposes and application. It is the intent of this section to modify and reduce the deleterious visual, environmental and aesthetic effects of vehicular surface areas. The landscape requirements herein have been developed to: filter and reduce the glare of headlight and reflected sunlight from parked automobiles onto the public street rights-of-way; to separate the public from the ill effects of fumes and dust; to visually modify the appearance of parking areas and vehicular surface areas, to encourage the construction of such necessary areas in a manner that more closely follows the existing natural contours of the land; to distribute planting areas around and within the parking areas; to modify the rate of stormwater runoff and increase the capability of groundwater recharge in urban areas; to provide shade, noise attenuation, filtering the air of particulate and gaseous pollutants and other beneficial environmental effects to the microclimate; to prevent the overcrowding of land; and to break the visual blight created by large expanses of vehicular surface areas. These requirements shall apply to all vehicular surface areas, required or otherwise, regardless of the zoning district wherein they are located. 
    10-109.2 Street yard vehicular surface plantings. 
1.  Applicability. All edges of vehicular surface areas within 50 feet of any street right-of-way are required to have a visually modifying screen or barrier between the vehicular surface area and the right-of-way. 
2.  Plants and materials. The owner may use natural plants, fences, walls or earthen berms or any combination thereof to meet the requirements of this section so long as all the minimum criteria set forth below are met. 
a.  The natural plants, fences, walls, earthen berms or combination thereof, must occupy a minimum of 75 percent of a vertical rectangular plane equal to the peripheral length of the vehicular area in feet, times an average of three feet six inches as measured from the surface edge of the vehicle area. Such rectangular plane shall be exclusive of driveways and sight lines used for automobile ingress and egress. No additional consideration towards meeting the 75 percent average requirement shall be given for any material greater than 84 inches in height. 
b.  No more than six continuous lineal feet of vertical plane as measured and viewed perpendicular from the street may be void of any natural plants, berms, closed fences or walls or combinations, thereof. 
c.  See subsection 10-108.1, [subpart] subparagraph 1, Materials and construction standards, for standards of construction and appearance. Additional planting materials shall be provided so that no more than two-thirds of the surface area of the fence or wall is visible from the street within three years of erection of the structure. Forty percent of this plant material may be deciduous. 
d.  All berms installed shall meet the standards of subsection 10-108.2. 
e.  All natural shrubs installed to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be a locally adapted species expected to reach a minimum height of 30 inches within three years of planting. Live vegetation planted on berms may have a lesser mature height provided the combined height of the berm and the plantings after three years are at least 30 inches high. Forty percent of all shrubs may be deciduous. 
    10-109.3 Interior plantings. 
1.  Planting areas. In addition to all other landscape requirements, all vehicular surface areas, temporary or permanent (excluding parking structures) shall provide and maintain landscaped planting areas within the interior of the vehicular surface area. Each planting area shall contain a minimum of 300 square feet in area with minimum dimensions of seven feet and, except for vehicular display areas, shall contain at least one and not more than two locally adapted canopy trees a minimum of 13/4-inch caliper and a minimum height of eight feet. 
2.  Trees required. Trees shall be required at a minimum rate of one natural canopy tree for every 2,000 square feet of total vehicular surface area. All vehicular surface areas located within the same block which serve one or more businesses or uses of land or share unified ingress and egress shall be considered as a single vehicular surface area for the purpose of computing the required number of trees, notwithstanding ownership. 
3.  Planting area locations. Landscaped planting areas are to be located within or adjacent to the parking area as tree islands, at the end of parking bays, inside seven-foot wide or greater medians between rows of cars, or as part of continuous street or transitional protective yards. The number, size and shape of landscape planting areas shall be at the discretion of the owner; however, tree spacing shall not exceed a maximum of 195 feet or three double-loaded bays of parking, which ever is less. Landscaped planting areas shall be distributed in a manner, which fulfills the purposes of subsection 10-109.1. For vehicular display areas which are not required to have trees, measurements shall be made from the edge of the landscaped planting areas, and no stored vehicle shall be farther than 50 feet from the edge of any landscaped planting area. 
4.  Parking reductions permitted. The number of off-street parking spaces required in article IX of this ordinance, may be reduced by the following ratio: The square footage of required interior landscaped planting area divided by 150 but no fraction thereof, provided that no reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces authorized by article IX, in excess of ten percent shall occur without prior approval of the Board of Commissioners which shall first determine if further reductions will cause on-street parking congestion. 
5.  Shrubs within planting areas. Any vehicular surface area, including vehicular display areas, shall be provided with landscaped areas containing shrubs. Shrubs shall obtain a minimum size of 30 inches within three years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted. No more than 40 percent of required shrubs may be deciduous. Shrubs shall be required at the rate of one shrub per 500 square feet of vehicular surface area. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-109) 
Sec. 10-110. - Loading area, display area and utility service area landscaping requirements. 
    10-110.1 Application. All loading areas and display areas with minimum dimensions of 15 feet or more, designated short-term storage areas and utility service areas not screened by an intervening building, established after the effective date of [the ordinance from which this article is derived], shall be screened from view from any public street right-of-way for their entire length except for necessary points of access. 
    10-110.2 Loading areas. 
1.  General screening. See subsection 10-108.1, [subpart] subparagraph 1, Materials and construction standards, for construction and appearance criteria. Additional planting materials shall be provided so that no more than two-thirds of the surface area of any closed fence or wall is visible from the street within three years of erection of the structure. The screening may also be accomplished with a natural evergreen plant material which can be expected to reach a height of six feet or greater within three years of planting. Any plant materials used to fulfill these requirements shall be a minimum of three feet in height when planted and there shall be no gap greater than four feet between plant material. 
2.  Loading areas in close proximity to residential properties. Loading areas located closer than 50 feet to a property line of land located within a residential zoning district shall be screened from view from the residential property with an earthen berm, closed fence or solid wall which is at least six feet high. (See subsection 10-108.1, [subpart] subparagraph 1, Materials and construction standards, for standards of construction and appearance of fences.) Additional planting materials shall be provided so that no more than two-thirds of the surface area of the closed fence or wall is visible from any adjoining residence within three years of erection of the structure. 
    10-110.2 Display areas. Screening for display areas may be accomplished by natural plants, closed fences, walls or earthen berms or any combination thereof to meet the requirements of this section so long as all the minimum criteria set forth below are met. 
1.  Screening standard. The natural plants, solid fences, walls, earthen berms or combinations thereof, must occupy 75 percent of a vertical rectangular plane equal to the peripheral length of the display area, in feet, times an average of two feet six inches as measured from the surface edge of the display area. Such rectangular plane shall be exclusive of driveways and sight lines used for automobile access. No additional consideration towards meeting the 75 percent average requirement shall be given for any material greater than 66 inches in height. No more than six continuous lineal feet of the vertical plane as measured and viewed perpendicular from the street may be void of any natural plants, berms, closed fences or walls or combination, thereof. 
2.  Use of fences and walls. See subsection 10-108.1, [subpart] subparagraph 1, Materials and construction standards, for standards of construction and appearance of fences. Additional planting materials shall be provided so that no more than two-thirds of the surface area of the fence or wall is visible from any adjoining residence within three years of erection of the structure. Forty percent of this plant material may be deciduous. 
4.  Use of berms. Any berms installed shall meet the standards set out in subsection 10-108.2. 
5.  Size and quality of plant material. All natural shrubs installed to satisfy the requirements of this subsection shall be a locally adapted species expected to reach a minimum height of 24 inches and a minimum spread of 24 inches within three years of planting. All shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted. Live vegetation planted on berms may have a lesser mature height provided that the combined height of the berm and the plantings after three years are at a height of at least 24 inches. No more than 40 percent of required shrubs may be deciduous. 
    10-110.3 Utility service areas. Screening for utility service areas may be accomplished by locally adapted plantings, evergreen or deciduous, which are at least 18 inches tall when planted and are expected to reach a height and width equal to or greater than the utility service structures which are required to be screened. Screening for utility service areas in the right-of-way is to be installed by the utility company or the person who installed the service; in all other instances, the property owner shall install the plantings. 
    10-110.4 Temporary storage areas. Temporary storage of goods outside a building shall occur in such a manner as to screen from adjacent properties as effectively as the building and the vehicular use area. Such goods, whether in storage trailers, temporary structures or simply stacked on the site, shall be placed in a location which has been approved as a part of the site plan, and shall not obstruct required parking, loading spaces, travel ways or fire lanes, nor shall such goods be stored within a required setback. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-110) 
Sec. 10-111. - Transitional protective yard requirements. 
    10-111.1 Intent. This section requires transitional protective yards to be provided and maintained when certain land uses are adjacent to or directly across the street from each other to protect the uses from the traffic, noise, glare, trash, activity, vibration, odor, visual disorder and other harmful or noxious effects likely to be emitted by or associated with a more intensive use. Transitional protective yard regulations are also required to prevent adverse community appearance, to protect the character of the area, to conserve the values of buildings and land and to provide adequate light and air. Transitional protective yards of differing depths and widths are required depending upon the combination of uses and the adverse effects which the uses have. 
    10-111.2 Location and extent of protective yards. Transitional protective yards are measured from the property line of the property to be screened to vehicular surface areas, buildings, the loading, display, storage and service areas. No transitional screening shall be required in street yards provided in accordance with the provisions of section 10-112, Street yard landscape regulations. Transitional protective yards may overlap other yard areas but yard areas used as transitional protective yards must comply with the requirements of this section. Nothing contained in this section shall reduce the minimum requirements of any other yards required by this ordinance. Whenever two or more transitional yards are simultaneously applicable, as for example a property which contains two or more uses, then the more stringent regulation is controlling. If two or more different uses are present on one lot, only those uses which constitute ten percent or more of the gross floor area of the building or land area shall be considered. 
    10-111.3 Planting materials. 
1.  Trees. All deciduous trees which are planted to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall be a minimum height of eight feet in height and 13/4 inches in caliper and shall have an expected mature height of 35 feet or greater, unless subject to an overhead utility line, in which case the mature height may be less. One-half the required trees shall be locally adapted natural evergreen species, a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting. Two evergreen trees, a minimum of 41/2 feet in height at the time of planting, may be substituted for each required evergreen tree. These trees shall be distributed throughout the transitional protective yard in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
2.  Shrubs. Shrubs planted to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall be a minimum of 11/2 feet in height when planted and be expected to reach a height of six feet or greater within five years of planting. Shrubs planted on berms may have a lesser mature height provided that the combined height of the plantings and the berm after five years is at least six feet. Shrubs shall be planted in such a way as to form a continuous row, with no shrub being greater than ten feet from another as measured from the property line. Shrubs shall be planted in two or more overlapping rows, and a minimum of 50 percent of the required shrubs shall be locally adapted evergreen species. 
3.  Quantities of material required. In the required transitional protective yard, natural trees and shrubs shall be planted in the quantities shown on the chart entitled, Transitional protective yard requirements of subsection 10-111.4 (below). All required plantings shall be no further than 50 feet from the property line, which is to be screened. 
4.  Plantings within easements. With the exception of easements for overhead utility services, vegetative screening shall not be placed within a utility or drainage easement if the easement holder or the City object to such plantings. Vegetative screening shall not be placed within the flowage area of swales or drainage ditches. Should either the easement holder or the City object to vegetative screening in the easement, the required plantings shall be installed in the same number as otherwise required in the portion of the transitional protective yard remaining after exclusion of the easement area. (See subsection 10-108.4.) 
5.  Modifications and alternatives. The height and quantity of required planting materials and fencing in areas immediately contiguous to street yards required by section 10-112, may be modified as an alternate method authorized by section 10-107, when such screening will not serve any useful purpose due to the location of uses, vehicles, buildings, structures, storage, loading, display or service areas or when such screening will obstruct traffic visibility. 
    10-111.4 Determination of transitional protective yard requirements. Generally, a transitional protective yard shall be located at the perimeter of the building site along zoning district boundaries, or otherwise coincident with the edge of a specified facility that is to be screened, and shall not be located within in any portion of the public right-of-way. The following procedure shall be followed to determine the standard of transitional protective yard required along a zoning district boundary: 
Step A. Determine the zone district for the proposed development site as well as that of the abutting site(s). 
Step B. Determine the transitional protective yard standard required for each building site boundary (or portion thereof) by referring to table 10-111.4. Read down the column beneath the zone district of the proposed site development and across the row, which listed the zone district of the abutting site. The letter in the grid square where the column and the row intersect is the required standard for the transitional protective yard. 
Step C. Select one width/screening option from the appropriate group among those listed in figures 10-111.4A through 10-111.4D. Any of the listed screening variations shown on the appropriate figure shall satisfy the requirement between the abutting zone districts. (Ex: A-1, A-2, or A-3, may be used to meet the requirements for an A standard, transitional protective yard). 
Step D. When calculating required numbers of plant materials, round all fractions to the next whole number. 
Calculation of Required Plants for a C-3, Transitional Protective Yard for 275-foot Frontage Required canopy trees 275/100 x 6 = 2.75 x 6 = 16.5, round up to 17 canopy trees Required understory trees 275/100 x 3 = 2.75 x 3 = 8.25, round up to 9 understory trees Required shrubs 275/100 x 24 = 66 shrubs  





    10-111.5 Existing vegetation. 
1.  Credit for existing vegetation. So long as the required level of visual barrier is provided by the resulting transitional protective yard, existing vegetation which meets or exceeds the quantity, spacing and height standards, may be used to satisfy the requirements of subsection 10-111.3. Provided, however, no encroachments shall occur within the greater of either a seven-foot radius or one foot in diameter for each inch of circumference of the existing tree and that the provisions of subsection 10-112.6, are met. 
2.  Reduction of required plantings. The amount of required shrubs in a transitional protective yard may be reduced by 50 percent, if in that yard existing trees meeting the space, quantity and specification requirements of subsection 10-111.3, are preserved and protected from encroachment, and the reduced number of shrubs still meets the intent of this ordinance for screening at the level of the groundplane. 
3.  Supplemental plantings. Supplemental natural evergreen shrub plantings may be required, however, if it can be reasonably inferred that after five years, the existing vegetation will not continually provide a yearround foliage screen between properties from the natural grade to six feet above grade. Where such supplemental shrub plantings are required, the plantings shall have a minimum height of 11/2 feet when installed with an expected height of six feet or greater within five years after planting and shall be planted so that there are no horizontal gaps greater than ten feet between shrubs as measured along the property lines. Where the existing vegetation on site does not meet the established criteria for spacing, quantity and size of plant, then the owner shall be required to plant only those trees and shrubs necessary to meet the established standards for the transitional protective yard required for the specific situation. All plants used for this purpose shall meet the standards set out in subsection 10-111.3. 
    10-111.6 Fences, walls and earthen berms. 
1.  Installation of closed fence or solid wall. A fence or solid wall may be used as the sole means to meet the requirements of this section, only if the ground area required for transition protective yards, other than such yards for uses requiring transitional protective yard standard D, adjoining either property developed residentially or zoned for any residential use, exceeds 20 percent of the lot area. 
2.  Height requirements. See [sub]section 10-108.1, [subpart] subparagraph 1, Materials and construction standards, for standards of construction and appearance of fences. 
3.  Width of transitional protective yards with closed fences and solid walls. If a fence or wall is erected pursuant to subpart 1 of this section, the width of the transitional protective yard may be reduced to one-half the required width. 
4.  Grade changes of six feet or more. Whenever a wall or fence is authorized to be constructed, in lieu of such construction, a natural or manmade grade separation at least six feet in elevation may be substituted; provided that the side slopes of such grade are not greater than 3:1, the developing property is located at an elevation lower than the properties to be screened and the change in grade achieves a similar screening effect as the wall or fence. 
5.  Earthen berms. Any earthen berm installed in a transitional protective yard which reduces the width of the transitional yard shall be constructed to meet the standards set out in subsection 10-108.2 and shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of subsection 10-111.3. A steeper slope than that specified in subsection 10-108.2, may be used in exceptional cases when all the following are met: 
a.  The steeper slope is sufficiently stabilized; 
b.  The screening objectives of subsection 10-111.3, are better achieved; and 
c.  Physical constraints of the site prevent the use of a flatter slope. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-111) 
Sec. 10-112. - Street yard landscape regulations. 
    10-112.1 Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish a landscape planting area parallel to the recorded public street right-of-way. This area shall contain plantings of trees and other live vegetation to provide a more pleasing view from the ways of travel, to provide continuity of vegetation throughout the City, to reduce the amount of impervious surface and reduce stormwater runoff, to filter air, provide shade and otherwise improve the microclimate and to preserve a remnant of the City's natural vegetative cover. 
    10-112.2 Applicability. Any use of land, including vehicular surface areas and parking structures, established after the effective date of [the ordinance from which] this article [is derived] shall provide a street yard along any existing or proposed public street right-of-way adjacent to or adjoining the property except those portions of the lot used for driveway construction in accordance with article IX, are exempt from all street yard requirements. The street yard shall be required as follows: 
1.  For existing developed lots with unexpired building permits issued prior to the time this article becomes applicable to the property, the required street yard shall be at least five feet wide as measured perpendicular to the public street right-of-way abutting the property. 
2.  For existing undeveloped lots platted prior to the application of this article to the property, the required street yard shall be at least five and no more than 25 feet wide measured perpendicular to the public street right-of-way abutting the property. The minimum area of the street yard in square feet, shall be equal to the length of the property line measured along the right-of-way, in linear feet, times ten. Widths in excess of 25 feet in width shall not be calculated in determining the minimum area. 
3.  For all new lots developed or otherwise platted and recorded after application of this article to the property the required street yard shall be at least 71/2 and no more than 25 feet wide measured perpendicular to the public street right-of-way abutting the property. The minimum area of the street yard, in square feet, shall be equal to the length of the property line measured along the right-of-way, in linear feet, times 15. Widths in excess of 25 feet in width shall not be calculated in determining the minimum area. 
4.  For properties which are either acquired by a condemner or which have a change in the type of use which results in a change in the type of occupancy of a building, the applicable required minimum street yard width as determined in [subparts] subsections 1. through 3., above, shall be provided in the same manner as set forth in subsection 10-103.4, except that the multiplier of five contained in subsection 10-103.4, shall be increased to equal the width of the applicable required minimum street yard. 
5.  For properties which have expansions or additions made after application of this article, the required minimum street yard widths shall be provided as set forth in subsection 10-103.4. 
    10-112.3 Alternative street yards. In lieu of the average 15-foot wide street yard area required by subsection 10-112.2, a minimum street yard area equal to 12 times the length of the recorded public right-of-way abutting the property may be substituted as an alternative, provided: 
1.  An inventory of all existing trees located within the street yard and sized five caliper inches or greater is shown on the site plan, or landscape plan, when no site plan is required. The inventory shall contain as a minimum the scientific name, caliper and location of all trees identified on the inventory; and 
2.  The species of existing trees shown on the inventory should have the characteristics required in subsection 10-112.5; and 
3.  The minimum number of existing trees shown on the inventory shall equal the average rate of six caliper inches of trees for each 50-foot linear distance of the street yard measured parallel to the street; and 
4.  One or more of the following requirements are met: 
a.  All trees shown on the inventory are [to be] preserved. Preservation of existing trees shall be done in accordance with subsection 10-112.6; 
b.  Each tree shown on the inventory which is not preserved in accordance with subsection 10-112.6, is replaced with one new tree equal to one-half of the caliper of the unpreserved tree, but the maximum required replacement size need not exceed six inch caliper; or 
c.  A continuous area of the street yard equal to at least 20 percent of the street yard area remains unaffected by land disturbing activities, and that located within this undisturbed area are trees at least one inch caliper which sum total of circumference or caliper equals the circumference or caliper of all trees required in that yard. 
Note. The required number of caliper inches shall be comprised of one or more trees, provided a total of six caliper inches is provided for each 50 linear feet of frontage and that no tree less than 13/4 inches in caliper shall be credited toward this requirement. 
    10-112.4 Use of street yards. Street yards required by the provisions of this ordinance shall be landscaped and properly maintained by the owner and shall have live vegetation, groundcover, grass, trees, shrubs, and may unless otherwise prohibited include fences or walls, screening for loading, utility and display areas, and plantings for vehicular surface areas. All fences shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance. No more than 15 percent of this required protective yard shall be covered with an impervious surface which may be used without limitation for walkways, fountains or walls, but not vehicular surface, storage, utility service, display, service or loading areas. 
    10-112.5 Trees within street yards. Street yards shall contain natural trees, either existing or planted, of at least eight feet in height and 13/4 inches caliper as follows: 
1.  No street yard shall contain less than one natural tree. 
2.  Each street yard shall contain an average of at least one tree for every 50 linear feet of street yard or fraction thereof, as measured from the corners of the property and shall be located so that at least one tree is within every 100 lineal feet of street yard or fraction thereof. Such street trees shall be planted at least ten feet from any tree on the right-of-way. Along street yards for display areas, the spacing of trees may be one natural tree every 150 lineal feet of the street yard or fraction thereof. 
3.  All required trees in the street yard must be a locally adapted species with an expected mature height of 35 feet or greater and an expected crown spread of at least 30 feet or greater unless subject to an overhead power line in which case the mature height may be less. 
    10-112.6 Preservation of existing trees. Preservation of existing live trees between the principal building and the public street right-of-way can be credited towards the tree planting requirements of this section according to the following ratio: The credit toward the required number of trees shall be a number equal to the value of one-sixth the sum in inches of the caliper(s) of each preserved tree(s) but no fraction thereof. To be included in the computation for credit for existing trees, each preserved tree must be a least 13/4 inches in caliper and be uniformly encircled by a protected ground area. At a minimum, this protected ground area for an existing tree shall be the greater of either a seven-foot radius or one foot in diameter for each inch of circumference of the tree, except those trees in parking lots which are already located inside planting areas with a minimum dimension of seven feet may be used. During construction activities, the protected ground area shall be clearly marked in the field. 
No credit will be allowed for any tree proposed to be retained if there is any encroachment within the protected ground area defined by a circle which has as its center the trunk of the tree or if the tree is unhealthy or dead. The replacement of dead or unhealthy trees which are used for credit may be accomplished provided the replacement trees shall be equal to the number of credited trees. 
For the purposes of this section an encroachment is defined as any change in the natural grade, construction of impervious surfaces, trenching or excavation, storage of equipment, materials or earth and the temporary or permanent parking or circulation of vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-112) 
Sec. 10-113. - Landscape maintenance. 
    All landscaping materials shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted horticultural procedures. Any landscape material that fails to meet the minimum requirements of this article at the time of installation shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials. The person in charge of or in control of the property whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or otherwise, shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials, and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris, at all times. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one year, of notification or by the next planting period, whichever comes first; while other defective landscape material shall be replaced or repaired within three months. All fences and/or walls provided in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance shall be maintained in such manner as to preserve them structurally and present an attractive appearance. Failure to replace materials within the time period specified in said notice shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, per subsection 14-108.3. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-113) 
Sec. 10-114. - Variances. 
A.  General[ly]. Where it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of these regulations can not be met, due to unavailability of sufficient land, a variance from the provisions of this article may be sought. 
B.  Variance procedure. The owner shall submit in writing a request for variance at the time application is made for approval of a site plan. The request shall detail the reasons for such request and shall demonstrate that alternative means of compliance authorized by section 10-107, are unfeasible upon the site in question. 
C.  Administrative variances. A variance of up to 15 percent of the land area or requirement for plants may be approved by the Zoning Administrator, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the request for variance complies with all requirements of subpart D (below). 
D.  Minimum adjustments only. Any request for variance must be held to the minimum necessary. The Zoning Administrator must find that each of the following conditions apply to the particular circumstances prior to the granting of the variance: 
(1)  Practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. That strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. 
(2)  Not detrimental. That granting the application will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood of the premises. 
(3)  Maintains intent of ordinance and the development plan. That such variance is within the intent and purpose of this ordinance and will not adversely affect the community objectives of this ordinance. 
E.  Variances by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any request for variance which exceeds the standards for administrative approval may only be approved by an action of the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of article XIV, section 14-105. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-114) 
Sec. 10-115. - Technical advisory committee. 
    There is hereby created a Technical Advisory Committee which shall be comprised of the following members: 
The Zoning Administrator 
The City Engineer 
The Codes Enforcement Officer 
The City Planner 
The purpose of the Committee is to review landscaping plans presented to meet the requirements of this article and to make such recommendations and reports, as it deems necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 10-115) 
ARTICLE XI. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 13, 2016, repealed the former Art. XI., §§ 11-101-11-110, and enacted a new Art. XI as set out herein. The former Art. XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2014-21, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 24, 2014 

Sec. 11-101. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is not the purpose or the intent of these provisions to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of the provisions to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The City's regulations are set forth in an effort to regulate signs by providing an adequate means of expression and to promote the economic viability of the business community, while protecting the City and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
a.  Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
b.  Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City by preventing visual clutter that is a threat to traffic safety and is harmful to the appearance of the City. 
c.  Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for effective means of communication consistent with constitutional guarantees. 
d.  Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the regulatory authority of the City. 
e.  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication for businesses, organizations and individuals in the City. 
f.  Provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances. 
g.  Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in this article. 
h.  Regulate signs in all zoning districts in the City. 
i.  Provide a means of way-finding in the community, thereby reducing traffic confusion and congestion and improving pedestrian and traffic safety. 
j.  Preserve the City as a community that is attractive to business. 
k.  Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property while protecting First Amendment free speech rights. 
l.  Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this article. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 11-102. - General provisions, requirements and terms. 
    A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained on private property in Mt. Juliet and the Planning Region only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this section. 
A.  Effect. The effect of this section is to: 
1.  Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in residential zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this section. 
2.  Allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this section, but without a requirement for permits. 
3.  Provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances. 
4.  Regulate signs in all zoning districts in the City. 
5.  Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this section. 
6.  Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
B.  Permits required. 
1.  Applicability. No sign, except those identified in these provisions, as being exempt or not requiring a permit, shall be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a sign permit. All permanent commercial and non-commercial and temporary commercial signs shall be registered on a form provided by the City of Mt. Juliet Planning Department, prior to their construction/erection or change of design. All such signs are required to be reviewed. Signs placed prior to approval and obtaining the appropriate permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee (i.e. double permit fee). 
2.  Authority and execution. The Planning Department shall be responsible for determining compliance with this ordinance. The Planning Department shall be responsible for issuing a sign permit. 
3.  Temporary permits. Temporary commercial signs require registration, no fee is required. 
4.  Permit issuance. Upon the filing of an application for a permanent sign permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a sign, the Planning Department shall, determine whether the application is complete. If the application in not complete, the Planning Department shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies, and shall take no steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied. Once it is determined that the application is complete the Planning Department shall: 
a.  Examine the plans and specifications, and location (if required) upon which the proposed sign is to be erected, altered or relocated. 
b.  Within seven working days of receiving a complete and correct application, upon notification to the applicant and receipt of the required fees, issue a permit if the sign complies with the requirements of this ordinance, all other ordinances of the City and upon receipt of the required fee. If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed within one year, after the date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void. 
5.  Approval of electrified signs. The application for a sign permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used, require a separate electrical permit and such application may be filed with the City of Mt. Juliet Building Codes Department upon approval of the sign through the Planning Department. 
6.  Approval of ground signs. The application for a sign permit for the erection of a ground/monument sign which is in excess of four feet in height and will require footers, may require a separate building permit application and which may be filed with the City of Mt. Juliet Building Codes Department upon approval of the sign registration through the Planning Department. Approval of the sign registration through the Planning Department does not constitute approval through the Building Codes Department. 
7.  Inspection. The Planning Department may inspect, at such times as deemed appropriate, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this ordinance. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or insecure, whether in need of repair or removal, or not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this section. All other inspections, including electrical and building will be performed at the discretion of the Building Codes Department. 
8.  Revocation of Permit. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this section are mere licenses revocable at any time by the Planning Department. Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the applicant shall remove the sign or other advertising structure without cost or expense of any kind to the City. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the applicant to do so, the City may proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the applicant or property owner. 
C.  Transitional provisions. 
1.  Existing signs. All signs legally erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance are considered legal by this ordinance and may remain in place and in use, subject to certain restriction on time frames (if applicable for temporary signs), modification, replacement and other actions affecting the sign, as set forth in this ordinance. 
2.  Existing permits. All holders of permits for signs issued legally prior to the effective date of this ordinance may erect the signs which are the subject of such permits within the times allowed by such permits, and such signs shall then be treated as though they had been erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance. However, such permits may not be extended or amended unless the sign which is the subject of such permit will conform to all of the requirements of this ordinance. 
3.  Existing violations. All violations of the sign regulations repealed by this ordinance shall remain violations of this ordinances of the City of Mt. Juliet and all penalties and enforcement remedies set forth hereunder shall be available to the City of Mt. Juliet as though the violation were a violation of this ordinance. However, if the effect of this ordinance is to make a sign that was formerly nonconforming become conforming, then enforcement action shall cease except to the extent of collecting penalties (other than removal of the sign) for violations that occurred prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
D.  Nonconforming signs. The utilization of a nonconforming sign and/or sign structure, as defined herein, may continue subject to the conditions and requirements noted below. When the use of a property changes (including but not limited to the redevelopment of the site or a change in the use of the business, the sign on that property must be brought into compliance with the provision of this article. 
1.  With the exception of repairs, maintenance and alterations (allowed pursuant to state law), no alterations to a nonconforming sign/sign structure shall be allowed. Unless otherwise allowed by law, any structural or other substantial improvement to a nonconforming sign (except for printing or refinishing/refacing the surface of the existing sign face or sign structure so as to maintain the appearance) shall be deemed an abandonment of the nonconforming status and shall result in the reclassification of such sign as an illegal sign. 
2.  Prior to any new sign being permitted or constructed on any site, all nonconforming signs that do not constitute off-site signs shall be brought into full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a sign or structure declared unsafe by a City of Mt. Juliet Building Inspector. Such signs may be improved only to bring the sign in conformance with applicable safety requirements. Any structural changes outside of the context for the safety of the structure will be required to be reviewed and may be required to come into conformity with the current Sign Ordinance regulations. 
E.  Violations. Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each day such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable by a fine of no more than $500.00 per day, as well as any action permitted at law to enjoin or prevent a violation of this article. 
City of Mt. Juliet staff may immediately remove temporary commercial signs which are in violation of this article. For Permanent sign violations, please reference, section 11-109, Administration and Enforcement, subsection B for regulatory enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 11-103. - Design guidelines and standards. 
    All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Design review and conformance. Compliance with the following design standards is required for all new permanent signs including replacement signs for which a permit is required as per Appendix, Table A. The Planning Department shall, prior to the issuance of a sign permit as required, review such proposed signs and approve or deny as to conformance with the design standards contained in this ordinance. Denials and waivers, as applicable and in accordance with section 11-109, may be appealed through the Planning Commission. 
B.  Design principles. Signs should be designed with consideration to the effect the sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. Signs can complement or detract from the character of a building. Therefore, particular attention should be given to the way in which the sign will read and whether its design, size, materials, shape, illumination, location, configuration, and character are appropriate to its intended audience or whether a more appropriate sign could better serve its intended purpose and, at the same time, be less visually disruptive. 
C.  Design guidelines. 
1.  Wall signage should be consistent in size within each development and should be proportional to the building on which each sign is placed. A sign which meets the maximum size limitations may not be appropriate to the scale of the buildings, its architectural features and the character established by the adjacent buildings. 
2.  Wall signs should match the architectural character of buildings within the development and area of the building on which the sign is to be placed in terms of style, location, configuration, materials and color. 
3.  Wall signs should not obstruct or crowd architectural elements or details such as cornices, pilasters, windows and other features which define the design of the building. 
4.  Sign materials must be permanent, durable, low maintenance and of similar quality to the principal structure. Appropriate materials for ground sign background, frame, support and ornamentation includes brick, natural stone (Including panels and limitation stone), wood and EIFS or similar material when use in combination with brick or stone. 
5.  Signs consisting of plastic faced channel letters should not be more than two colors. However, this is not to say that logos and other accents combined with letters may not have other colors. Any back lighting should be white in color. 
6.  Signs should not be of a material, color or design that attracts attention excessively and disrupts the public environment. 
7.  Entire signs may not be in the shape of a product or motif, i.e. soda bottle, burger or boot, however, may contact a shape/element within the sign. 
8.  Signs should be primarily for identifying the business and not predominantly for advertising products sold or services rendered. 
9.  Ground signs shall be in monument style in nature and design. Ground signs must be placed on a base of at least a minimum base of 12 inches in height flush with the sign and ground. Any sign posts must be concealed within the base and structure of the sign, i.e. with brick columns. 
10.  The ground sign base shall be constructed of the same material as the principal building with integrated colors. Where the principal building is not constructed of brick or stone, acceptable base materials shall include, brick, stone, stucco and split face block, or other materials acceptable to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
11.  The ground sign base should be complemented by shrubs, flowers and/or other landscaping. This landscaping should be of a low-growing variety so as not to block the visibility of the sign. This landscaping should also be designed to hide or shield any external light source. 
12.  For sites with no principal building, the requirement for a monument design shall not be mandatory. However, the voluntary use of a monument sign shall use base materials as stated in [subsection] 10 above. If a monument sign is not used, supports for the sign shall include two vertical members spaced a width equal to the sign. Exposed metal, including 'painted' metal, shall not be used. 
13.  All freestanding signs will need to contact Building Codes to verify any required regulations and permits of the City of Mt Juliet Building Codes Department. 
D.  Computations. For commercial/industrial wall sign computation, see section 11-108.C.6. 
1.  Computation of sign area of individual signs. The sign area shall be determined by computing the area of the smallest square, rectangle, circle, triangle or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the sign face (including any open areas within the sign face), writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The sign face describes the entire area of a sign upon, against or through which the sign copy is placed including any background. 
2.  Computation of area of two-faced signs. Only one side of a two-faced sign shall be included in the computation of sign area. Where the inside angle of a two-faced sign exceeds 45 degrees, both sign faces shall be counted toward the sign area. 
3.  Computation of height. Sign height is measured from the average level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign structure. Average grade shall be the lower of existing grade prior to construction or newly established grade after construction. Any (berming), filling, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign, shall be computed as part of the sign height. 
4.  Lot frontage. Lot frontage is the distance for which a lot adjoins a public street from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line including the distances along not more than two streets for a corner lot or a double frontage lot. 
E.  Setbacks (temporary and permanent). 
1.  All permanent signs shall be setback at least two feet from a public right-of-way or private roadway or eight feet from the edge of pavement or back of curb, whichever is greater, unless a greater distance is required to remove such sign from the sight distance triangle, or otherwise specified by these provisions. No permanent sign shall be located within a public utility or drainage easement, without written approval from the affected agencies. 
2.  All temporary signs shall be located at least ten feet back from the street curb, edge of pavement, stabilized shoulder, or back of sidewalk, whichever is greater, unless a greater distance is required to remove such sign from the sight distance triangle, or otherwise specified by these provisions. No temporary signs, except temporary signs posted on residentially zoned property with a residential use and not impeding visibility along a public thoroughfare, shall be permitted within a public right-of-way. 
F.  Spacing. Lots shall generally be limited to one freestanding sign. In order to have additional freestanding signs the following shall be met. A maximum of two freestanding signs shall be allowed for any lot. All permanent freestanding signs on any single lot shall be a minimum of 200 feet from all other signs on the same property, whether on the same or different street frontage, and shall be measured from the closest parts of any two signs unless otherwise provided for by this article. Signs shall be oriented toward the street to which they are adjacent. 
G.  Visibility triangle. All entrance signs and freestanding signs located near the corners of an intersection, shall be located outside of the sight distance triangle. Such triangle shall be measured at a distance of 35 feet running parallel along each leg of the road right-of-way connecting them to form a triangular area. This area shall be free of any permanent or temporary signs that may inhibit a clear sight visibility for motorists. Where a private driveway and a right-of-way intersect the distance shall be measured from both sides of the center line of the driveway along the right-of-way/property line to create the visibility triangle. 
H.  Sign illumination. Sign illumination shall only be achieved through the following standards: 
1.  All electrical service to ground mounted signs shall be placed underground. Electrical service to other signs shall be concealed from public view. 
2.  General illumination standards. 
a.  Illumination should not interfere or distract from the message conveyed by the sign. 
b.  Lighting for signs shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or vehicles either in a public street or on any private premises. 
c.  The light source, whether internal to the sign or external, shall be shielded from view. This requirement is not intended to preclude the use of creative exposed lighting. 
d.  Illumination should be appropriate for the location, use and character of the neighborhood. 
e.  Illumination should seem integrated into the building façade or property/neighborhood character. 
f.  Illuminated signs should not be illuminated after 10:00 p.m. or the close of business, whichever is later. 
g.  Flashing, blinking, revolving, or rotating lights are not permitted. 
h.  All exposed conduit and junction boxes should be concealed from public view. 
3.  Internal illumination standards. 
a.  Internally illuminated sign cabinets that allow the entire face to illuminate are prohibited. 
b.  The sign background or field should be opaque and of a non-reflective material. 
4.  External illumination standards. 
a.  External lighting fixtures that project light on a sign from above or below are strongly enforced. Light fixtures supported on the front of the building cast light on the sign and a portion of the facade immediately around the sign. The visual impact of this should be considered in lighting selection. 
b.  Light fixtures should be simples and unobtrusive in appearance and size. 
c.  Light fixtures should be positioned as to not obscure the sign's message and graphics. 
d.  Light sources should be shielded and such that the light source is directed aware from passersby. Light sources should be directed against the sign such that is does not shine onto adjacent property or cause glare for motorists and pedestrians. Bare light bulbs should not be exposed. 
e.  Awnings with signage included should always be externally illuminated. 
5.  Styles of illumination. 
a.  Halo-style internal illumination-This form of internal illumination directs light to the wall behind the sign that results in a halo of light around the opaque lettering or logo. 

b.  Stencil-cut internal illumination (freestanding sign)-This form restricts the illuminated portions of the sign to the lettering or logo. The remaining face of the sign is opaque. Stencil-cut creates a sign that prevents the background of the sign from being illuminated. Only the logo and name of the brand would illuminate. 

c.  Channel-letters internal illumination-This style of sign is comprised of individual letters and symbols, each with its own internal illumination. 

d.  Push-through graphics and text-A mix between stencil-cut and channel-letters, where an opaque background like a stencil-cut, but has raised lettering or images that act similarly to channel-letters. 

6.  Preferred external illumination standards. 
a.  Goose-neck lighting-This form of external illumination consists of lamps that hang over the sign, where the lamps are an attractive architectural component of the building. 

b.  Spot or ground external lighting-This is a method of illumination where the source is shielded from public and is not an architectural component of the building or sign. 

c.  Direct lighting-Any method of external illumination where a light source is directed at a sign, and is adequately shielded to prevent light pollution on neighboring properties. 
I.  Unlawful cutting of trees and shrubs. No person may for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy or remove any trees, shrubs or other vegetation located: 
1.  Within right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done pursuant to any approved site or grading plan; 
2.  On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person doing or responsible for such work, unless the work is done pursuant to the express written authorization of the owner of the property where the trees and/or shrubs are located; or 
3.  In any area where such trees or shrubs are required to remain pursuant to an approved site plan, grading plan or plat. 
J.  Signs on undeveloped/vacant property. Signs on undeveloped/vacant property may be used for any purpose permitted by this ordinance. For the purposes of this requirement, a property is considered "developed" when it contains a permitted active principal use. Rights-of-way, fee simple land, and/or easements used for utilities, roads, railroads, and similar uses are considered "Undeveloped/Vacant property" and may not contain any type of changeable copy signs. 
K.  Municipal information signs. 
1.  The City of Mt. Juliet may install within public City rights-of-way municipal information signs. Such signs shall: 
a.  Provide directions only to locations within the corporate limits or urban growth boundary of the city; 
b.  Conform to the materials and construction standards established by the City; 
c.  Conform to standards set by the commission with their number, location and content. 
2.  The City of Mt. Juliet may install and/or authorize the placement of signs with non-commercial messages within the public City rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-29, § 1, 5-8-2017; Ord. No. 2018-28, § 1, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 11-104. - Construction and maintenance. 
A.  Code compliance. All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the current Building and the Electrical Codes as adopted by ordinance of the City of Mt. Juliet at all times. 
B.  Permanent installation required. Except for permitted flags, temporary banners/signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
C.  Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this section, at all times. Specifically: 
1.  A sign shall have no more than 20 percent of its surface area covered with disfigured, cracked, ripped/peeling paint, or other material for a period of no more than 30 days. 
2.  A sign shall not stand with bent or broken sign facing, with broken supports, with loose appendages or struts, or more than 15 degrees from vertical for a period of no more than 30 successive days. 
3.  A sign shall not have weeds, trees, vines, bird nests or other vegetation growing upon it, or obscuring the view of the sign from the street or right-of-way from which it is to be viewed for a period of no more than 30 successive days. 
4.  An internally illuminated sign shall be allowed to stand with only partial illumination for a period of no more than 30 successive days. 
5.  Damaged and/or deteriorated signs shall be restored within 60 days or removed in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 11-105. - Prohibited signs. 
    All signs not expressly permitted under this section or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Abandoned, dilapidated or obsolete signs: Such signs and all frames, supporting structure, posts and appurtenances shall be removed by the owner of the property, their agent, or person having a beneficial use of the premises upon which said sign is located. 
B.  Any commercial sign located in a residential district not otherwise provided for in this article. 
C.  Any sign that obstruct free ingress or egress through a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way. 
D.  Any sign which by reason of its location, positions, size, shape, materials or other physical characteristics poses a safety hazard to drivers, pedestrians or residents. 
E.  Animated-Other attention-attracting devices except to the extent that they conform fully to the dimensional, design, lighting and other standards applicable to a sign in the same location. Includes signs that emit audible sound, odor, visible matter (smoke, steam), projecting images, search lights, sign spinners/holders/walkers or involve the use of live animals. 
F.  Banners, beacons, pennants, and streamers, except for those otherwise provided for in this article or article 3-106.VI, Temporary Event and Use Policy. Banners erected in or over a public right-of-way or streets are specifically prohibited. 
G.  Bench signs. 
H.  Blade banners, feather flags, swoop flags, teardrop flags, vertical flag, temporary flags and similar devices. 
I.  Flashing signs, including flashing signs inside the window visible from the street (public or private). 
J.  Inflatable signs including inflated characters, lighter than air devices, and other balloon type devices not otherwise provided for within this article. 
K.  Obscene signs-Any signs that exhibits statements, words or pictures of an obscene nature, as defined by the United States Supreme Court. 
L.  Off-site signs. 
M.  Portable signs-including but not limited to, a-frame, sidewalk, sandwich board. 
N.  Projecting signs. 
O.  Roof signs, or signs extending beyond the main roofline, provided that signs may be mounted on an architectural feature extending beyond the roofline if such feature is fully enclosed and considered an integral part of the occupied space, such as an atrium or high ceiling. 
P.  Signs on natural features such as trees, vegetation and rocks. 
Q.  Signs that are painted, pasted or printed on any curbstone, flagstone, pavement, or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house numbers and traffic control signs. 
R.  Signs in the public right-of-way except as follows: 
1.  Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
2.  Public transit signs. 
3.  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes or other facilities. 
4.  Signs appurtenant to a use of public property permitted under a franchise or lease agreement with the City of Mt. Juliet. 
5.  Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way. 
S.  Signs which constitute a traffic hazard described as follows: Any sign which by reason of its location, position, size, shape or color may obstruct, impair or otherwise interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign or signal erected by a public authority. To those ends, no sign shall use the words, "slow," "stop," "caution," "yield," "danger," "warning" or "go" in a manner that misleads, confuses or distracts a vehicle driver. 
T.  Snipe signs including those utility poles, fences and benches. 
U.  Strings of lights. 
V.  Suspended signs. 
W.  Trash receptacle signs, other than listing the name and contact information for the waste company providing the receptacle. 
X.  Vehicle signs-Limited to a sign placed upon a vehicle that either advertises a business that employees or is owned by the owner of the vehicle. Such signage must be painted or wrapped. Vehicle signs cannot be hung, draped or temporarily attached for immediate removal. Specific placement for off-site advertising is not allowed. 
Y.  Any other sign not specified herein and which is not a lawful nonconforming sign. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 11-106. - Exempt and exception signs. 
A.  Signs exempt from regulation. The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this section, provided all conditions if noted are followed, and do not require a permit: 
1.  Any public, legal or official instrument, notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
2.  Traffic control signs such as stop, yield, and similar signs, the faces of which meet Department of Transportation standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort. 
3.  Signs internal to a building that are set back more than three feet from a window or door. 
4.  Non-commercial flags attached to residential structures in residential zones. 
5.  Freestanding flag poles in residential zones. 
6.  Scoreboards; athletic/ball field fence signs (cannot exceed the height of the fence). 
7.  Decals, numbers, names, addresses, hours and the like attached to doors or windows and all of which occupy a total area of two square feet or less. 
8.  Other signs and stamps required by state and federal law, provided they are of the size no greater than the minimum requirements of the law. 
9.  Time and temperature signs. 
10.  Works of art that do not include a commercial message. 
11.  Decorative signs that may be displayed on light poles within a commercial retail or planned unit development, provided such signs do not contain any commercial name, logo or commercial message. 
12.  Municipal information signs-The City of Mt. Juliet may install within public City rights-of-way municipal information signs. Such signs shall: 
a.  Provide directions only to locations within the corporate limits or urban growth boundary of the city; 
b.  Conform to the materials and construction standards established by the City; 
c.  Conform to standards set by the Commission with their number, location and content. 
d.  The City of Mt. Juliet may install and/or authorize the placement of signs with non-commercial messages within the public City rights-of-way. 
B.  Exception signs (temporary). 
1.  Non-commercial signs. Temporary non-commercial signs may be displayed on private property with permission of the property owner. There shall be a limit of two temporary, non-commercial signs posted on any lot at any given time. 60 days prior to and five days after any primary or general election, this limit shall be increased to ten temporary non-commercial signs per lot. Temporary non-commercial signs are limited to six square feet per sign face, with a maximum of two sign faces per sign, and a maximum height of four feet. A sign permit is not required for temporary non-commercial signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 1-9-2017) 
Sec. 11-107. - Allowable signs by district. 
    All signs designated in this section, and Table A shall conform to the standards established herein, In addition to those applicable standards set forth elsewhere herein. See section 11-108 for special conditions as noted in Table A. 
A.  All zoning districts. The signs listed below are allowed in all zoning districts, provided that such signs are on private property unless otherwise provided; that such signs are maintained in a manner that does not create a safety hazard; and that the specific restrictions set forth for each type of sign listed below shall apply wherever such a sign is erected, displayed or maintained: 
1.  An official sign or notice issued or required to be displayed on private property by any court, public agency or public office, whether permanent or temporary. 
2.  A traffic directional, warning or information sign authorized by any public agency, whether permanent or temporary. 
3.  A private street or road name sign located at an intersection that does not exceed two square feet per face and does not advertise any commercial name, message or logo. 
4.  Signs denoting a property as historic. Such signs shall be authorized by the State of Tennessee or Mt. Juliet Historic Zoning Commission and shall not exceed 16 square feet per sign face nor exceed nine feet in height. 
5.  Non-commercial flags/government flags/civic flags, limited to 60 square feet per face, displayed in a non-commercial manner. No flagpole shall exceed 40 feet in height in any zoning district. 
6.  Decorative flags (non-commercial). One decorative flag, limited to 24 square feet, whether temporary or permanent, may be displayed on any lot provided that it does not contain any commercial message, logo or symbol. No flag pole shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
7.  Building marker. Any permanent building marker shall be limited to four square feet of sign face and composed of materials compatible to the identified building. 
8.  All commercial window signage shall comply with the following requirements (see [section] 3-104.7.5.F for retail liquor stores) 
a.  Permanent and Temporary window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the aggregate window or door area, if such door is a see through glass door. A group of windows on a particular building elevation separated by a distinct architectural feature, other than the window frame, shall be considered a separate contiguous window area and the sign area within each contiguous window area shall not exceed 25 percent [CM 1]. 
b.  Window and door signs shall be located fully within the interior of the building and attached directly to or mounted within 12 inches of the inside of commercial type businesses. 
c.  Except otherwise provided within this section, window signage may be painted on the interior of the window with easily removable paint, constructed of paper, cloth or other like material, or internally illuminated provided that the signage is UL-approved, non-animated, does not flash, blink or otherwise contain attention getting features. LED electronic message center window signs are prohibited. 
d.  All window signs shall be conformance with all applicable safety and electrical codes. 
For all other signs, please see Table (A) for specifications and requirements by sign type and provided that such signs are on private property unless otherwise provided; that such signs are maintained in a manner that does not create a safety hazard; and that the specific restrictions set forth for each type of sign as listed in section 11-108, Special Conditions, or Appendix Table (A) permitted signs. 
Sec. 11-108. - Permitted signs. 
APPENDIX 
Table A-Sign Classifications and Types 
All Zoning Districts specifications unless otherwise provided for 
Zoning Types 
(I) All Industrial 
(R) All Residential 
(CG) Commercial General 
(CI) Commercial Interchange 
(CMU) Commercial Mixed Use 
(CNS) Convenience Neighborhood Service 
(OPS) Office Professional Service 
(CTC) Commercial Town Center District 
(CRC) Commercial Retail Center 
Specifications for permitted signs including Appendix (Table A) 
A.  Interstate radius. Signs within the interstate radius must be spaced at intervals no less than 500 feet apart. The edge of the sign face shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any public right-of-way or street. 
B.  Permanent sign setbacks. All permanent signs shall be setback at least two feet from a public right-of-way or private roadway or eight feet from the edge of pavement or back of curb, whichever is greater, unless a greater distance is required to remove such sign from the sight distance triangle, or otherwise specified by these provisions. No permanent sign shall be located within a public utility or drainage easement, without written from the affected agencies. 
C.  Special conditions by sign type. The following supplemental regulations apply to particular types of signs or to particular signs in particular circumstances. Where appropriate, the tables refer to the conditions set forth in these supplemental regulations by paragraph number within this section. See section 3-104.7 for regulations applicable to retail liquor stores. Changeable copy signs shall not be authorize for retail liquor stores. 
1.  Changeable copy. 
a.  Electronic changeable copy signs shall only be permitted for schools, churches, and City of Mt. Juliet parks and recreational facilities. 
b.  Electronic signs for fuel stations are permitted in convenience neighborhood service and commercial districts for the sole purpose of displaying fuel pricing. 
c.  With the exception of gas price signs, changeable copy signs may not be displayed on a building, window, or canopy. All changeable copy signs other than gas price signs shall be freestanding signs. Gas price signs may be mounted on a canopy or freestanding when complying with other requirements of this ordinance. 
d.  Electronic signs: the display of the message must be static for a minimum of eight seconds. When copy changes occur, they must change instantaneously with no phasing, scrolling, flashing or any other characteristic which imitates movement. 
e.  All electronic messages shall be displayed as illuminated text against a black or non-illuminated background. Black or dark text against an illuminated or bright background is not permitted. 
f.  Signs shall be used for the display of text and numbers only and no more than two colors shall be used at one time. The display of graphics, photographs, art, or other images, or the use of text/numbers to create such images shall not be allowed on electronic signs. 
g.  The area of the changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed 75 percent of the total area of the freestanding sign. 
h.  The illumination of an electronic changeable copy sign shall not exceed 0.3-foot candles over ambient lighting conditions, day or night. Measurement shall be as prescribed in the document "Recommended Brightness Levels for On-Premise Electronic Message Centers" published by the International Sign Association. All electronic signs shall be equipped with a sensor device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and each electronic sign shall be programmed to dim in accordance with ambient illumination conditions. Maximum illumination from dusk to dawn shall not exceed 500 nits. A malfunctioning sign shall be programmed to shut down. 
i.  No changeable copy sign shall be placed within 100 feet of any residential zoned property measured by a straight line. 
j.  A changeable copy sign may not constitute an off-site sign as defined herein. This rule shall not prohibit the display of non-commercial messages on changeable copy signs, including, but not limited to, announcements for nonprofit organizations and the City of Mt. Juliet. 
2.  Community facility (churches, schools, service clubs and parks and recreation facilities). Signs for community facilities, shall conform to the following provisions: 
a.  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be mounted in a flat fashion, and shall be limited to 1.5 square feet of signage per linear foot of the front facade of the building up to a maximum area of 120 square feet per sign and a maximum of four signs and 480 square feet. 
b.  Freestanding signs. A maximum of two freestanding signs shall be located on any community facility site. No more than one non-changeable copy sign and/or one changeable copy sign (manual or electronic) shall be permitted. Both signs shall comply fully with all limitations and specifications contained in this section. 
1.  Non-changeable copy sign. Signs shall be a maximum of 24 square feet per sign face, with a maximum of two sign faces, and a maximum sign height of six feet. 
2.  Changeable copy sign. (As defined in section 11-110). All signs shall conform to section 11-108.C.1, Requirements for Changeable Copy Signs (Manual and Electronic), and the following: 
a.  The maximum height of the sign, including base and frame shall be seven feet. 
b.  The maximum size of the sign shall be 32 square feet including the changeable copy and non-changeable copy portions thereof. The changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed 75 percent of the total area of the freestanding sign. 
c.  Electronic portions of the sign shall only be illuminated from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. A sleep mode shall be included in each sign and shall be programmed to comply with the time limitations of this subsection. 
d.  No sign shall be placed within 200 feet of an adjacent single-family residence. 
e.  Signs may be placed on the same or alternate street frontages so long as a minimum of 300 feet is provided between such signs. 
3.  Real estate signs (temporary). One temporary sign advertising the sale, auction, rental or lease of real estate may be displayed on the private property which is for sale, auction, rental or lease. 
a.  Residential-The maximum in residential zones is nine square feet in size and four feet in height and may be dual faced. The sign shall be maintained or replaced if damaged, torn, or otherwise defaced. 
b.  Commercial/industrial-The maximum in commercial and industrial zones is 20 square feet in size and eight feet in height. The sign shall be maintained or replaced if damaged, torn, or otherwise defaced. Signs advertising the lease or sale of commercial or industrial real property shall only be permitted for 90 days. Upon a showing that the property has not sold or been rented in such 90 day period, and such property remains available on the site wherein the sign is located, the Zoning Administrator is permitted to allow the for sale or rent sign to stand for an additional 90 day period. This process may continue until the real property is sold or leased. 
c.  On corner lots and double frontage lots, one such sign may be displayed on each of the two frontages. These two signs shall be separated by at least 100 feet. Properties in excess of three acres may include up to two additional real estate signs, provided such signs are spaced at 500-foot intervals, not located within a public right-of-way and shall not create a visibility hazard. 
These signs may remain for as long as the property is for sale, auction, rental or lease and shall be removed within three days of closing of the sale, end of the auction or rental of the premises. Setbacks shall be at least ten feet back from the street curb, edge of pavement or stabilized shoulder, and two feet from the edge of public right-of-way or private roadway, whichever is greater, unless a greater distance is required to remove such sign from the sight distance triangle or otherwise specified within these provisions. 
To accommodate an open house, an open house sign may also be placed on the property under the same size and setback requirements specified above. These open house signs shall be allowed on the day of the open house, to be removed by 10:00 a.m. the next day, and on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, regardless of the date of the open house, and removed by 10:00 a.m. on Monday. Such signs are allowed in addition to all other permitted signs. 
Temporary residential development signs-One such sign may be erected on-site per street frontage for the purpose of advertising the development of a subdivision or multifamily development (including multi-family developments zoned as CMU). The sign may remain until the sale of all subdivision lots are complete, or the construction of the multi-family development is complete. The sign has a maximum sign face area of 32 square feet per face, maximum of two sign faces and a maximum height of eight feet. 
4.  Incidental signs-Commercial tracts other than CNS Zoning. 
a.  For all commercial tracts utilizing less than eight acres of land per business/commercial use, incidental signs not exceeding two square feet in area per face. Such signs proclaiming "no trespassing," "no hunting," "no parking," "entrance," "exit," "loading only," "phone," "ATM," "open/closed," "hours of operation," and the like shall be considered incidental to the use of property. There shall be no more than one such incidental sign per 75 spaces provided for customer parking. Enter and exit signs for directing vehicular traffic to/from adjacent roadways shall not be more than three feet in height. 
b.  For all commercial tracts utilizing eight acres of land or greater per business/commercial use, incidental signs not exceeding four square feet in area per face and not to exceed six feet in height. Such signs proclaiming "no trespassing," "no hunting," "no parking," "entrance," "exit," "loading only," "phone," "ATM," "open/closed," "hours of operation," and the like shall be considered incidental to the use of property. There shall be no more than one such incidental sign per 75 spaces provided for customer parking, and said sign shall not be visible from public roadways. Enter and exit signs for directing vehicular traffic to/from adjacent roadways shall not be more than three feet in height. 
5.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Signs within the interstate radius must be spaced at intervals no less than 500 feet apart. The edge of the sign face shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any public right-of-way or street. 
b.  All permanent signs shall be setback at least two feet from a public right-of-way or private roadway or eight feet from the edge of pavement or back of curb, whichever is greater, unless a greater distance is required to remove such sign from the sight distance triangle, or otherwise specified by these provisions. No permanent sign shall be located within a public utility or drainage easement, without written from the affected agencies. 
Table B-Freestanding Signs 
Commercial Districts Other Than CNS 
Zoning District Lot Frontage (linear feet) Max. Sign Area in sq. ft. Max. Sign Faces per Sign Max. Height CG Less than 200 ft 30 2 10 CG More than 200 ft 50 2 10 CMU Less than 200 ft 30 2 10 CMU More than 200 ft 50 2 12 CI Any 40 2 12 CI within interstate radius (1) Any 240 2 75 CRC Any 50 2 10 CTC Any 40 2 8 OPS Any 30 2 7 Industrial Any 50 2 15  
**In addition to the maximum sign faces per sign as allowed above in Table B, Freestanding signs, the addition of a building/development identification sign face may be allowed, with a maximum of two sign faces, and not to exceed 15 square feet in area. 
6.  Wall signs (Commercial/Industrial Districts other than CNS). Wall signs shall be mounted in a flat fashion. For the purposes of this article, painted wall signs, awning and canopy signs shall be calculated as and deducted from the total allowable wall sign area. In no event shall awning or canopy signage exceed 30 square feet. Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted as wall signs. See below for calculations and computations: 
When more than one word, image, logo and/or trademark is attached to one elevation of a building and they are not enclosed by a box or outline, either: 
a.  Each word, image, logo and/or trademark may be considered as a separate attached sign, with the display surface are of each such sign being calculated as listed in the example below; or 
b.  Two or more of the words, images, logos and/or trademarks may be considered as one attached sign, with the display surface area of the sign being calculated as the area within an proposed rectangular box around the combination of the two or more words, images, logos, and/or trademarks, by calculating the size of multiplying height by width. 

1.  Retail or service use/individual principal entrance. The primary entrance to the occupied space shall be considered the front facade. 
Specifications. Sign area: 1.5 square feet of signage per linear foot of building elevation for the front facade space for the building, and 2.0 square feet of signage per linear foot of building elevation for the side and/or rear façade space for the building, maximum, provided that no single sign shall exceed 120 square feet, with a total signage limitation of four signs and 480 square feet per business. 
2.  Retail or service use/multiple tenants. Each business, of a retail or service nature, sharing a common entrance shall be allowed to have at least one wall sign. 
Specifications. Maximum sign face area, 20 square feet per sign face. 
7.  Wall signs-Commercial complex. 
a.  Signs for tenants with external primary entrances per occupied space, may have a wall sign with a maximum sign face area of 20 square feet, when the building shall include a primary entrance for internal tenants. Internal tenants within the same building sharing a common principal entrance shall not have external wall signs, however, the building shall be allowed a maximum of three wall signs for building identification purposes only. 
b.  Specification. External primary entrance wall signs per tenant, maximum of 20 square feet for the sign face. Building identification wall signs, no single sign shall exceed 60 square feet, and shall have a total signage limitation of three signs and 180 square feet. 
8.  Permanent residential subdivision signs. 
a.  Permanent residential subdivision signs. Such signs shall be located at the primary entrance(s) to a development as identified on a preliminary/final plan approved by the planning department. The signs shall be located on private property and may be within any platted sign and/or landscape easement or within the common open space and approved by the planning department. Such signs shall be maintained by an established property owners' association. 
b.  Specifications. One sign per entrance, with a maximum of four entrances per subdivision; maximum sign face area, 24 square feet per sign face, with a maximum of two sign faces; maximum sign height, six feet; setback, ten feet from edge of pavement or the edge of the public right-of-way, whichever is greater, unless more space is necessary to preserve the sight distance triangle. Signs shall provide landscape in the form of trees, shrubs and groundcover along with seasonal color. Walls and landscape shall be maintained by the homeowners association, if one exists. If no homeowners association exists, then the entity/person that erected the sign, or his designee, shall maintain the walls and landscape. 
9.  Flag (permanent). The display of permanent horizontal flags shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.  There shall be no more than three flagpoles per principal building on any zone lot. The poles shall be installed in concrete at least three feet deep. 
b.  There shall be no more than two flags per pole. 
c.  No flag may contain a commercial message except that one of the allowed flags may contain a commercial message in a non-residential zone. 
d.  No flagpole shall exceed 35 feet in height. Flagpoles on buildings shall not extend more than 15 feet above the highest point of the building or roof. 
e.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to review and approve, if applicable, any increases in the height of a flag pole, based on the zoning and use of the property. 
10.  Vehicle signs. Temporary vehicle signs are prohibited as noted in section 11-105, [subsection] X. Permanent vehicle signs shall be painted or vinyl wrapped, and is an ad that advertises a business that employees or is owned by the owner of the vehicle. Permanent vehicle signs cannot be specifically parked or placed for off-site advertising. 
11.  Temporary signs. 
a.  Unless otherwise provided for within this article or on Table A, temporary signs shall be limited to and not exceed a period of 30 consecutive days in a calendar year. Businesses shall be limited to a maximum of four temporary sign registration permits to be issued within a calendar year. 
b.  For a single commercial lot, that has multiple businesses located on the same lot, there shall be no more than three temporary signs allowed on the lot at any time, and each business shall be limited to one sign in accordance with the time frame and sign limitations as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016; Ord. No. 2018-26, § 1, 7-9-2018) 
Sec. 11-109. - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  Waivers and variances. The Regional Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve increases in sign area for the following uses and as prescribed in [subsections] 1-4 below: 
1.  Wall signs for community facilities. 
2.  Wall signs for "big box" buildings in commercial districts other than CNS may be increased a maximum of 50 percent above the allowances in 11-108.C.6, Wall Signs. A "big box" building shall have a front dimension greater than 200 lineal feet and a minimum gross floor area of 75,000 square feet. 
3.  Wall signs for industrial buildings in all industrial districts may be increased a maximum of 50 percent above the allowances in 11-106.5(a), provided that the building has a front dimension greater than 300 lineal feet and a minimum gross floor area of 100,000 square feet. 
4.  Wall signs for buildings in commercial districts other than CNS, with four stories or more, shall not exceed 175 square feet in size, if approved by the Regional Planning Commission. 
5.  In making their decision, the Regional Planning Commission shall approve additional sign area under this section when it has been determined that the requested signage is in proportion and scale to the size of the building façade to which it is to be installed. 
B.  Regulatory enforcement. The sign administrator and/or his designees are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. This authority empowers such individuals to perform any necessary inspections, including entering upon private property, and to issue related citations for the enforcement of this article. 
1.  Violation notice. The sign administrator or his designee shall order the removal of any sign permanently erected or maintained in violation of this article, providing ten days' written notice to the owner of the premises upon which the offending sign is located to achieve compliance with provisions of this article. If, after ten days, the property owner has failed to achieve compliance with this article, a citation to municipal court shall be issued. However, when good faith efforts to bring a sign into compliance have begun within ten days of notice of violation, the sign administrator may extend the time period for compliance with this article to a period not to exceed 30 days. Temporary commercial signs may be removed immediately upon notice of a violation. Temporary non-commercial signs will receive a 24-hour notice prior to removal. 
2.  Impoundment/disposal of signs. The sign administrator, the municipal codes officer and their designees shall have the authority to remove without notice any illegal sign on public property or a public right-of-way, or any illegal sign attached to trees, fences, posts, utility poles or other natural features. Such signs shall be considered litter and shall be subject to disposal. 
3.  The sign administrator, the municipal codes officer and their designees shall have the authority and discretion to remove, without prior notice, any sign on public or private property which, due to its physical condition and/or location, constitutes an immediate threat to the safety of citizens or other passersby. Notice shall, however, be provided to the landowner within ten days of removal of a permanent sign on private property. 
4.  Each day that a violation of this ordinance remains shall constitute a separate violation of this ordinance for purposes of the court's assessment of fines or penalties. 
5.  In addition to other remedies here in under, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
C.  Conflict. In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part hereof, the City, and any other provision of this Code, the provision that establishes the higher standard shall prevail. 
    The provisions of this sign ordinance control signage in the City. Any other provisions of the City zoning ordinance which purport to control signage are subordinate to the provisions of this ordinance, unless specifically stated otherwise in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 11-110. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this article. The definition of the singular form of any defined term also applies to the plural form of the same term. 
    Abandoned sign means a sign that was lawfully erected on the property in conjunction with a particular use, that use having been subsequently discontinued for a period of 120 days or more, or a lawfully erected temporary sign for which the time period allowed for display of the sign has expired. 
    A-frame (portable, sidewalk, sandwich board) means a "sandwich-board" style sign that is anchored to a concrete sidewalk outside of the public right-of-way. The term "anchored" means tie-downs, weights or other methods of preventing movement because of winds. 
    Accessory sign [means] a sign, generally informational or directional, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," or other similar devices. 
    Address sign [means] the official street address of a building or part thereof. 
    Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, or any sign that uses fade in/fade out, marching, rolling, flashing, scrolling, or other special effects created with lights, or other means (LED, LCD and similar technology whether now existing or hereafter created). A sign on which any message changes more frequently than every eight seconds shall be considered an animated sign. Animated attention-attracting devices may or may not convey a message and may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Search lights. 
2.  Beacons. 
3.  Rope and or string lights. 
4.  Neon lights, except as an incidental sign i.e. open/close sign and a marquee for a movie theater. 
5.  Sign spinners and/or persons in costumes or any other animated sign design to attract attention. 
    Awning sign [means] any sign, which is painted, printed, sewed, or otherwise attached to an awning. For purposes of this article, signage on two panels of an awning counts as one sign for purposes of calculating total number of allowable signs. 
    Balloon [means] any spherical shaped inflatable device (excluding mylar balloons) 14 inches or less in diameter, tethered in a fixed location. Often used for promotional events and grand openings. (*See Inflatable) 
    Banners, pennants and streamers means any sign of fabric or other flexible material that is mounted to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or otherwise mounted to allow movement caused by wind. Flags shall not be considered as banners under this article. 
    Beacon . See Animated. 
    Building identification marker means any sign indicating the name of a building or date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
    Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of, attached to, or made up of an awning, canopy, or other protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
    Changeable copy sign (manual) means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign, and without the aid of lighting or electronic means. All words, text, or other display shown on a sign at one time shall be considered to be one message. 
    Changeable copy sign (electronic) means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign, with the aid of lighting (LED or otherwise) or electronic means. All words, text, or other display shown on a sign at one time shall be considered to be one message. A sign on which any message changes more than every eight seconds shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not an electronic changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
    Commercial complex . 
1.  Two or more buildings proposed for occupancy by commercial activities constructed or to be constructed upon one zone lot; or 
2.  Two or more principal commercial uses or occupancies located upon one zone lot. 
    Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, mural, or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
    Community facilities are churches, schools, service clubs and parks and recreation facilities. 
    Construction sign means a sign conveying information about a building project, such as the name and use of the building being constructed, and the names of architects, engineers, contractors and other persons involved with the construction project. 
    Decorative artwork {means] exterior works of art, such as statues, murals, and super graphics that do not advertise a product, service, or business; may include vertical banners attached at two ends to a light pole. 
    Dilapidated sign means any sign that is structurally unsound, has defective parts, or is in need of painting or other maintenance. 
    Directional sign means a permanent sign erected for or by a public entity for purposes of identification, direction or public safety. 
    Directory development sign means a sign providing orientation within an office or commercial subdivision, listing such information as on-site businesses and other tenants and their respective activities. 
    Façade [means] the entire wall of any side of a building, including the wall [CM2] face, parapet, facis, windows, door, canopy and roof on any complete elevation. 
    Flag means any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols that is used as a symbol of a governmental, commercial, or non-commercial entity. 
1.  Commercial flag means any flag which displays a commercial name, message, logo or symbol. 
2.  Decorative flag means any flag which displays any holiday or seasonal insignia, design or the like which does not include any commercial name, message, logo or symbol. 
3.  Non-commercial/government/civic flag means any flag displaying a name, message, logo or symbol of any governmental, religious, civic or nonprofit agency. 
    Flashing Sign [means] any illuminated sign whose motion or visual impression primarily changes through electronic means. Said signs include visual simulation of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, or expanding or contracting light patterns. 
    Freestanding/ground sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are anchored in the ground and that are independent of any building or other structure. Freestanding signs include those that are mounted on a pole, pylon, or designed with a monument base. 
    Front facade means the front elevation of a building that faces the front property line, as recorded on the plat and/or site plan. If a structure is located on a corner parcel, the side which includes the primary entrance shall be considered the front facade. If a structure located on a corner parcel contains a primary entrance on more than one side, the longer side with a primary entrance shall be considered the front facade. 
    Illegal sign means any sign which is a prohibited sign or does not comply with the requirements established herein, is not a lawful nonconforming sign and is not exempted by law from the requirements established herein. 
    Illuminated sign (internally) means any sign that transmits light through its face or any part thereof. 
    Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "exit," "loading only," "no trespassing," "no hunting," "phone," "ATM," "open/closed," "hours of operation," etc. 
    Inflatable sign [means] any sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gases contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. A temporary inflated sign, which may be stationary or mobile that is used to attract attention, which may or may not bear a message. An inflatable stationary sign is anchored in such a fashion that does not allow it to move. An inflatable mobile sign is tethered so that it moves and free floats. For purposes of this definition and ordinance, a simple helium balloon is not considered to be an inflatable sign. 
    Lot frontage means the distance for which a lot line adjoins a public street from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line including the distances along not more than two streets for a corner lot or a double frontage lot. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to, or made part of, a marquee or other permanent roof-like structure that projects beyond a building face and is not supported from the ground. 
    Menu board means a structure primarily designed for the display of menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through or curbside service. 
    Monument sign. See freestanding/ground. 
    Mural [means] painting or other work of art executed directly on a wall. See decorative artwork. 
    Non-commercial means not naming, advertising, or calling attention to a business or commercial product, service, or activity. However, where the name of a business is merely incidental to the primary purpose of a sign displayed on residential property, such as may be the case with a real estate sign or baby announcement, such sign shall be deemed non-commercial. This exception does not apply to at-home businesses. 
    Nonconforming sign or sign structure means any existing permanent sign or sign structure which does not conform to the provisions of this article, but was lawfully erected and complied with the sign regulations in effect at the time it was erected. 
    Off-site sign means any sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, use, or entertainment not exclusively related to, located on, or provided by the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
    On-site sign means any sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, use, or entertainment that is related to, located on, or provided by the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. In the case of a real estate office, a sign displaying information about properties that are off-premises but which are offered for sale or rent by the business on-premises shall be considered an "on-site" sign. 
    Painted wall sign means any sign or display painted directly on any exterior surface, exclusive of window or door. See Murals also. 
    Pennant. See Banners, pennants and balloons. 
    Permanent sign means any sign that is intended for other than temporary use or a limited period. A permanent sign is generally affixed or attached to the exterior of a building, or to a pole or other structure, by adhesive or mechanical means, or is otherwise characterized by construction materials, a foundation or anchoring indicative of an intent to display the sign for more than a limited period. 
    Pole sign [means] a freestanding sign supported wholly by one pole placed in the ground. 
    Political preference sign means any temporary sign erected on private property for the purpose of supporting a political candidate, stating a position regarding a political or ideological issue or similar purpose. 
    Portable sign means any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated, and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure. Portable signs include such signs as; A-frame sign; or any sign attached to or painted on a vehicle or trailer, parked and visible from the public right-of-way for more than four consecutive hours or more than eight total hours between sunrise and sunset. For the purposes of this article, portable signs shall not be considered permanent signs. Real estate signs and other temporary signs which are otherwise provided for in this article shall not be considered portable signs for purposes of this article. As to vehicles, portable sign shall not include a vehicle sign on which an ad is placed that advertises a business that employs or is owned by the owner of the vehicle. Such portable vehicle signs are permitted. 
    Projecting sign means any sign, other than a wall sign, whose leading edge extends beyond the building or wall to which it is affixed, forming an angle with said building or wall. Typically will extend laterally more than 18 inches from the face of such wall. 
    Public right-of-way/public way means a strip of ground dedicated for public use, usually for a public street, public infrastructure and/or waterway. For the purposes of this article, such rights-of-way shall be considered to extend a minimum of ten feet from the edge of pavement, or to the dedicated right-of-way boundary, whichever is further. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. 
    Roofline means the highest horizontal point of the wall visible to the public, excluding any architectural feature which extends above such apparent horizontal roofline if such feature is fully enclosed and considered an integral part of the occupied space, such as an atrium or high ceiling. 

    Roof sign means any sign erected wholly or partially above the roofline. 
    Scoreboard means a structure located within an athletic field, displaying changing scores and related information; provided, however, the scoreboard may also display additional content, including but not limited to the names and logos of any sponsors. 
    Sidewalk sign means a "sandwich-board" style sign that is anchored to a concrete sidewalk outside of the public right-of-way. The term "anchored" means tie-downs, weights or other methods of preventing movement because of winds. 
    Sign means any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce or identify a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind. 
    Sign administrator means the person designated by the City Manager as the staff member assigned to oversee the enforcement and interpretation of this article. 
    Sign area means square foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign face. With respect to signs that are composed of individual symbols, letters, figures, illustrations, messages, forms, or panels, sign area shall be considered to include all such components together with their background, surrounding frame, and any cutouts or extensions. The sign area shall not include any supporting structure or bracing. 
    Sign face means the entire area of a sign upon, against or through which sign copy is placed including any background. 
    Sign structure means any structure that supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign, including any decorative cover for the sign structure. This definition shall not include a building, fence, wall or earthen berm. 
    Snipe sign means any sign that is affixed by any means to trees, rocks, utility poles, light poles, fences or other similar structures or objects, where the sign does not qualify as an incidental sign allowed pursuant to section 1-103 herein. 
    Special events sign [means] any sign advertising special temporary events, such as carnivals, festivals, exhibits, and parades, but not including promotional sales or grand opening signs. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into smaller tracts for any planned, self-contained residential or office development which, for the purpose of this article, shall initially consist of a minimum of 20 acres or shall create 20 or more individual lots. 
    Subdivision sign means any sign located at the entrance to a subdivision as defined in this article, for the purpose of identifying the subdivision. 
    Subdivision temporary development sign means any temporary sign for the purpose of advertising the sale of lots and the development of the subdivision. The names of participating home builders may be included on such signs. For purposes of this article, such signs shall not be classified as the same as a construction sign. 
    Suspended sign means a sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
    Temporary sign means any sign not permanently mounted, with any message that is intended for temporary use and a limited period of time as specified, as allowed by this article. Temporary signs include but are not limited to political preference signs, construction signs, ideological signs, yard sale signs, help wanted signs and banners which are allowed pursuant to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. If sign display area or structure is permanent but the message displayed is intended to be displayed for a temporary period then such a sign shall not be regarded as a temporary sign. See article 3-106.VI, Signs, for temporary uses and events, for signs such as grand openings, now open, commercial sales events, nonprofit festivals, and other special events. 
    Time and temperature portion of a sign means a sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature. 
    Two sign faces means any sign with two parallel, or nearly parallel, faces back-to-back and constructed on a single set of supports, with messages visible on either side, or a V-type sign with a common support in the center of the V, where the inside angle of the V does not exceed 45 degrees. The width of a sign cabinet (measurement from face to face) shall be the minimum necessary to contain the working components of the sign. 
    Vehicle sign [means] flat, one dimensional signs painted or placed magnetically or otherwise attached on the side of vehicles as long as no other structural support is added to the vehicle. Advertising on vehicles for sale at bona fide automobile dealerships are excluded from this definition. 
    Wall sign means any sign, other than a projecting sign, that is attached parallel to or painted on any wall of any building, awning or canopy and projects from the plane of the wall, canopy or awning less than ten inches. This definition shall not include freestanding walls or multiple sign surfaces. Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted as wall signs. 
    Window sign means any sign, graphic, or interior design element placed upon the inside or outside of the window pane, or setback less than five feet from the window pane, and used to advertise, announce, or identify a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind, or to draw visual attention to the business or use, and which is visible from off-site or the public right-of-way. For purposes of this article, window signs may be permanent or temporary and are subject to applicable provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2016) 
ARTICLE XII. - ENVIRONMENTAL AND OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 12-101. - Environmental performance standards. 
    12-101.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish development standards for environmentally sensitive land areas, in a manner that provides for reasonable use of land while retaining to the maximum extent possible environmentally sensitive portions in a predeveloped state. These provisions are predicated on the concept that land use policy decisions are made in the context of land characteristics. Optimally, these characteristics include all physical as well as locational characteristics of a development site. The requirements and standards of this section are intended to promote low-impact development of identified environmentally sensitive areas by the use of incentives aimed at minimizing environmental disturbance. 
    12-101.2 Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable to the following environmentally sensitive lands: 
1.  Steep hillsides. The hillside development standards apply to predevelopment conditions for new development on steep slopes. 
2.  Special flood hazard areas. The floodplain development standards apply to predevelopment conditions for new development within "areas of special flood hazard" identified in article VIII of this ordinance. 
3.  Problem soil areas. The problem soils development standards apply to predevelopment conditions for new development located within the listed soil types as identified in the Wilson County Soil Survey (USDA, Soil Conservation Service). The groundwater protection standards developed herein shall apply to any lot not served by public water and/or sewer. 
4.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Any construction, development or use initiated pursuant to any valid building permit or approved final site development plan issued or approved prior to adoption of this ordinance. 
b.  Any essential public utility facility, system or roadway initiated to provide utility services or access to a property. 
c.  Repair or replacement to an existing structure or building that does not increase the impervious surface area of the site more than 25 percent. 
d.  Construction of a single-family or duplex dwelling on a lot which was platted and recorded at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
    12-101.3 Variable lot size option. Within development sites that contain steep slopes, areas subject to flooding or problem soils the clustering of residential lots on portions of a development site that are not subject to such problems is strongly encouraged. Within such developments, the provisions of article V, subsection 5-104.3, Variable lot residential development, shall apply. Portions of the development site within variable lot size developments that contain slopes of 20 percent or greater, are subject to flooding or are identified as wetlands shall be retained as open space. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 12-101) 
Sec. 12-102. - Hillside development standards. 
    12-102.1 Residential sites. Residential development on property that includes slopes of 18 percent or greater shall minimize changes to grade, cleared area, and volume of cut and fill on the site and shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Single- and two-family dwellings. 
a.  Site plan required. Any lot two acres or less in size that is created for use as a building site for a single- or two-family dwelling shall be considered a critical lot. Approval of a site plan prepared by a registered engineer containing the information required by subsection 4-102.103, Lots located on steep slopes, of the subdivision regulations shall be required. 
b.  Minimum lot size. Within areas of steep slopes the following minimum lot size provisions shall apply: 
Natural Slope Minimum Lot Size Less than or equal to 18% See table 5-103A Greater Than 18% Twice the minimum zone lot area for the district in which the unit is located  
2.  Multifamily development density reductions. In all multifamily (RM) zone districts manipulation of natural slopes shall result in the following reductions in density permitted for those portions disturbed: 
Multifamily Density Adjustment Factors Natural Slope Standard Density Adjustment Factor Effective Density ;lt;15% See table x 1.0 = Effective ;gt;15% and ;lt;20% 5-103A x 0.5 = Effective ;gt;20% x 0.0 = Effective  
    12-102.2 Nonresidential sites. 
1.  Reductions in allowable impervious surface ratio (ISR). In all nonresidential districts, manipulation of natural slopes shall result in the following reductions in allowable impervious surface ratio (ISR) for those portions disturbed: 
Nonresidential ISR Adjustment Factors Natural Slope Standard ISR Adjustment Factor Effective ISR ;lt;15% See tables x 1.0 = Effective ;gt;15% and ;lt;25% 6-103A and x 0.5 = Effective ;gt;25% 7-103A x 0.0 = Effective  
2.  Grading standards for hillside sites in nonresidential zone districts. Grading standards for hillside sites in nonresidential zone districts shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimal disruptions. For lots or parcels containing natural slopes of 20 percent or greater, approval of a site development plan shall be based upon a demonstration that the development plan minimizes disturbance to these slopes. Architectural and engineering features that reduce unnecessary encroachment on steep slopes may include, but are not limited to, use of retaining walls and structural foundations to return to natural grade. 
b.  Slope stabilization. Finished slopes shall be stabilized by perennial vegetative cover. Slope face stabilization by use of rip-rap or hydraulically applied concrete is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 12-102) 
Sec. 12-103. - Development standards for flood hazard areas. 
    12-103.1 Filling permitted. 
1.  Filling of land located outside the regulatory floodway. Filling of land situated within the portion of the floodplain which lies outside the "regulatory floodway" (as defined by this ordinance) is permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  All filling shall comply with all provisions contained in article VIII, section 8-301, Floodplain district regulations. 
b.  No filling shall be permitted without a detailed plan prepared and sealed by a licensed engineer and approved by the City Engineer. 
c.  Any plan for placing fill material shall demonstrate that the amount of fill material being located within an area of special flood hazard is less than or equal to material being removed from such area. 
d.  No encroachments, including fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other developments shall be located within an area of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.1-foot during the occurrence of the base flood discharge at any point within the community. The engineering certification shall be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
e.  Where fill material is used such material shall sufficient to raise the site to an elevation at least equal to the height of the regulatory flood. 
2.  Status of filled sites. Any site which is filled in accordance with the provisions of subpart 1 of this section shall be subject to all provisions of article VIII, unless and until such site is formally removed from the area of special flood hazard by action of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Any such site which is formally removed from the area of special flood hazard by action of the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall following the date of such action no longer be subject to the provisions of article VIII, section 8-301, Floodplain district regulations. 
    12-103.2 Status of other sites. Any site located within an area of special flood hazard, other than sites which have been filled as provided in subsection 12-103.1, may be developed only in full compliance with the provisions of article VIII, section 8-301, Floodplain district regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 12-103) 
Sec. 12-104. - Operational performance standards. 
    12-104.1 Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to provide appropriate standards relating to the operation of certain activities throughout the City. Such operations may create or maintain such excessive noise, vibration, air pollution, odor, or electromagnetic interference as to be a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare. These standards are therefore provided to protect the public interest and promote the public health and welfare. 
    12-104.2 Applicability. 
1.  In all districts every building or other structure or tract of land that is established, developed or constructed shall comply with each and every performance standard contained in this section, as applicable. 
2.  When the use or building or other structure is extended, enlarged or reconstructed after the effective date of this zoning ordinance, the applicable performance standards shall apply with respect to such extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion or portions of such use or building or other structure. 
3.  In the case of any conflict between the activity type and the performance standards, the latter shall control. 
4.  The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding the issuance after the effective date of this ordinance of any zoning permit or certification of zoning compliance. 
5.  In case of conflict between the performance standards set forth herein and any rules or regulations adopted by any other governmental agencies, the more restrictive shall apply. 
    12-104.3 General exemptions. The following activities or sources are exempt from these regulations: 
1.  Temporary construction, excavation and grading. 
2.  Demolition activities which are necessary and incidental to the development of facilities on the same lot, on another of several lots being developed at the same time, or on the public right-of-way or easement for a community facility activity. 
3.  Aircraft, railway and operating motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 12-104) 
Sec. 12-105. - Specific standards. 
    12-105.1 Noise. 
1.  Applicability. These standards apply to noise from any machinery or equipment that is part of or operated within any development provided for in this ordinance, including continuous and intermittent noise, noise emitted by speaker boxes and any other commercial or industrial activities which are under the control of the occupant of a building site. 
2.  Method of measurement. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter which meet the standards pertinent for type 52A, meters of the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. Noise levels shall be measured using an A-weighted sound pressure level scale. Impact noises, produced when two or more objects strike each other, shall be measured using the fast response of the sound level meter and other noises using the slow response. For purposes of this ordinance, impact noises shall be considered to be those noises whose peak values are more than three decibels higher than the values indicated on the sound level meter. 
3.  Required performance level. The maximum permitted sound pressure levels in decibels across lot lines and district boundaries shall be in accordance with the following table. The [following] table shall be used to determine the maximum noise level, measured in A-weighted decibels, which shall be permitted at the property line of the closest use in each of the following categories: 
Receiving Land Use 
Category Sound Level Limit (dBA) 7:00 a.m.-8:00 p.m. 8:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. Residential 55 50 Community facility 55 50 Commercial 65 60 Manufacturing 75 75 Agricultural and extractive 75 75  
    12-105.2 Vibration. 
1.  Applicability. These standards are to apply to the operation of any device that creates a vibration above the vibration threshold (see subpart 2, below) at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 150 feet from the source if on public space or public right-of-way. These standards do not apply to blasting operations which are conducted in connection with construction activities. Blasting operations shall be controlled as provided in appropriate sections of the Tennessee Code and any locally adopted ordinances or regulations. 
2.  Method of measurement. Vibration displacement shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular directions. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residential district boundary line as described herein. The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined by the following formula: 
KD = F Where: K = A constant to be determined by reference to the tables below D = Displacement (in inches) F = The frequency of the transmitted vibration (in cycles per second)  
3.  Required performance level. No activity or operation shall cause vibrations in excess of the maximum displacement permitted at the points described below for the district indicated. The maximum permissible displacement shall be determined by the use of the formula presented in subpart 2 of this section and the appropriate K constant, shown in the [following] tables: 
Values of K to be Used in Calculating Permissible Vibration in the I-R District Location K On or beyond any adjacent lot line Continuous 0.015 Impulsive 0.030 Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.075 On or beyond any residential district boundary line Continuous 0.003 Impulsive 0.006 Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015  
Values of K to be Used in Calculating Permissible Vibration in the I-G and I-S Districts [Location] K On or beyond any residential district boundary line Continuous 0.006 Impulsive 0.012 Less than eight pulses per 24-hour period 0.030  
    12-105.3 Smoke and particulate matter. Any land use or other activity which involves the emission of smoke, particulate matter, or other air pollutants shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in state and federal statutes and regulations regarding the emission of air pollutants. Any such land use or other activity shall also obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and permits from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    12-105.4 Odor. 
1.  Applicability. Any use established in an industrial district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing noxious odorous materials set forth, hereinafter, for the district in which such use is located. No use already established on the effective date of this ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with the provisions of this section. In addition, to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the emission of noxious odorous matter in such a manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful. 
2.  Required performance level. 
a.  Standards applicable within I-R districts and at any boundary of a residential district. Within any I-R district and along any boundary separating any industrial district from any residential district, the emission of noxious odorous matter in such quantities as to be detectable at any point along lot lines when diluted in the ratio of one volume of noxious odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air is prohibited. 
b.  Standards applicable within I-G and I-S districts. Within any I-G or I-S district, except along any residential district boundary where the provisions of subpart a, above, shall apply, the emission of noxious odorous matter in such quantities as to be detectable at any point along lot lines when diluted in the ratio of one volume of noxious odorous air to eight or more volumes of clean air is prohibited. 
    12-105.5 Toxic, hazardous and radioactive matter. 
1.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all uses and activities located within any zoning district. 
2.  Continuous compliance with federal, state and local laws and regulations required. Any land use or activity which involves the use of toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials shall comply at all times with all applicable standards set forth in local, state and federal statutes and regulations regarding the use, storage, transportation, emission and disposal of such materials. Any such land use or other activity shall also obtain and maintain all necessary licenses from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
3.  Required performance level. In all zoning districts inclusive, no use shall for any period of time discharge across the boundaries of the lot where it is located toxic matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business. 
    12-105.6 Glare. 
1.  Applicability. The standards contained within this section shall apply in all commercial and industrial districts and to all community facilities activities located within any district. 
2.  Required performance level. 
a.  All site lighting shall be shielded so that substantially all directly emitted light falls within the property line. No illumination in excess of one-half footcandle shall be permitted within the boundaries of any adjacent residentially developed property. A footcandle is the illumination at all points one foot distance from a uniform point source of one candlepower. 
b.  All exterior building floodlights shall be shielded so that all of the light falls upon either the surface of the structure or on the ground. 
c.  No illumination shall produce direct, incident, or reflected light that interferes with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public streets. Lighting prohibited by this provision shall include, but not be limited to: 
i.  Any light that may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device; 
ii.  Any animated, flashing or changing intensity lights, except for temporary holiday displays. 
    12-105.7 Fire and explosive hazards. 
1.  Applicability. The standards contained within this section shall apply in all commercial and industrial districts and to all community facility activities located within any district. 
2.  Required performance level. 
a.  All flammable solid, liquid and gaseous substances shall be stored and used in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes and regulations. 
b.  In all nonresidential zoning districts, the storage or use of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. 
c.  In all nonresidential zoning districts, the storage or use of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted, provided that either of the following conditions is met. Free or active burning to intense burning is a rate of combustion described by material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples include sawdust, powdered magnesium, pyroxylin and other solids deemed by the fire marshal to have equivalent burning characteristics. 
i.  Solid materials or products shall be stored or used within completely enclosed buildings having no less than two-hour fire resistant exterior walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system; or 
ii.  Said material, if stored outdoors, shall be no less than 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
d.  Storage tanks for flammable liquids and gasses shall be located no closer than 50 feet to any lot line. 
    12-105.8 Electromagnetic interference. In all districts, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with radio and television reception on a property beyond the lot line on which such activity exists. 
    12-105.9 Nonconforming by reason of operational performance standards. Any use existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or subsequent amendment as applicable and permitted by right that does not meet the requirements of one or more of the operational performance standards established explicitly in this section or by reference shall be subject to the provisions of article XIII, subsection 13-102.11, Special provisions pertaining to uses not conforming to performance standards. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 12-105) 
ARTICLE XIII. - PROVISIONS GOVERNING NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES 

Sec. 13-101. - Statement of purpose. 
    The districts established in this ordinance (as set forth in district regulations, in articles V through XII) are designed to guide the future use of land in Mt. Juliet, Tennessee, by encouraging the development of desirable residential, commercial and industrial areas with appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses and thus promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    As a necessary corollary, in order to carry out such purposes, nonconforming uses of land that adversely affect the development of such areas must be subject to certain limitations. The provisions governing nonconforming uses set forth in this article are, therefore, established to contain the existing undesirable conditions resulting from such incompatible nonconforming uses, which are detrimental to the achievement of such purposes. While such uses are generally permitted to continue, this ordinance is designed to restrict any expansion of such uses beyond the site which the use occupied upon the effective date of this ordinance. 
    In the case of buildings or other structures not complying with the bulk regulations or open space provisions of this ordinance, the provisions governing noncomplying buildings or other structures set forth in this article are established in order to permit the continued use of such buildings or other structures, but to limit the creation of additional noncompliance or increase in the degree of noncompliance. 
    These provisions are thus designed to preserve the character of the districts established in this ordinance in light of their suitability to particular uses, and thus to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 13-101) 
Sec. 13-102. - Provisions governing nonconforming uses. 
    13-102.1 Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable to all uses which are not permitted within the districts in which they are located. Additionally, buildings and other structures located within the floodplain are considered within the regulation of nonconforming uses. 
    13-102.2 Construction or use permit approved prior to ordinance adoption. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, site or designated use of any development, building, structure, or part thereof where official approvals and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto, the construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of this ordinance and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six months period, and not discontinued until completion except for reasons beyond the builder's control. In the event that the activity or construction of such building or other structures is not substantially underway and being diligently pursued within the six-month period following issuance of a building permit, then such permit shall automatically lapse and the provisions of this ordinance shall apply. 
    13-102.3 Conditional use; status and alteration. Whenever the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the zoning ordinance has authorized any use which is not permitted as of right by issuing a variance, exception, or permit to locate in a district, such authorization may be continued subject to the time of approval of said variance, exception, or conditional use permit, including any time period established for the continuation of such use. However, any change of use, alteration or expansion is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    13-102.4 Repairs and alterations. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
    13-102.5 Continuation of nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use which existed lawfully at the time of enactment of this ordinance and which remains nonconforming under the provisions contained herein or any use which shall become nonconforming upon enactment of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments thereto, may be allowed to continue in operation and be permitted provided that no change in use (see subsection 13-102.6 of this section) is undertaken. 
    13-102.6 Change of nonconforming use. 
1.  General provisions. For the purpose of this article, a change in use is a change to another use either under the same activity type or any other activity type or major class of activity; however, a change in occupancy or ownership shall not, by itself, constitute a change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use, and the applicable bulk regulations and accessory off-street parking requirements shall apply to such change of use or to alterations made in order to accommodate such conforming use. 
2.  Land with incidental improvements. In all districts, a nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall be changed only to a conforming use. 
3.  Nonconforming to conforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
    13-102.7 Expansion of nonconforming uses. Any use which shall become nonconforming upon enactment of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments thereto, may be allowed to expand operations and construct additional facilities which involve an actual continuance and expansion of the nonconforming use provided that any such expansion shall not violate the provisions set out below. 
1.  Land with incidental improvements. In all districts, a nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be allowed to expand through the addition of buildings or other structures. 
2.  Adequate space for expansion. No expansion or any nonconforming use shall infringe upon, or increase the extent of any infringement existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, upon any open space required by this ordinance. 
3.  Application of other provisions to expanded facilities. In the event that any proposed expansion or addition is valued at less than 50 percent of the assessed valuation (as recorded on the most current edition of the property tax records) of the improvements located upon the site, all provisions of this ordinance other than those which would act to eliminate the use of the property, shall be applicable to the expansion or addition. In the event, however, that the proposed expansion or addition is valued at 50 percent or more of the assessed valuation of the improvements located upon the site, all provisions of this ordinance other than those which would act to eliminate the use of the property, shall apply both to the existing facilities, as well as the expansion or addition. 
4.  Expansion limited. Any expansion of a nonconforming use permitted under the provisions of this article shall take place only upon the zone lot(s) on which said use was operating at the time the use became nonconforming. Nothing within this provision shall be construed so as to permit expansion of any nonconforming use through the acquisition and development of additional land. Where parking, open space or other provisions of this ordinance may so require, future expansions or additions shall be limited to that which can be accommodated without creating any new noncompliance. 
5.  Expansion upon land subject to flood. No expansion of any nonconforming use shall violate the provisions of subsection 13-102.10, Special provisions governing nonconforming buildings within floodplain districts. 
    13-102.8 Damage or destruction. Any use which shall become nonconforming upon enactment of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments thereto, may be permitted to reconstruct damaged or destroyed facilities which involve an actual continuance of the nonconforming use provided that any such reconstruction shall not violate the provisions set out below. 
1.  Change in use prohibited. No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities may occur which shall act to change the nonconforming use (as regulated in subsection 13-102.6, above) to other than a permitted use. 
2.  Land with incidental improvements. In all districts, when a nonconforming building or other structure or improvements located on "land with incidental improvements" (as defined by this ordinance) is damaged or destroyed to the extent of 25 percent or more of the assessed valuation of all buildings, and other structures or other improvements located thereon (as determined from the assessment rolls effective on the date of damage or destruction), such nonconforming use shall terminate and the tract of land shall, thereafter, be used only for a conforming use. 
3.  Infringement upon open space restricted. No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities utilized by a nonconforming use shall increase the extent of any infringement upon any open space required by this ordinance. 
4.  Damage or destruction of buildings or other structures. In all districts, when any building or other structure which is substantially occupied by a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent or more of the assessed valuation (as recorded on the most current edition of the property tax records) of the improvements located upon the site, such building or other structure may be reconstructed provided that no such action shall increase the extent of any infringement upon any open space required by this ordinance and that the reconstructed buildings, structures and other site improvements, shall comply as fully as possible with all other provisions of this ordinance. When the extent of damage or destruction is less than 50 percent of the assessed valuation of the improvements, the nonconforming use may be continued and the buildings or other structures may be restored provided that: 
a.  A building permit pertaining to such restoration is applied for and issued within one year of such damage or destruction. 
b.  A certificate of zoning compliance is issued within one year after the issuance of the building permit. 
c.  Such restoration shall not cause a new nonconformance nor increase the degree of nonconformance or noncompliance existing prior to such damage or destruction. Otherwise, the nonconforming use shall be deemed to have ceased active operation and the provisions of subsection 13-102.9 shall apply. 
5.  Reconstruction of flood damaged property. The provisions of subsection 13-102.10, Special provisions governing nonconforming buildings within floodplain districts, shall apply to the reconstruction of all buildings and structures associated with any nonconforming use located within the F-1, Floodplain District. 
    13-102.9 Discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of land or the active operation of substantially all the nonconforming uses in any building or other structure or tract of land is discontinued for a period of one year, then the land or building or other structure shall thereafter be used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume active operations shall not affect the foregoing provision. 
    13-102.10 Special provisions governing nonconforming buildings within floodplain districts. 
1.  General provisions. In all districts or portions, thereof, which extend into the F-1, Floodplain Districts as established by section 8-301, any building or other structure or use which is not permitted by the floodplain district provisions shall become nonconforming upon the effective date of this ordinance or subsequent amendment as applicable. 
2.  Enlargement of buildings within the floodplain. A building or other structure which is nonconforming by reason of location within the floodplain shall not be enlarged or expanded, but may be altered, or repaired as set forth in subsection 13-102.4, or as may be expressly authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals in order to incorporate floodproofing measures provided that such alteration will not increase the level of the 100-year flood. 
3.  Special provisions governing reconstruction of buildings or structures located within floodway districts. Within any designated floodway district, any building or structure in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance that is, hereafter, destroyed or substantially damaged by any means may be reconstructed and used as before, only if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The reconstruction does not exceed the volume and external dimensions of the original structure or does not offer any greater obstruction to the flow of floodwaters than did the original structure. 
b.  Nonresidential structures may be reconstructed only if the lowest floor (including basement) elevation is at least one foot above the level of the 100-year flood or the structure is floodproofed (in accordance with the requirements of article VIII, section 8-304) to a height of at least one foot above the level of the 100-year flood. 
c.  Residential structures may be reconstructed only if the lowest floor (including basement) of the structure is elevated to a point at least one foot above the level of the 100-year flood. 
d.  That no reconstruction or alteration permitted, hereinunder, shall result in any increase in the level of the 100-year flood. 
    13-102.11 Special provisions pertaining to uses not conforming to performance standards. 
1.  Conformance of lawful uses to applicable performance standards. In all districts, any lawful use which does not conform to one or more applicable performance standards established in article XII, may be continued for a period of ten years from the effective date of the ordinance or subsequent amendment. After ten years and six months notice by the Zoning Administrator, it shall conform to all applicable performance standards. 
2.  Conformance of nonconforming uses to applicable performance standards. In all districts where there is any use which is not a permitted use, and where there are performance standards which are applicable in the districts in which it would be permitted, but not in the district in which it is located, the use may be continued, but it shall conform to the performance standards in that district where it is a permitted use in which the most stringent performance standards apply after five years and six months notice by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 13-102) 
Sec. 13-103. - Noncomplying buildings or other structures. 
    13-103.1 General provisions. The provisions of this section shall control buildings and other structures which do not meet the bulk or any other provisions applicable in the districts in which they are located, except those provisions which pertain to activity or use. 
    13-103.2 Continuation of use. The use of a noncomplying building or other structure or parcel may be continued, except as, otherwise, provided by this section. 
    13-103.3 Repairs and alterations. Repairs, incidental alterations, or structural alterations may be made in noncomplying buildings or other structures subject to the provisions of subsection 13-103.4, Enlargement of conversion. 
    13-103.4 Enlargement of conversion. 
1.  Adequate space for expansion. No expansion or enlargement of any noncomplying building or other structure may be made which would either create a new noncompliance or increase the degree of any previously existing noncompliance of any building or other structure or parcel or portion, thereof. 
2.  Buildings noncomplying as to lot area. If a building does not comply with the applicable district regulations on lot area per dwelling unit (lot area of zone lot being smaller than required for the number of dwelling units on such zone lot) such building may be converted (and, in mixed buildings, the residential use may be extended, except when in the floodplain district) provided that the deficiency in the required lot area is not, thereby, increased (for example, a noncomplying building on a zone lot of 3,500 square feet, which before conversion required a lot area of 5,000 square feet and was, therefore, deficient by 1,500 square feet, can be converted into any combination of dwelling units requiring a lot area of no more than 5,000 square feet). 
3.  Application of other provisions to expanded facilities. In the event that any proposed expansion or addition to a noncomplying building or structure is valued at less than 50 percent of the assessed valuation (as recorded on the most current edition of the property tax records) of the improvements located upon the site, all provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable to the expansion or addition. In the event, however, that the proposed expansion or addition is valued at 50 percent or more of the assessed valuation of the improvements located upon the site all provisions of this ordinance shall apply to both the existing facilities, with the exception of any preexisting noncomplying conditions and the expansion or addition. 
    13-103.5 Damage or destruction of noncomplying buildings and other structures. In all districts, when any noncomplying building or other structure is damaged or destroyed such building or other structures may be restored provided that such restoration shall not cause a new noncompliance nor increase the degree of noncompliance existing prior to such damage or destruction. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 13-103) 
Sec. 13-104. - Substandard residential lots. 
    Within all districts where residential uses are authorized, a single-family dwelling may be built upon a lot which was of record upon the date of adoption of this ordinance, provided such lot contains a minimum total lot area of 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 2009-23, 5-11-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 13-101) 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-101. - Appointment and duties of the zoning administrator. 
    14-101.1 Appointment of the Zoning Administrator. There is hereby created the office of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall be the administrative and executive official charged to enforce this ordinance and shall be appointed by the City Manager. 
    14-101.2 Duties of the Office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this ordinance, and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, he is granted the following authority and responsibility: 
1.  Interpretation and administration. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret and administer the provisions of this ordinance; 
2.  Use and occupancy permits and certificates of compliance. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue use and occupancy permits, to certify zoning compliance, to stop work that has commenced without obtaining a required zoning permit, and to impose additional fees for required permits when work has commenced or occupancy occurs without obtaining a required zoning permit. In any instance, however, where a site plan is required by provisions of this ordinance no final use and occupancy permit shall be issued until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator; 
3.  Enforcement of this ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for enforcing all provisions of this ordinance; 
4.  Information and advisement. The Zoning Administrator shall provide information to the public on all matters relating to this ordinance; 
5.  Maintain records. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain permanent and current records of this ordinance and subsequent amendments, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, conditional uses, variations, appeals and applications, therefor; and 
6.  Right of entry. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to enter upon any land within the jurisdiction of this ordinance for purposes of making examinations and surveys, conducting inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and to place or remove public notices as required by this ordinance. 
    14-101.3 Powers of the zoning administrator regarding enforcement of performance standards. When the Zoning Administrator has reason to believe that there is a violation of applicable performance standards, he may issue notice specifying the nature of the alleged violation and demanding that it be corrected. The Zoning Administrator may engage appropriate governmental agencies or other experts to perform tests to determine the existence and extent of the violation. Where other experts are employed and a violation is verified, the owner of the use shall pay all test costs and correct the violation. In any instance where such fees are not paid, the City may withhold issuance of any use and occupancy permits and/or create a lien on the subject property. If the owner does not correct the violation within a reasonable time, the Zoning Administrator may proceed to enforce as with any other violation. 
    14-101.4 Board of Zoning Appeals support. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to provide support services to the Board of Zoning Appeals. These services shall include the following: 
1.  Administrative coordination. The Zoning Administrator shall receive, file, and forward to all necessary agencies all applications for conditional uses and for amendments to this ordinance; 
2.  Administrative support. The Zoning Administrator shall receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all applications for variances or other matters on which the Board is required to pass under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    14-101.5 Duties of the Zoning Administrator in enforcing floodplain district regulations. In the enforcement of the provisions of article VIII, sections 8-301 through 8-305, Floodplain district regulations, the Zoning Administrator or his designated representative shall: 
1.  Review all development permits to ensure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
2.  Advise permittees that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. This shall include section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments, of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
3.  Notify adjacent communities, the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development, Local Planning Assistance Office and the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
5.  Verify and record as the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings. 
6.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings and all mechanical and electrical equipment have been floodproofed. 
7.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation of the flood maps. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
9.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in zone A, on the community FHBM or FIRM, meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-21, 5-29-2007; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-101) 
Sec. 14-102. - Zoning permits. 
    14-102.1 Permits required. The permits indicated within this section are required before any site grading or construction activity of any type is initiated upon any zone lot or parcel of land or before extending or changing to another activity type on any zone lot. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any officer, department, or employee of the City, unless the application for such permit has been examined by the office of the Zoning Administrator and a determination made by that office that the proposed building or activity complies with all provisions of this ordinance. Any building permit or any other permit issued in conflict with this provision or any other provision of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
1.  Application. An application for a zoning permit shall include all information and exhibits necessary to determine if the proposed activity and/or development is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. The following zoning permits are required subject to the specific provisions of the referenced sections: 
Permit Applicable Provision Grading permit [Sub]section 14-102.2 Site utilization and reclamation permit [Sub]section 14-102.3 Foundation permit [Sub]section 14-102.4 Building permit [Sub]section 14-102.5 Use and occupancy permits [Sub]section 14-102.6  
    14-102.2 Grading permits. In any instance where no building or construction activity is to take place upon a site a grading permit may be issued by the City Engineer, provided that a tree inventory and protection plan meeting the requirements for such set out in article X, has been approved and the applicant has demonstrated that the use or activity will comply with all provisions of this ordinance. 
    14-102.3 Site utilization and reclamation permits. Site utilization and reclamation permits are required for any mining and quarrying uses and for the removal or stripping of topsoil in excess of 10,000 square feet of land area; the excavation or placement of fill material in excess of 100 cubic yards; or any excavation or placement of fill material which would infringe upon a drainageway, floodplain or wetland area as determined by the City Engineer. This section expressly exempts excavation or fill for the purpose of constructing a swimming pool, basement, garage or similar use which is deemed to be an accessory structure to a principal residential building or minor grading one foot or less in depth done for purposes of constructing a one- or two-family dwelling. 
    14-102.4 Foundation permits. In any instance where building or construction activity is proposed to take place upon a site, a building permit may be issued upon approval of a grading plan (as specified in subsection 14-103.3, of this article). Such permit may be limited to preliminary site grading and construction of the foundation only. 
    14-102.5 Building permits. Upon approval of a plot plan or site plan as specified in subsections 14-103.1 or 14-103.2, a building permit for such use may be issued. A grading permit or building permit (limited to preliminary site grading and foundation construction) may be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit with an approved site plan or a site utilization and reclamation plan forming the basis for such action. 
    14-102.6 Use and occupancy permit. All buildings, excluding one- and two-family dwelling units, which are constructed after the effective date of this ordinance or are to be occupied by any commercial, industrial, multifamily residential or community facilities activity, and all additions to previously existing buildings to be similarly utilized or occupied and all land uses for such purposes shall be subject to this provision. A use and occupancy permit shall be obtained as provided herein prior to occupancy of the building or land area. No change in a use to a use or activity of a different type or class shall take place until a use and occupancy permit has been obtained. 
1.  Permits for use and occupancy where no building permit is required. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use or activity of a different class or type, unless a use and occupancy permit is first obtained for the new or different use. Every application for a use and occupancy permit for a new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the office of the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Application to be accompanied by certified final site plans. Any application for a use and occupancy permit involving any development for which a site plan is required by the provisions of subsection 14-103.2 of this article, shall be accompanied by the completed site certification required by subpart 5, of subsection 14-103.5 and/or a performance bond as provided in subsection 14-103.7. 
3.  Permits not to be issued. No use and occupancy permit shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. In all instances where a site plan is required in accordance with the provisions of subsection 14-103.2, no final use and occupancy permit shall be issued until a final development review has been conducted and the development has been found to be in full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  Permits for initial occupancy of new buildings. No new building shall be occupied nor any use of the land commenced before either a temporary use and occupancy permit or a permanent use and occupancy permit has been issued therefor. Provided, however, that no permanent use and occupancy permit shall be issued for any use until a final development review has been conducted and the development has been found to be in full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. In any instance where the Zoning Administrator determines that due to the season of the year planting of landscape materials would not be desirable, a permanent use and occupancy permit may be issued provided that a performance bond is established for the uncompleted portion of the landscaping as provided in subsection 14-103.7 and a maintenance surety is established as required by subsection 14-103.8. 
5.  Temporary use and occupancy permits. In any instance where a site plan has been approved and site improvements have been bonded as provided in subsection 14-103.8, a temporary use and occupancy permit may be issued for all or a portion of the development. No temporary use and occupancy permit may be issued until the building or portion thereof for which the request is made has been determined to meet all safety codes. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-102) 
Sec. 14-103. - Required plans. 
    The following plans and procedures for approval thereof are required for the uses indicated: 
14-103.1 Plot plan required for one- and two-family dwellings. A plot plan shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of a building permit for any one- or two-family detached dwelling (including manufactured homes located on individual lots). A copy of the final approved final subdivision plat indicating the size and location of the lot whereon the dwelling is proposed to be located shall be filed with each application for approval of a plot plan. 
1.  Plan content. Plot plans shall be submitted in a form and content established by the Zoning Administrator, and shall specifically describe the nature and scope of the development. 
2.  Plan review. It shall be the duty of the Office of the Zoning Administrator to review and act upon all plot plans submitted under this section. 
3.  Critical lots. Where any lot is declared a critical lot by the provisions of article XII, section 12-102, Hillside development standards or section 12-103, Development standards for flood hazard areas, no building permit shall be issued for any such lot until a grading plan meeting the specification of subsection 14-103.4 is approved. 
14-103.2 Master development plans. Certain uses and activities require approval of a master development plan by the Planning Commission to ensure that development occurs in a coordinated manner. The following activities require such plans: 
•  Multifamily developments. Any development involving two or more multifamily structures located upon the same zone lot. 
•  Manufactured home parks. Any development of a manufactured home park as defined by this ordinance. 
•  Variable lot residential developments. Any development of a variable lot residential development (VLRD) as controlled by the provisions of article V, subsection 5-104.3. 
•  Commercial complexes. Any development of a commercial complex as defined by this ordinance. 
1.  Plan content. The master development plan for the proposed development shall be a general concept plan which shall include: 
a.  Sufficient information to disclose. 
i.  The location and size of the area involved. A boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor of the property contained in the master development plan will be required for purposes of identifying the actual area involved in the approval request. 
ii.  Transportation routes including streets, driveways, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways, and off-street parking and loading areas, showing sizes and fire lanes. 
iii.  Location and approximate dimensions of structures including approximate height, bulk and the utilization of structures including activities and the number of living units. 
iv.  Estimated population density and extent of activities to be allocated to parts of the project. 
v.  Reservations for public uses including schools, parks and other open spaces. 
vi.  The ability of the proposal and the manner in which the proposed plan will comply with the provisions of article X, Landscaping and screening provisions of this ordinance. 
vii.  The general means for the disposition of stormwater, (including any detention or retention areas) with preliminary drainage calculations. 
viii.  The location and adequacy of utilities required to serve the development. 
ix.  The proposed means of erosion and sediment control. 
b.  Tabulation of land area. A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses and activities and overall densities. 
c.  Nature of applicant's interest. The nature of the applicant's interest in the land proposed to be developed and a written statement of concurrence from all parties having a beneficial interest in the affected property. 
d.  Substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions. The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures including proposed easements for public utilities. 
e.  Preliminary drainage calculations. Preliminary drainage calculations showing 25-year and 100-year flows and provisions for detention/retention of each. 
f.  Site topography. Preliminary site topography at a vertical interval no greater than two feet. 
g.  Development schedule. A proposed development schedule indicating stages in which the project will be built. 
h.  Off-site improvements. A detailed listing of off-site improvements to roads, stormwater drainage systems, sanitary sewers, water supply systems and other public facilities including easements required to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development. 
i.  Special information. The following plans and diagrams, insofar as the proposed development creates significant impact of traffic, parking, landscaping or economic feasibility: 
i.  A traffic study which shall include a circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the development and, to and from existing and proposed thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern must be shown. 
ii.  An analysis of off-site easements which are required to facilitate the extension or improvement of roads and utilities needed to serve the site. 
j.  Information about surrounding area. Information regarding the physical characteristics of the surrounding area and developments within 300 feet of the proposed development, including the ownership of same. 
k.  Within floodplain districts. Within all floodplain districts, floodplain development permits are required prior to the initiation of any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, permits are set forth in article VIII, section 8-301, Floodplain district regulations. 
2.  Plan review. 
a.  Plans to be complete. No application for approval of a site plan shall be considered until such plan is complete. An application is complete when it contains all the information required by subpart 1 of this section, in a form sufficient for the Zoning Administrator to determine whether or not the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  Establishment of Plan Review Committee. A plan review committee to be comprised of representatives from the office of the City Engineer, the Department of Code Enforcement, and the Zoning Administrator along with representatives from the various organizations providing utility services is hereby established. The Plan Review Committee shall meet on a regular basis at the call of the Zoning Administrator for purposes of jointly reviewing and offering recommendations on development applications subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Bases for approval. In addition to satisfying all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, approval of a master development plan shall be based upon a demonstration that the following design and development objectives have been satisfied: 
i.  Adequate streets, utilities and drainage. Approval of a master development plan shall be based upon a demonstration that streets, utilities and drainage features will be of adequate capacity to serve the development. As a part of a master development plan proposal, a property owner may offer to improve or otherwise provide adequate facilities to support the proposed development. Public facilities already included in an adopted capital improvements budget may be considered a demonstration of adequate capacity if properly timed with anticipated construction of the development. 
ii.  Vehicular access and traffic generation. The vehicular access and internal circulation system of a master development plan shall adequately support the operational needs of the development itself in a manner that maintains and protects the operational integrity of the community's major streets. The traffic circulation system for a master development plan shall be designed in such a manner as to direct commercial traffic away from residential areas. 
iii.  Sensitivity to adjacent areas. The approval of a master development plan shall be based on a demonstration that the project is designed and will be developed in a manner that maintains the long term stability and integrity of nearby development. 
3.  Planning Commission action. Within 30 days after receipt of written findings developed by the Plan Review Committee, the Planning Commission shall take one of the following actions: unconditional approval, conditional approval or disapproval. The Commission shall make a finding regarding consistency of any master development plan having long-range development implications, and any such implications not specifically included in the general plan shall be identified and analyzed and made part of the Commission's findings. 
a.  Conditional approval. When the Planning Commission's action is conditional approval, the Commission shall transmit to the applicant within ten working days in writing conditions or modifications which must be complied with in order that the proposed development receive approval. The application will not be considered approved until the applicant has concurred in writing with all conditions of approval. 
b.  Disapproval. If the Planning Commission acts to disapprove a master development plan, the reasons for that action shall be stated in writing. 
14-103.3 Site development plans. 
1.  Activities requiring plans. A site development plan containing the information indicated herein is required for specified community facilities and all commercial, industrial and residential activities (excepting one- and two-family dwellings) and for feed lots, stockyards and mining and quarrying activities contained within the agricultural and extractive activity grouping. This plan shall be approved prior to any grading and excavation, including removal of trees, or of any construction activity of any type. This plan shall indicate: 
2.  Plan content, preparation and submittal. 
a.  Plan content. A site plan shall be submitted in a form and content established by the Zoning Administrator. The plan shall be sufficient to fully describe the nature, scope, design features and ultimate appearance of the proposed development. 
b.  Plan preparation. All site plans, excepting those subject to approval in the manner provided in subpart 3.b, Plans for small additions and freestanding accessory structures of this section, shall be prepared and stamped by individual(s) licensed and/or certified by the State of Tennessee to perform such design service as may be required. 
c.  Plan submittal. All site plans shall be submitted to the office of the Zoning Administrator for review and appropriate action as provided in subpart 3 of this section. 
3.  Plan review. 
a.  Plans to be complete. No application for approval of a site plan shall be considered until such plan is complete. An application is complete when it contains all the information required by subpart 2 of this section, in a form sufficient for the Zoning Administrator to determine whether or not the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  Plans for small additions and freestanding accessory structures. A site plan submitted for a structure which is either an addition to an existing building or a freestanding accessory structure up to 2,000 square feet in floor area or 50 percent of the total square footage of the existing building, whichever is less, is authorized by the Planning Commission to be approved by the Zoning Administrator. This plan is exempt from the following requirements: 
i.  The requirement that the plan be prepared and stamped by an individual licensed and/or certified by the State of Tennessee, to perform such design service. 
ii.  The requirement that topographic features be shown. 
iii.  Compliance with subpart 5, Certifications of compliance required, of subsection 14-103.5. 
If any of the above exempt requirements are deemed essential to consideration of the site plan, the staff maintains the right to rescind the exemption and request review by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Plans subject to planning commission approval. All site plans, other than those which may be approved by staff as provided in subpart b (above), shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
4.  Planning Commission action. 
a.  Review by Plan Review Committee. The Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the application and supporting documents to all representatives of the Plan Review Committee and any other appropriate department or agency. The Plan Review Committee shall review the proposed plan and recommend action thereon prior to consideration by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Bases for site plan approval. A site plan shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. In any instance where the development activity proposed on the site plan is located within a development requiring a master development plan (See subsection 14-103.2), such development shall be in strict compliance with the approved master development plan. 
c.  Planning Commission action. Within 30 days after receipt of written staff and departmental findings, the Commission shall unconditionally approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plan. 
5.  Transfer of ownership. Unless otherwise provided as a condition of approval of a site plan, the landowner may subsequently divide and transfer parts of such development. The transferee shall complete each such unit and use and maintain it in strict conformance with the approved site plan. 
14-103.4 Grading plans. Grading plans containing the information required by this section shall be prepared, submitted and approved prior to any grading, placement of fill material or excavation, including the removal of trees, or any construction activity of any type. 
1.  Activities requiring plans. In any instance where a site plan is required by the provisions of subsection 14-103.3, the grading plan shall accompany such plan and be acted on in the manner specified in that section. In addition to the grading plans required with site plans, grading plans shall be required for the following uses and activities: 
a.  Any mining and quarrying uses. 
b.  Any grading activity which involves removal or stripping of topsoil in excess of 10,000 square feet of land area or the excavation or placement of fill material in excess of 100 cubic yards. This section expressly exempts excavation or fill for the purpose of constructing a swimming pool, basement, garage or similar use which is deemed to be an accessory structure to a principal one or two-family residential building or minor grading one foot or less in depth done for purposes of constructing a one- or two-family dwelling. 
c.  Any excavation or placement of fill material which would infringe upon a drainageway, floodplain or wetland area as determined by the City Engineer. 
d.  Any "critical lot" as defined by subpart 3, of subsection 14-103.1. 
2.  Plan content, preparation and submittal. 
a.  Plan content and preparation. Grading plans shall be submitted in a form and content established by the City Engineer. Plans shall be prepared and stamped by an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering who is licensed by the State of Tennessee to perform such design service as may be required. 
3.  Plan review. 
a.  Plans to be complete. No application for approval of a site plan shall be considered until such plan is complete. An application is complete when it contains all the information required by subpart 2 of this [sub]section. Application shall be made in a form sufficient for the City Engineer to determine whether or not the development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements of this ordinance and generally accepted engineering practice. 
b.  Action by City Engineer. Within 30 days after receipt of a complete grading plan the City Engineer shall unconditional[ly] approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plan. 
c.  Appeal to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. The applicant may, upon disapproval of a grading plan, appeal the decision of the City Engineer to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. The appeal shall be filed within ten days of the adverse decision and shall be placed on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. 
14-103.5 Time limits upon approvals. Due to rapidly changing conditions within the City, it is necessary to establish specific time periods after the passage of which approved plans shall become null and void, thereby assuring that no new development will, due to altered conditions, etc., damage the public interest. 
1.  Time limit on plot plans, site plans and grading plans. Any plot plan, site or grading plan approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall become null and void one year after the date of its approval, unless a building permit for the project has been obtained in which case the provisions of subpart 2 (below) of this section shall apply; provided, however, that in no instance shall an approved site plan become null and void in less than one year. 
2.  Time limit on building permit. Any building permit issued shall become null and void six months after the date of issuance, unless "actual construction" (as defined by this ordinance) has begun and been continued in a diligent manner. 
14-103.6 Construction to be in accordance with approved plans. In general, all site construction and development activity shall proceed in strict compliance with the approved site plan. Minor modifications in the terms and conditions of the approved site plan may be made from time to time as provided in the following paragraphs. Any proposed modification which is not permitted under these provisions may be approved only as an amendment to the site plan (see subpart 4, below). Any modification in site construction or development activity which exceeds the minor modifications permitted hereinunder shall, unless approved as an amendment to the site plan, constitute a violation of this ordinance and is punishable as provided in subsection 14-108.3. 
1.  Minor modifications during construction. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor modifications in the location, and configuration of buildings and structures if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the development plan was approved so long as: 
a.  No modification violates any provision of this ordinance; 
b.  No modification involves an item for which modification is prohibited under the provisions of subpart 3, below; and 
c.  The total of such modifications approved by the Zoning Administrator shall never in aggregate result in: 
i.  Any increase in residential density; 
ii.  A net increase in the floor area of any nonresidential building which exceeds the lesser of two percent of the gross floor area or 2,000 square feet; 
iii.  An increase of more than three percent in the total ground area covered by buildings, provided that no such increase shall be permitted which would exceed the impermeable surface ratio established for the site; 
iv.  A reduction of more than two percent in the area set aside for open space (exclusive of parking area green spaces and required screening areas); 
v.  Movement of a point of access by a distance greater than 15 feet. (Within PUD, Planned Unit Development Districts no alteration of access points shall be permitted.) 
d.  No modification may be approved which is greater than the absolute minimum necessary as defined by the provisions of subpart 2 (below) of this section. 
2.  Minimum adjustments only. Any modification identified below must be held to the minimum necessary. The Zoning Administrator must find that each of the following conditions apply to the particular circumstances prior to the granting of the adjustment: 
a.  Practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. That strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. 
b.  Not detrimental. That granting the application will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood of the premises. 
c.  Health or safety not adversely affected. That granting the application under the circumstances of the particular case will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons working or residing in the neighborhood containing the property of the applicant. 
d.  Maintains intent of ordinance and the development plan. That such adjustment is within the intent and purpose of this ordinance and will not adversely affect the community objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
3.  Subjects not included for modification. The following are not subject to modification under the provisions of this section: 
a.  Uses permitted; 
b.  Increases in the number of dwelling units or increases in the nonresidential floor area permitted in excess of increases permitted as staff approved projects; 
c.  Increases in building height (excepting minor modifications in non occupied portions of the building) or reduction of the number of required parking spaces; 
d.  Significant changes to the drainage pattern, as determined by the City Engineer; 
e.  Any reduction in required screening area, or the minimum required vision clearance area. 
4.  Amendments to approved site plans. Any modification to an approved site plan which exceeds the minor modifications that may be approved by the Zoning Administrator shall only be approved as provided herein. All such amendments to site plans shall be presented to and acted upon by the Planning Commission. Should the Planning Commission approve the amendment to the site plan, the applicant may proceed with the amended plan as a basis for modifications. In the event that the Planning Commission disapproves the proposed modifications, the applicant may proceed with the original plan. In any instance where the Planning Commission disapproves proposed modifications to an approved site plan, the Commission shall note specific violations of this ordinance as reasons for it's action. 
5.  Certifications of compliance required. On at least three occasions during the course of the construction or development activity which is taking place upon any site, certification shall be required as to the correspondence between actual conditions existing upon the site and the depiction of those conditions upon the approved site plan. In general, these certifications shall be as follows: 
a.  The first certification shall be presented to the City Engineer when the building foundation is substantially complete. A licensed surveyor shall certify the building location and the first floor elevation of the foundation. A certificate signed by both the individual conducting the survey and the owner shall indicate the location and first floor elevation for the building. 
b.  The second certification shall be presented to the City Engineer when the site has been rough graded to the point where the drainage system has been installed and parking areas generally established. A licensed engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering shall present to the City engineer a letter which shall indicate the extent of correspondence between actual conditions found upon the development site and those depicted on the approved site plan. This letter shall detail the location and extent of discrepancies between actual conditions found in the field survey and the depiction of those conditions upon the approved plan. 
c.  The final certification shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator when construction upon the site is substantially complete and the building is ready for occupancy. This certification, prepared by a licensed engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering and a licensed landscape architect, shall indicate if actual conditions upon the development site are in substantial compliance with the site plan approved by the Planning Commission. To be included are all aspects of the development project to include, but not be limited to: 
i.  Location and dimensions of all buildings, parking areas and other site features; 
ii.  Location and sizes of all utilities and storm drainage facilities as established on the site; 
iii.  Location and material (to include plant names and size where specified) of all landscaping and site plantings. 
Note-In the event that the first or second certification, as referenced in subparts a and b of this section, differ from that shown on the approved site plan, the plan shall be revised and submitted for review to the Plan Review Committee prior to any further work. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor modifications authorized, as per subpart 1, Minor modifications during construction, of this [sub]section. Where such modifications exceed those which may be approved under this section, the plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for further consideration. Failure to submit the proper certification at the appropriate time will result in issuance of a stop work order and/or denial of use and occupancy permits. Any failure to stop work under order shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
14-103.7 Plats to be filed with site plans. Any development plan submitted which requires dedication of right-of-way or recording of any easements shall either be accompanied by a final plat of the property shown on said plan, or shall be accompanied by a legal instrument which is sufficient in form to record in the Register of Deeds Office. This document must be legally recorded in the Register of Deeds Office prior to issuance of a building permit. 
14-103.8 Bonding of site improvements. 
1.  Completion of improvements. Prior to issuance of any use and occupancy permit for development covered by any site plan or grading plan submitted in accordance with this ordinance an applicant shall be required to complete all site improvements indicated on the approved plan. 
2.  Performance bond. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and/or dedicate all public improvements and landscaping prior to being issued a permanent use and occupancy permit. A temporary use and occupancy permit may be issued in the alternative, upon posting of an acceptable performance bond to insure the construction, installation and/or dedication of all remaining public and private improvements and landscaping. The bond shall be in the amount estimated by the Zoning Administrator, upon recommendation by the City Engineer as sufficient to complete the remaining improvements. The performance bond shall also secure site improvements and private access improvements required pursuant to this ordinance, including necessary off-site improvements. Posting of an acceptable performance bond shall constitute prior permission for the properly designated parties to enter upon said property to complete these improvements. 
3.  Bonding period; obligee. The period within which required improvements shall be completed shall be specified by the Plan Review Committee, incorporated in the performance bond, and shall not exceed one year from the date of approval of any temporary use and occupancy permit. The performance bond shall name the Planning Commission and/or the City as obligees and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. The performance bond shall remain in force in its full face amount until improvements are completed. 
4.  Surety. A performance bond shall be secured by a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, escrow account or other surety deemed adequate by the City. The beneficiary of the surety shall be the Planning Commission and/or the City. If a surety bond is used, then the guarantor of the debt shall have a commercial rating of not lower than "A" as designated by the A.M. Best and Company or other similar corporate rating service acceptable to the Planning Commission. If an irrevocable letter of credit is used as surety, then the bank or other financial institution issuing the letter of credit shall have total capital and unrestricted surplus of not less than $20,000,000. The bank or other financial institution shall allow the letter of credit to be presented for collection at a place physically located within the boundaries of Wilson County or Davidson County, Tennessee. 
5.  Release of performance bond and surety. The performance bond, and the surety securing it, may be released by the Zoning Administrator upon completion of the site improvements and landscaping. 
a.  A request for release of the performance bond shall be made by the applicant in the form of a letter to the Zoning Administrator requesting release of the performance bond. Such request shall include a written statement from the engineer employed by the applicant stating that the improvements have been installed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City departments. 
b.  All costs incurred in connection with a request for release of the surety or of the performance bond (that is, engineering, inspection fees, legal fees, etc.) shall be borne by the applicant, regardless of whether the request is ultimately granted. No bond shall be released until the Zoning Administrator certifies that all fees have been paid. 
6.  Appeal to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. The applicant may, upon disapproval of a request for release of a bond, appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be filed within ten days of the adverse decision and shall be set for hearing on the next available agenda of the Planning Commission. 
7.  Failure to complete improvements. Where a performance bond has been posted, and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of the performance bond, then the City may declare the bond to be in default and authorize the calling of the bond and surety and the completion of the improvements under the supervision of the City departments. 
14-103.9 Maintenance surety. 
1.  Basic requirement. [A] maintenance surety shall be required for the purpose of insuring that landscape material which is installed to meet the requirements of this ordinance does not die or significantly deteriorate for a period of one year. The maintenance surety shall be in the form of a bond or a letter of credit. 
2.  Bonding period; obligee. The period of the maintenance surety shall be one year from the date of approval of any permanent use and occupancy permit. The maintenance surety shall name the Planning Commission and/or the City as obligees and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-23, 5-11-2009; Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-103) 
Sec. 14-104. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    14-104.1 Establishment. Pursuant to sections 13-7-205 through 13-7-207, Tennessee Code, a Board of Zoning Appeals (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") is created. 
    14-104.2 Powers of the Board. The Board is hereby vested with the following powers: 
1.  Administrative appeals. Pursuant to section 13-7-207(1), Tennessee Code, the Board shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or any other administrative official in carrying out the enforcement of this ordinance, whereby it is alleged in writing that the Zoning Administrator is in error or acted arbitrarily. 
2.  Variances. Pursuant to section 13-7-207(3), Tennessee Code, the Board shall hear and act upon applications for variances to alleviate hardships created by not being able to comply with this ordinance by reason of unique shape, topography or physical features of the zone lot. 
3.  Conditional use permits. Pursuant to section 13-7-207(2) Tennessee Code, the Board shall hear and act upon applications for conditional use permits. For the purposes of this ordinance, conditional uses shall be synonymous with "special exceptions," as controlled by section 13-7-206, Tennessee Code. 
4.  Referred matters. Hear and act upon all matters referred to it on which it is required to act under this ordinance. 
5.  Right of entry upon land. Enter upon any land within its jurisdiction to make examinations and surveys and place or remove public notices as required by this ordinance. 
    14-104.3 Membership. The Board shall consist of five members who have been bona fide residents of the planning jurisdiction for not less than three years prior to appointment and who shall continue to be so eligible as long as they serve. Board members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners. No person holding any public office or position in the City government shall be eligible for membership on the Board. 
    14-104.4 Terms of office, removal and vacancies. Board members shall each serve for a three year term, or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The Board first appointed shall serve respectively for the following terms: one member for one year, two members for two years and two members for three years. 
All members of the Board shall serve with such compensation as may be fixed by the City and may be removed from membership on the Board for continued absence or just causes. Any member being so removed shall be provided, upon request, a public hearing upon the removal decision. Vacancies of said Board shall be filled in the manner provided herein for the appointment of such member. 
    14-104.5 Election of officers. The Board shall elect from its members its own chairman and vice-chairman, who shall serve for one year and may upon election serve succeeding terms. The City of Mt. Juliet shall provide necessary secretarial services. 
    14-104.6 Conflict of interest. Any member of the Board who shall have a direct or an indirect interest in any property which is the subject matter of or affected by, a decision of the Board shall be disqualified from participating in the discussion, decision and proceedings of the Board in connection therewith. The burden for revealing any such conflict rests with individual members of the Board. Failure to reveal any such conflict shall constitute grounds for immediate removal from the Board for cause. 
    14-104.7 Meetings of the Board. Regular meetings shall be held at specified times and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public and proper notice of such meetings shall be given. 
    14-104.8 Rules and proceedings of the Board. The Board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. Such rules shall at the minimum require that: 
1.  The presence of three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum and the concurring vote of at least three members of the Board shall be necessary to deny or grant any application before the Board. 
2.  No action shall be taken by the Board on any case until after a public hearing and notice thereof. Said notice of public hearing shall be a legal notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten days before the hearing of an appeal. No appeal shall be considered and heard by the Board less than 15 days after filing such appeal. If new information is uncovered regarding an action of the Board that could not have been reasonably presented in public hearing before the Board, the Board shall establish a date for the purpose of rehearing in accordance with the appropriate procedures herein. 
3.  The Board may call upon any other office or agency of the City government for information in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty of such other agencies to render such information to the Board as may be reasonably required. 
4.  The Planning Commission shall be permitted to submit an advisory opinion on any matter before the Board and such opinion shall be made part of record of such public hearing. 
5.  Any officer, agency or department of the City or other aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by state law. 
6.  Any decision made by the Board on a conditional use permit shall indicate the specific section of this ordinance under which the permit is being considered and shall state clearly the specific conditions imposed in granting such permit. 
7.  Appeals will be assigned for hearing in the order in which they appear on the calendar thereof, except that appeals may be advanced for hearing by order of the Board, upon good cause being shown. 
8.  At the public hearing of the case before the Board, the appellant shall appear on his own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent. The appellant's side of the case shall be heard first, and those in objection shall follow. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption from the other. 
    14-104.9 Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board, after such notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such instance the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction application, on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown. 
    14-104.10 Liability of Board members, [the] Zoning Administrator and employees. Any Board member, [the] Zoning Administrator or other employee charged with the enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City of Mt. Juliet, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render themselves liable personally, and all such persons are hereby relieved from all personal liability and shall be held harmless by the City of any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act required or permitted in the proper discharge of their duties. Any suit brought against any Board member, Zoning Administrator, or employee charged with the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance shall be defended by legal representatives furnished by the City until the final termination of such proceedings. 
    14-104.11 Rehearing. 
1.  No rehearing of the decision by the Board shall be held, except: 
a.  On motion to reconsider the vote. 
b.  On a written request for a hearing. 
2.  If the motion to reconsider receives a majority affirmative vote, the Board of Zoning Appeals may vote on the motion to grant the request for a rehearing, subject to such conditions as the Board may, by resolution in each case, stipulate. 
3.  No request to grant a rehearing will be entertained, unless new evidence is submitted which could not reasonably be presented at the previous hearing. If the request for a rehearing is granted, the case shall be put on the calendar for a rehearing. In all cases, the request for a rehearing shall be in writing, reciting the reasons for the request and shall be duly verified and accompanied by the necessary data and diagrams. The persons requesting the rehearing shall be notified to appear before the Board on a date to be set by the Board. 
4.  No rehearing for a variance shall be granted an applicant found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in willful violation of the express provisions of a prior variance granted under the authority of this ordinance. 
    14-104.12 Time limitations on obtaining permits. All permits authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after the effective date of this ordinance, whereby variances or conditional uses are granted, shall be obtained within one year from the date of the original authorization by the Board; otherwise, the right to obtain said permit shall expire and become invalid. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-104) 
Sec. 14-105. - Zoning variances. 
    The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances where it makes findings of fact based upon the standards prescribed in this section. 
14-105.1 Limits to jurisdiction. Applications for variances to the following shall not be considered by the Board: 
1.  Intensity increases. The Board shall not grant any variance permitting an increase in floor area or density above the maximum permitted by the zoning district. 
2.  Planned unit developments. Within planned unit development districts the Board shall act as provided in subpart 5 of subsection 8-201.1, Jurisdiction of Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals. 
3.  Nonpermitted uses. The Board shall not grant any variance to allow a use other than those specifically authorized by this ordinance in the applicable zoning district. 
4.  Lack of frontage. The Board shall have no jurisdiction to hear a variance from the denial of a zoning permit when such denial is due to the fact that such lot has no frontage on a public street. 
5.  Conditions created by parties having interest in affected property. The Board shall not grant any variance in any instance where the alleged difficulty or hardship has been knowingly and intentionally created by any person having an interest in the property after the effective date of this ordinance. 
14-105.2 Application for variances; notice of hearing; fee. A written application for a variance shall be filed with the Board by the property owner or his designated agent on forms provided by the Board and the application shall contain information and exhibits as may be required under subsection 14-103.2, site plan. No more than 90 days after the filing of the application, a hearing shall be held on the application, unless otherwise withdrawn or postponed by written request by the applicant. Notice of hearing shall be in accordance with subsections 14-105.3 and 14-109.3. A fee payable to the City shall be charged to cover cost associated with review and processing of each application for a variance, except that the fee shall be waived for a governmental agency. 
14-105.3 Notice to affected property owners. A public hearing shall be conducted with notice thereof provided as specified in section 14-109, of this article, on any request for variance brought before the Board. 
14-105.4 Standards for variances. The Board shall not grant a variance, unless it makes findings based upon evidence presented to it as follows: 
1.  By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a particular piece of property at the time of enactment of this ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other exceptional and extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation contained within this ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. 
2.  The variance is the minimum variance that will relieve such difficulties or hardship and thereby make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
3.  The variance will not authorize activities in a zone district other than those permitted by this ordinance. 
4.  Financial returns only shall not be considered as a basis for granting a variance. 
5.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare, injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which the subject property is located, or a substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of the zoning district wherein such property is located or of the general provisions of this ordinance. 
6.  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety. 
7.  The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been knowingly and intentionally created by any person having an interest in the property after the effective date of this ordinance. 
14-105.5 Nonconformity does not constitute grounds for granting of a variance. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and not permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or building[s] in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
14-105.6 Conditions and restrictions by the Board. The Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon surrounding property and better carry out the general intent of this ordinance. The Board may establish expiration dates as a condition or as a part of any variances. 
14-105.7 Board has powers of Administrative Official on Appeals; reversing decision of Administrative Official. In exercising the powers granted to it the Board of [Zoning] Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance. 
14-105.8 Variance appeals. Any person including any agency of the City government aggrieved by a decision of the Board on a variance may appeal by certiorari to a court of competent jurisdiction. The judgment and findings of the Board on all questions of fact that may be involved in any appeal, cause, hearing or proceeding under this article shall be final and subject to review only for illegality or want of jurisdiction. 
14-105.9 Special provisions governing variances from the provisions of article VIII, sections 8-301-8-305, Floodplain district regulations. The following provisions shall apply to the consideration by the Board of any variance from the provisions of article VIII, section 8-301-8-305, pertaining to floodplain districts: 
1.  Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
2.  Standards to be applied. In its consideration of any variance from the provisions of the floodplain district regulations the Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others. 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion. 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage. 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility. 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
g.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
h.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
i.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters. 
j.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
3.  Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance. The following conditions shall apply to any variance which may be approved by the Board: 
a.  Variances may be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increase risks to life and property. 
d.  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
e.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-105) 
Sec. 14-106. - Conditional use permits. 
    14-106.1 Authority. The Board of [Zoning] Appeals may hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, requests for conditional use permits. For the purposes of administration of this ordinance, conditional uses shall be construed as synonymous with special exceptions, as controlled by section 13-7-206, Tennessee Code. 
    14-106.2 Application for conditional use permit, notice of public hearing. Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the property owner or his designated agent and filed in writing with the Board on forms provided by the Board and shall contain such information and exhibits as may be required under subsection 14-103.3, Site development plans, or in the case of buildings or other structures or uses to be located within floodplain districts, as may be required by article VIII and subsection 14-106.5, Special provisions governing consideration of conditional uses within floodplain districts, of this section. Not more than 60 days after filing such application, a hearing shall be held on the application, unless, otherwise, withdrawn or postponed upon written request by the applicant. Notice of hearing shall be held in accordance with section 14-109. A fee payable to the City shall be charged to partially defray cost of review and processing for each application for a conditional use permit, except that the fee shall be waived for any government agency. 
    14-106.3 Requirements for conditional use permit. General requirements are hereby established which shall apply to all applications for conditional use permits, and specific standards listed shall apply to the issuance of a conditional use permit, as appropriate. The Board may impose such other conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a conditional use permit as may be necessary to comply with the provisions set out in subsection 14-106.4, and the specific criteria for such presented in article III, in order to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such conditional uses upon and ensure compatibility with surrounding property. The Board may establish dates for the expiration of any conditional use permit as a condition of approval. 
    14-106.4 General provisions. 
1.  Burden of proof. A conditional use permit shall not be considered an entitlement, and shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals only after the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that all required standards are met. 
2.  Ordinance compliance. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable regulations, including any specific standards for the proposed use set forth in this ordinance, unless circumstances qualify the proposed use for a variance. Any accessory use to a conditional use must receive express approval by the Board of [Zoning] Appeals. 
3.  General plan. A conditional use shall be in accordance with the general plan for the City. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine from its review that the location, design and operation of a conditional use is not an impediment to projected growth plans for the City and that adequate public facilities are available to accommodate the proposed use. 
4.  Traffic impact. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the safety and convenience of vehicular or pedestrian circulation and, in the opinion of the City Engineer, shall not decrease traffic flow below level of service D along any portion of public roadway where the property has frontage. 
5.  Parking adequacy. The facility shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities as required by the parking regulations of this ordinance. 
6.  Special conditions. In addition, the Board may restrict the hours of operation, establish permit expiration dates, require extraordinary setbacks and impose other reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
    14-106.5 Special provisions governing consideration of conditional uses within floodplain districts. The special provisions contained within this section shall apply to all applications for approval of a conditional use located within any floodplain district. 
1.  Special information required. In addition to the requirements for conditional uses set out elsewhere in the ordinance, any application for a conditional use to be located within any floodplain district shall contain the following and any additional information requested by the Board: 
a.  A map drawn to scale showing the curvilinear line representing the regulatory flood elevation, dimensions of the lot, existing structures and uses on the lot and adjacent lots, soil type and natural protective barriers, if applicable, existing flood control and erosion control works, existing drainage elevations and ground contours, location and elevation of existing streets, water supply and sanitary facilities and other pertinent information. 
b.  A preliminary plan showing the approximate dimensions, elevation and nature of the proposed use, amount, area and type of proposed fill, area and nature of proposed grading or dredging, proposed alteration of natural protective barriers, if applicable, proposed flood protection or erosion control works, proposed drainage facilities, proposed roads, sewers, water and other utilities, specifications for building construction and materials included in the floodproofing. 
2.  Technical review required. The Board shall transmit one copy of the application and all supporting information to the City Engineer for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, threatened erosion, the adequacy of the plans for flood and erosion protection, the adequacy of drainage facilities and other technical matters. 
3.  Determination by the Board and attachment of conditions. The Board shall determine the specific flood or erosion hazard at the site and shall evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard. Upon consideration of the factors listed herein and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board may attach such conditions to the approval of conditional uses as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
4.  Consideration of special dangers posed by such uses. In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider the technical evaluation of the Engineer, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 
d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
e.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
f.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to and from the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-106) 
Sec. 14-107. - Amendments. 
    14-107.1 General[ly]. The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, amend this ordinance by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provisions whenever it is alleged that there was an error in the original zoning ordinance or whenever the public necessity, convenience and general welfare require such amendment. 
    14-107.2 Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners, the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator or by an application by any other interested person(s). 
    14-107.3 Application for amendment. An application for amendment shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, on receiving such application shall transmit copies, thereof, to the Plan Review Committee and the Planning Commission prior to any consideration of the proposed amendment by the Board of Commissioners. 
    14-107.4 Review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission in its review and recommendation, and the Board of Commissioners in its deliberations shall make specific findings with regard to the following grounds for an amendment and shall note the same in the official record as follows: 
1.  The amendment is in agreement with the general plan for the area. 
2.  It has been determined that the legal purposes for which zoning exists are not contravened. 
3.  It has been determined that there will be no adverse effect upon joining property owners, unless such effect can be justified by the overwhelming public good or welfare. 
4.  It has been determined that no property owner or small group of property owners will benefit materially from the change to the detriment of the general public. 
5.  It has been determined that conditions affecting the area have changed to a sufficient extent to warrant an amendment to the zoning map. 
    14-107.5 Public hearing and notice of hearing. A public hearing shall be held on all proposed amendments to this ordinance. Notice of such hearing shall be displayed as specified in section 14-109 of this article. 
    14-107.6 Notice of enactment. Upon enactment of an amendment to this ordinance, a notice of such shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Mt. Juliet, within five days following such enactment. The change shall become effective upon the date of the announcement. 
    14-107.7 Amendments affecting zoning map. Upon enactment of an amendment to the zoning map which is part of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall cause such amendment to be placed upon the zoning map noting thereon the ordinance and effective date of such amendatory ordinance. No amendment shall be placed upon the zoning map until a boundary survey of the property is provided the City by the applicant. 
    14-107.8 Effect of denial of application. Whenever an application for an amendment to the text of this ordinance or for a change in the zoning classification of any property is denied, the application for such amendment shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year following such denial, except in the following cases: 
1.  Upon initiation by the Board of Commissioners or Planning Commission. 
2.  When the new application, although involving all or a portion of the same property, is for a different zoning district than that for which the original application was made. 
    14-107.9 Zoning districts as applied to territory added to planning jurisdiction of the City. Whenever new territory is added to the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Juliet, by any means, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the Board of Commissioners appropriate zoning districting within 30 days following the final approval of the annexation. Prior to the final enactment by the Board of Commissioners, of an amendment to this ordinance establishing zoning districting for said territory, the area shall be temporarily unclassified, and no zoning permits shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-107) 
Sec. 14-108. - Remedies and enforcement. 
    14-108.1 Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis, thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action, thereon, as provided by this ordinance. 
    14-108.2 Violations of sign provisions. Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this ordinance and by state law: 
1.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located; 
2.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit; 
3.  To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, or for which the sign permit has lapsed; or 
4.  Each sign installed, created or maintained in violation of this ordinance, shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance. 
    14-108.3 Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each day such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to any other penalty provided, a violation of the provisions of this ordinance, or failure to comply with any provision, shall constitute grounds for revocation of any permit or license issued or authorized by the City. The City Court shall have authority to revoke any permit or license issued or authorized by the City, as part of or in addition to any judgment rendered. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
    14-108.4 Remedies. In case any building or other structure is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended, or proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or other appropriate authority of the City government or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, extension, conversion or use, to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building or other structure or land. Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a building or other structure or land, the Zoning Administrator may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and municipal service departments of such violation and request that initial or reestablishment of service be withheld, therefrom, until such time as the building or other structure premises are no longer in violation of these regulations. 
    14-108.5 Special enforcement and remedies pertaining to signs. In addition to the general remedies applicable to all violations set forth in this article, the remedies specifically applying to signs shall include the following: 
1.  Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs on the same zone lot; 
2.  Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity; 
3.  In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the City under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code for such circumstances; 
4.  All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-108) 
Sec. 14-109. - Public notice. 
    14-109.1 Applicability. All public hearings required by this ordinance shall be preceded by public notice as provided by this section. 
    14-109.2 Notice by newspaper. Notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Mt. Juliet, shall be given at least 15 days, but not more than 30 days prior to the public hearing. This notice shall specify the location, current and proposed zoning classification and it shall contain a graphic illustration of the area. 
    14-109.3 Notice by mail. At least 15 days prior to the public hearing concerning the affected property, all owners of record of adjoining property, including those separated by a public way from the premises in question, shall be notified. The notification required to meet this provision shall be accomplished by certified mail, return receipt request. Return receipts shall be maintained and subject to public examination upon request. 
    14-109.4 Notice by signage. No public hearing shall be conducted until public notice has been provided by the posting of signs pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
1.  General requirements. The applicant shall post signs on properties for which either an action by the Board of Zoning Appeals or a request for change of zoning classification has been requested. Such signs shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the public hearing is to be conducted on the request. The applicant shall purchase such signs at the Office of the Zoning Administrator no less than 21 days prior to the date of the public hearing. No public hearing shall be conducted nor any action taken on any request for which such notice is required until these signs are posted as required herein. The posting of the signs shall be as follows: 
a.  Number. One sign shall be posted for each 500 feet of frontage. 
b.  Location. Signs shall be located facing and within 25 feet of all public rights-of-way on which the property fronts. 
c.  Size. The signs shall have a minimum width of 24 inches and a minimum height of 36 inches. 
d.  Wording. The signs shall contain wording provided by the Office of the Zoning Administrator which shall be sufficient to convey the information that a zoning action is proposed for the subject property along with the date, time and place of the meeting at which the requested action is to be considered and the telephone number for additional information. 
e.  Fee. The signs shall be provided by the City, subject to payment by the applicant of a fee charged to defray the administrative and printing costs. The fee shall be waived for any agency of government. 
2.  Alternative requirements for zoning actions affecting large areas. When the area included within the requested zoning action contains 100 or more parcels, the following alternative provisions shall apply: 
a.  Signs shall be posted within the public right-of-way facing the inbound lane of all public streets at, or as near as possible to, the point the street crosses the boundary of property subject to the proposed action. 
b.  Signs shall also be posted at the intersection of a local street with a collector or arterial street within the area of the proposed zoning action. 
c.  Where a public street forms the boundary, or a portion of the boundary, of an area subject to a zoning action, one double face sign shall be erected on the side of the street included within the proposed change within each 1,000 lineal feet of street frontage. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-109) 
Sec. 14-110. - Fees. 
    14-110.1 General[ly]. Standardized fee schedules may be established by ordinance of the board of commissioners to partially defray the processing and administrative costs associated with each type of application associated with this ordinance. All fees are to be paid at the time of filing. Fees shall be waived for the following: 
(1)  Applications initiated by any department of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
(2)  Any changes in zoning initiated by the planning commission and board of commissioners to implement the general plan. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2009, § 14-110; Ord. No. 2012-45, § 4, 7-23-2012; Ord. No. 2017-61, § 1, 10-23-2017) 
Part C - STORMWATER ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Stormwater Ordinance for the City of Mt. Juliet, Ord. No. 2013-81, adopted Nov. 25, 2013. The stormwater ordinance was formerly codified in Ch. 22 of the Code of Ordinances, and derived from Code 1997, §§ 14-1-101, 14-1-102, 14-2-101, 14-3-101-14-3-108, 14-4-101-14-4-105, 14-5-101-14-5-105, 14-6-101-14-6-104, 14-7-101-14-7-104, 14-8-101-14-8-105, 14-9-101-14-9-103, 14-10-101-14-10-106, 14-11-101-14-11-104, Title 14, § 11; Ord. No. 2004-36, § 1, adopted Aug. 23, 2004; and Ord. No. 2005-03, § 2, adopted January 24, 2005. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform. Capitalization and expression of numbers have been made consistent throughout the Land Development Code. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to: 
(a)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City of Mt. Juliet and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the cities stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city. 
(b)  Enable the City of Mt. Juliet to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR 122.26 for stormwater discharges. 
(c)  Allow the City of Mt. Juliet to exercise the powers granted in Tennessee Code Annotated § 68-221-1105, which provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to: 
(1)  Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality; 
(2)  Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this statute, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits; 
(3)  Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality; 
(4)  Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed subdivisions or commercial developments; 
(5)  Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities; 
(6)  Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of the permit; 
(7)  Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been contaminated; and 
(8)  Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public or private. 
(2)  Administering entity. The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall administer the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 1, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
(1)  As built plans: Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed. 
(2)  Best management practices or BMP: Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the City of Mt. Juliet, and that have been incorporated by reference into this ordinance as if fully set out therein. 
(3)  Buffer: A stream buffer is a non-structural low impact development control in areas along a stream or wetland where disturbance is restricted or prohibited. 
(4)  Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
(5)  Community water: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the City of Mt. Juliet, TN. 
(6)  Construction general permit (CGP): Permit issued by State of Tennessee regulating stormwater discharge from construction sites. 
(7)  Contaminant: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
(8)  Design storm event: A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility. 
(9)  Discharge: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(10)  Easement: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of another. 
(11)  Erosion: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by naturally occurring or land disturbance activities or effects. 
(12)  SWPPP: A written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
(13)  Hot spot: An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
(14)  Illicit connections: Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system. 
(15)  Illicit discharge: Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted under section 3, paragraph 3, Exemptions. 
(16)  Land disturbing activity: Any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. 
(17)  Maintenance: Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
(18)  Maintenance agreement: A document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
(19)  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): The conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm drains. 
(20)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or NPDES permit: A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342. 
(21)  Off-site facility: A structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
(22)  On-site facility: A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
(23)  Peak flow: The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event. 
(24)  Person: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
(25)  Priority area - Hot spots: as defined in section 2, paragraph 11, Hot spots. 
(26)  Runoff: The portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area onto adjacent property or municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(27)  Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea level. 
(28)  Sedimentation: Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in stream beds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
(29)  Soils report: A study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees. 
(30)  Stabilization: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
(31)  Stormwater: Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street washwaters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage. 
(32)  Stormwater management: The programs to maintain quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
(33)  Stormwater management facilities: The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of. 
(34)  Stormwater management plan: The set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMP, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
(35)  Stormwater runoff: The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
(36)  Stormwater utility: The stormwater utility created by ordinance of the city to administer the stormwater management ordinance, and other stormwater rules and regulations adopted by the municipality. 
(37)  Structural BMP: Devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff. 
(38)  Surface water: Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other water courses, lakes and reservoirs. 
(39)  Watercourse: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(40)  Watershed: The land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 2, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 3. - Land disturbance permits. 
(1)  When required. 
(a)  Every person will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department in the following cases: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity disturbs one or more acres of land. 
(2)  Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one or more acre of land; 
(3)  Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if in the discretion of the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department such activity poses a unique threat to water, or public health or safety; 
(4)  The creation and use of borrow pits. 
(2)  Building permit. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this ordinance. 
(3)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the permit requirement: 
(a)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
(b)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(c)  Any logging or agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a timber management plan approved by the appropriate federal or state agency and the City of Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
(4)  Application for a land disturbance permit. 
(a)  Each application shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Business or residence address of applicant; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of record in the office of the assessor of property; 
(4)  Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(6)  A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity. 
(7)  Where the property includes a sinkhole, the area shall be managed in accordance with subsection 4-101.401 of the City of Mt. Juliet Subdivision Regulations and the City of Mt. Juliet policy on management of karst features in residential subdivision as adopted by Regional Planning Commission on October 15, 2009. If the applicant chooses to remediate the sinkhole, then the applicant shall obtain from the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation the required permits. 
(8)  The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department from imposing additional development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this ordinance, on the development of property covered by those permits. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as described in section 4, paragraph 5. 
(c)  A stormwater management plan as described in section 4, paragraph 4, providing for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed. 
(d)  Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by payment of land disturbance permit and other stormwater management fees, which shall be set by resolution or ordinance. 
(5)  Review and approval of application. 
(a)  The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department will review each application for a land disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. Within 15 days after receiving an application, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall provide one of the following responses in writing: 
(1)  Approval of the permit application; 
(2)  Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this ordinance, and issue the permit subject to these conditions. 
(3)  Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the denial. 
(b)  If the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions established by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. However, the applicant shall be allowed to proceed with his land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to conditions established by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(c)  No development plans will be released until the land disturbance permit has been approved. 
(6)  Permit duration. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within 90 calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within 12 months from the date of approval. 
(7)  Notice of construction. The applicant must notify the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department ten working days in advance of the commencement of construction. The applicant, along with the notice must request an appointment to hold a pre-construction meeting with the staff of the stormwater department. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(a)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(b)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(c)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
(d)  Any violations that exist. 
(e)  Any assessment of penalties, warnings, or restriction imposed. 
(8)  Performance surety. 
(a)  The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance surety prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance surety shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement. The performance surety shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. Alternatively the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost estimates. 
(b)  The performance surety shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in Tennessee that the structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department will make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this ordinance. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance surety based on the completion of various development stages can be made at the discretion of the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 3, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 4. - Stormwater system design and management standards. 
(1)  Stormwater design or BMP manual. 
(a)  Adoption. The municipality adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manual the latest revision of [the] following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this ordinance as is fully set out herein: 
(1)  City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Design Guidelines. 
(2)  TDEC Sediment and Erosion Control Manual. 
(3)  TDEC Manual for Post Construction. 
(4)  The City of Mt. Juliet Subdivision Regulation. 
(b)  This manual includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the specific design performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the governing body of the municipality, upon the recommendation of the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitory and local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(2)  General performance criteria for stormwater management. All sites within the City of Mt. Juliet shall be required to comply with the following performance requirements of this ordinance and the stormwater design guidelines for the City of Mt. Juliet unless site specific engineering determinations allow for reduced on-site requirements (i.e. the nature of the site development and/or the location of the site discharge with respect to local water bodies). 
(a)  All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms specified in this ordinance or in the BMP manual and reduce the generation of post construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(b)  To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual. 
(c)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(d)  Stormwater discharges from hot spots may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(e)  Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(f)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities. 
(3)  Minimum control requirements. 
(a)  Stormwater designs shall meet the multi-stage storm frequency storage requirements as identified in the most current BMP manual unless the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department has granted the applicant a full or partial waiver for a particular BMP under section 6. 
(b)  If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(4)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(a)  Topographic base map: A one-inch equals 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 300 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates: 
(1)  Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands; and the type, size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures; 
(2)  Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
(3)  All other existing significant natural and artificial features; 
(4)  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; 
(5)  Proposed structural BMPs; 
(6)  A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(b)  Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the BMP manual. These calculations must show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this ordinance and the guidelines of the BMP manual. Such calculations shall include: 
(1)  A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable; 
(2)  Time of concentration; 
(3)  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil moisture conditions; 
(4)  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
(5)  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
(6)  Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities; 
(7)  Flow velocities; 
(8)  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and 
(9)  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(c)  Soils information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(d)  Maintenance and repair plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures in compliance with the requirements of the most current Phase 2, MS4 permit for the City of Mt. Juliet to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility. All permanent BMP's shall be inspected at least every five years by a State of Tennessee licensed professional engineer or landscape architect and kept on file with the property owner and made available to the City of Mt. Juliet upon request. 
(e)  Landscaping plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in Tennessee. 
(f)  Maintenance easements: The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record. 
(g)  Maintenance agreement: 
(1)  The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent property owners. 
(2)  The maintenance agreement shall: 
(a)  Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation. 
(b)  Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this ordinance. The property owner will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. It shall also grant permission to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained. 
(c)  Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual. 
(d)  Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(e)  Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property. 
(h)  Stormwater pollution prevention plans: The applicant must prepare a stormwater pollution prevention plan for all construction activities that complies with section 4, paragraph 5 below. 
(5)  SWPPP. The SWPPP (stormwater pollution prevention plan) shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The SWPPP shall comply with the most current requirements of the construction general permit (CGP). The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state of Tennessee. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least the following: 
(a)  Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and infrastructure required. 
(b)  A topographic map with contour intervals of five feet or less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity. 
(c)  All existing drainageways, including intermittent and wet-weather. Include any designated floodways or floodplains. 
(d)  A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified. 
(e)  Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of implementation for tree protection measures. 
(f)  Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling. 
(g)  Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site. 
(h)  A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics. 
(i)  Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements. 
(j)  Proposed drainage network. 
(k)  Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes. 
(l)  Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, etc. 
(m)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMPs. 
(n)  Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan. 
(o)  Specific details for: the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the work day by machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
(p)  Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site. 
(q)  A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the groundwater system through infiltration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 4, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 5. - Post construction. 
(1)  As-built plans. The City of Mt. Juliet specific requirements for as-built plans shall be promulgated by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department and included in the stormwater design guidelines Appendix C to the subdivision regulations. All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any structures located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in Tennessee. The plan shall identify all site stormwater outfall structures and structural water quality devices by State Plane Coordinates. A final inspection by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department is required before any performance surety will be released. The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance surety on the completion of various stages of development as each stage complies with the requirements of this ordinance. In addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(2)  Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(a)  Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
(1)  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
(2)  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
(3)  Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(3)  Inspection of stormwater management facilities. Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed as provided for in section 4, paragraph 4.g.2.b. 
(4)  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(5)  Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required for stormwater facilities under this ordinance, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 5, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 6. - Alternative provisions. 
(1)  General. Every applicant shall provide for post-construction stormwater management as required by this ordinance. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. Consideration of the request for waiver shall be based on the following: 
(2)  Conditions for waiver. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(a)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this ordinance. 
(b)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(c)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(3)  Downstream damage, etc. prohibited. In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream: 
(a)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(b)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(c)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(d)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property. 
(4)  Land disturbance permit not to be issued where waiver requested. No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 6, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 7. - Existing locations and developments. 
(1)  Requirements for all existing locations and developments. The following requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this ordinance: 
(a)  Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department. 
(b)  Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed. 
(c)  Drainageways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion. 
(d)  Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainageways. 
(e)  Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution of local waters. Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Ponds: 
(a)  Detention pond. 
(b)  Extended detention pond. 
(c)  Wet pond. 
(d)  Alternative storage measures. 
(2)  Constructed wetlands. 
(3)  Infiltration systems: 
(a)  Infiltration/percolation trench. 
(b)  Infiltration basin. 
(c)  Drainage (recharge) well. 
(d)  Porous pavement. 
(4)  Filtering systems: 
(a)  Catch basin inserts/media filter. 
(b)  Sand filter. 
(c)  Filter/absorption bed. 
(d)  Filter and buffer strips. 
(5)  Open channel: 
(a)  Swale. 
(2)  Requirements for existing problem locations. The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department shall in writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problem affecting such locations and developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. 
(3)  Inspection of existing facilities. The City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department may, to the extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of this ordinance, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality's NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs. 
(4)  Corrections of problems subject to appeal. Corrective measures imposed by the stormwater department under this section are subject to appeal under section 11 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 7, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 8. - Illicit discharges. 
(1)  Scope. This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the municipality's separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(a)  Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources: 
(1)  Water line flushing or other potable water sources, 
(2)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water, 
(3)  Diverted stream flows, 
(4)  Rising groundwater, 
(5)  Groundwater infiltration to storm drains, 
(6)  Pumped groundwater, 
(7)  Foundation or footing drains, 
(8)  Crawl space pumps, 
(9)  Air conditioning condensation, 
(10)  Springs, 
(11)  Non-commercial washing of vehicles, 
(12)  Natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, 
(13)  Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), 
(14)  Firefighting activities, and 
(15)  Any other uncontaminated water source. 
(b)  Discharges specified in writing by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(c)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department has received a dye trace application reviewed and approved from the State of Tennessee. 
(3)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(4)  Reduction of stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 8, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 9. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement authority. The stormwater coordinator for the City of Mt. Juliet or his designees shall have the authority to issue notices of violation and citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this section. 
(2)  Notification of violation. 
(a)  Written notice. Whenever the stormwater coordinator for the City of Mt. Juliet finds that any permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this ordinance or a permit or order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten days of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The stormwater coordinator is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) below. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The stormwater coordinator may order any person who violates this ordinance or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the stormwater coordinator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the stormwater coordinator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(3)  Conflicting standards. Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this ordinance and in the BMP manual adopted by the municipality under this ordinance, the strictest standard shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 9, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 10. - Penalties. 
(1)  Violations. Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this ordinance, who violates any provision of this ordinance, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department, shall be guilty of a civil offense. 
(2)  Penalties. Under the authority provided in Tennessee Code Annotated § 68-221-1106, the municipality declares that any person violating the provisions of this ordinance may be assessed a civil penalty by the City of Mt. Juliet Stormwater Department of not less than $50.00 and not more than $5,000.00 per day for each day of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(3)  Measuring civil penalties. In assessing a civil penalty, the stormwater coordinator for the City of Mt. Juliet may consider: 
(a)  The harm done to the public health or the environment; 
(b)  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
(c)  The economic benefit gained by the violator; 
(d)  The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation; 
(e)  Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the municipality; 
(f)  The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for specific categories of violations; and 
(g)  Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment. 
(4)  Recovery of damages and costs. In addition to the civil penalty in subsection (2) above, the municipality may recover; (a) all damages proximately caused by the violator to the municipality, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this ordinance, or any other actual damages caused by the violation. 
(a)  The costs of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this ordinance. 
(5)  Other remedies. The municipality may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this ordinance, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions. 
(6)  Remedies cumulative. The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 10, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 11. - Appeals. 
(1)  Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated § 68-221-1106(d), any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this ordinance may appeal said penalty or damage assessment to the municipality's governing body. 
(2)  Appeals to be in writing. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the municipal recorder or clerk within 15 days after the civil penalty and/or damage assessment is served in any manner authorized by law. 
(3)  Public hearing. Upon receipt of an appeal, the municipality's governing body shall hold a public hearing within 30 days. Ten days' prior notice of the time, date, and location of said hearing shall be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation. Ten days' notice by registered mail shall also be provided to the aggrieved party, such notice to be sent to the address provided by the aggrieved party at the time of appeal. The decision of the governing body of the municipality shall be final. 
(4)  Appealing decisions of the municipality's governing body. Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the municipality's governing body pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter 8. 
(Ord. No. 2013-81, § 11, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 12. - Stormwater fees. 
(a)  Plan review fees. 
Commercial Site Plans-$204.00 + $103.00 per acre or portion thereof, maximum of $6,010.00 
Residential Subdivisions-$204.00 + $51.00 per lot 
(b)  Land disturbance permits. 
Residential subdivision sections or commercial sites: 
Less than one acre - 1 acre - 4.99 acres $511.00 5 acres - 9.99 acres $614.00 10 acres - 19.99 acres $818.00 20 acres - 29.99 acres $1,023.00 30 acres - 39.99 acres $1,227.00 40 acres - 49.99 acres $1,533.00 50 acres - 59.99 acres $2,045.00 60 acres - 69.99 acres $4,090.00 100 acres - 149.99 acres $6,135.00 150 acres - 249.99 acres $8,180.00 250 acres - 499.99 acres $10,225.00 500 acres or more $15,337.00  
(c)  Stormwater erosion control inspection fee. 
Residential construction - $307.00 per residence 
Commercial construction - $0.1400 per sq. ft. of impervious surface up to a maximum of $28,600 PLUS $143.00 per acre of impervious surface, rounded up to the nearest whole number of acres. Impervious surface includes building footprint and all paved areas. 
(d)  Rock crusher fee. 
Plan review $204.00 Rock crusher permit fee 307.00 Total 511.00  
(e)  Stock Pile Fee. 
Plan review $204.00 Stock pile permit fee 307.00 Total 511.00  
(Ord. No. 2014-9, § 1(Att.), 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016-28, § 1, 5-23-2016) 
APPENDIX A - MOUNT JULIET PLANNING REGIONAL MAP 

APPENDIX B - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND DRAINAGE SPECIFICATION STANDARD DRAWINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- At the instruction of the city, former § 22-485 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Mt. Juliet has been moved to the Land Development Code, App. B, as set out herein. 

Sec. I. - General. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these specifications is to establish standards of design and construction, including construction procedures and quality of materials, that are adequate to assure the safety, convenience, and welfare of the people within the planning jurisdiction. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Local Government. The city or county government having jurisdiction within the area where a development is located. 
2.  City Engineer. That individual designated by the local government to receive and review plans submitted in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Engineer. An engineer certified and registered by the State Board of Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Section 62-202, Tennessee Code. 
4.  Enforcing Officer. That individual designated by the chief executive officer of the local government to enforce these provisions. 
5.  Standard Specifications. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Tennessee Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways, Nashville, Tennessee, March 1, 1995, and subsequent revisions and additions. 
6.  A.A.S.H.T.O. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
7.  A.S.T.M. American Society for Testing Materials. 
8.  Basic Regulations. The basic subdivision regulations of Mount Juliet Planning Region to which this material is attached as an appendix. 
C.  Approvals. All construction plans shall be prepared and submitted to the City Engineer. The content and submission procedure shall be as set forth in Section II, Planning. 
D.  Acceptance. Acceptance for public maintenance of any facilities or improvements located within any subdivision may only be accomplished by formal action of the governing body in the manner established in Subsection 3-101.7, Basic Regulations. Any approval of plans, etc., submitted in conformance with these provisions, shall not in any manner bind or presuppose acceptance of these facilities by the governing body. 
E.  Responsibility for compliance. In all matters involving enforcement of, or compliance with, the provisions contained herein, the subdivider (as defined in Basic Regulations, Section 6-102) is considered as the party legally responsible for performance; and the use of engineers, contractors, or other agents shall in no way diminish or absolve the subdivider of this basic responsibility. 
(Res. of 3-17-2016) 
Sec. II. - Planning. 
A.  Plan preparation. All construction plans for improvements within land subdivisions shall be prepared by engineers registered to practice within the State of Tennessee. The plans shall bear the stamp and signature of the individual responsible for their preparation. 
B.  Content. The information set forth in Section 5-103, Basic Regulations, shall be required upon each and every plan submitted hereunder. In any instance where special conditions may warrant, additional data may be required. 
C.  Submission, review, and approval. When the plans are complete, with all required data entered thereon, they shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and comment prior to formal presentation before the planning commission. If the City Engineer finds that the plans are in order and all required information is presented, he shall forward the plans to the planning commission for review and approval. Should any disagreement between the City Engineer and the subdivider (or his engineer) arise as to the nature of, or requirement for, any particular improvement or facility, the plans may be forwarded to the planning commission for arbitration of the dispute. 
    Action by the planning commission may come in the form of unconditional approval of the plans as submitted, conditional approval, or disapproval. Should the commission's action come in the form of conditional approval, the applicant may modify and resubmit the plans to the City Engineer for further review. Should the City Engineer find that the conditions established by the commission have been met, he may so certify in which instance the plans shall be considered approved. Should the commission act to conditionally approve the plans and no subsequent action is pursued by the subdivider (or his engineer) for a period of six (6) months following the date on which action was taken by the planning commission, the plans shall become null and void and any subsequent action shall require submission of new plans. 
D.  Action upon approval. Once the plans and preliminary subdivision plat have received approval, construction may begin. 
(Res. of 3-17-2016) 
Sec. III. - Typical sections. 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

Sec. IV. - Materials specification and construction procedures. 
A.  Preliminary Work. 
1.  Location and Protection of Underground Utilities. Prior to beginning excavation or grading, the subdivider shall determine, insofar as possible, the actual locations of all underground utilities in the vicinity of his operations and shall clearly mark them so that they can be avoided by equipment operators. Where such utility lines or services appear to lie in the path of construction, they shall be uncovered in advance to determine their exact location and depth and to avoid damage due to excavation or grading operations. Existing facilities shall be protected during construction or removed and replaced in equal condition, as necessary. 
Should any existing utility line or service be damaged during or as a result of the subdivider's operations, the subdivider shall take such emergency measures as may be necessary to minimize damage and shall immediately notify the utility agency involved. The subdivider shall then repair the damage to the satisfaction of the utility agency or shall pay the utility agency for making the repairs. In all cases the damaged structure shall be in as good or better condition as before the damage occurred. 
2.  Surveying and Staking. The subdivider shall be responsible for his own surveys and establish his own grades unless otherwise directed by the enforcing officer. 
3.  Removal of Obstructions. The subdivider shall be responsible for the removal, safeguarding, and replacement of fences, walls, structures, culverts, street signs, billboards, shrubs, mailboxes, or other obstructions which must be moved to facilitate construction. Such obstructions shall be restored to at least their original condition. 
4.  Clearing and Grubbing. The subdivider shall be responsible for cutting, removing, and disposing of all trees, brush, stumps, roots, and weeds within the construction area. Disposal shall be by means of chippers, landfills, or other approved methods not in conflict with state or local ordinances. 
Care shall be taken to avoid unnecessary cutting or damage to trees not in the construction area. The subdivider shall be responsible for loss or damage to trees outside the permanent easement or rights-of-way. 
5.  Traffic Control and Safety. The subdivider shall provide and maintain access to and from all properties along the line of his work. The subdivider shall also provide temporary bypasses and bridges where necessary to route traffic and shall maintain them in a safe and usable condition whenever, in the opinion of the enforcing officer, detouring of traffic to parallel routes cannot be done without hardship or excessive increase in travel by the public. 
Where single-lane bypasses are provided the subdivider shall furnish signalmen to control traffic operations and minimize delays. 
The subdivider shall provide, erect, and maintain adequate barricades, warning signs, and lights at all excavations, closures, detours, points of danger, and uncompleted pavement. 
B.  Roadway construction. 
1.  Stripping, Stockpiling, and Placing Topsoil. All topsoil shall be stripped within the street right-of-way and from any other area designated by the enforcing officer. Topsoil shall be stored in stockpiles. All organic matter within the right-of-way shall be stripped and disposed of unless directed otherwise by the enforcing officer. 
A two or three inch layer of topsoil shall be placed where seeding is required or where required by the enforcing officer. 
After the stockpiled topsoil has been placed as specified above, the area where the topsoil was stockpiled shall be neatly graded and dressed. 
2.  Excavation. Excavation shall conform to limits indicated on the plans. Excavation materials shall be removed in such manner that the slopes can be neatly trimmed. Excavation shall not be made below grade except where rock or stone masonry is encountered or undercutting of unstable materials is required. Materials removed below grade shall be replaced with approved materials thoroughly compacted. Where borrow materials are required to complete embankments or fills the subdivider shall be responsible for providing them. 
Rock excavation shall be removed to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the subgrade and backfilled with approved materials which shall be thoroughly compacted. 
Where a spring or seepage water is encountered that is not provided for on drainage plans it shall be reported to the enforcing officer. 
3.  Fills and Embankments. Embankment and fill materials shall be free from frost, stumps, trees, roots, sod, or muck. Only materials from excavation or borrow pits, or other materials approved by the enforcing officer shall be used. Materials shall not be placed on frozen ground. 
Where excavated materials are used in fill construction and the materials consist of earth and various grades of rock, the fills shall be carefully constructed with the larger or hard rock on the bottom followed by the smaller or soft rock and finally the earth fill to provide a well-compacted and void-free embankment. 
All depressions or holes below the natural ground surface, whether caused by grubbing, rock removal, undercutting, or otherwise, shall be filled with suitable materials and compacted to ground surface before fill construction is started. 
Backfilling around a structure shall have been completed and thoroughly compacted to ground surface before any embankment materials are placed thereon. 
Embankments shall be so constructed that adequate surface drainage will be provided at all times. 
Fill areas shall be compacted by a sheep's foot roller, to a density of not less than 95 percent of optimum density and within three percent of optimum moisture content per ASTM D 698, and each lift of fill materials shall be rolled until the roller "walk out". 
Fill materials shall be placed in eight inch lifts, maximum thickness. Where excavated materials consist mainly of rock too large to be placed in the normal eight inch thickness without crushing or further breaking down the pieces, such materials shall be placed in the fill in layers not exceeding three feet in depth. No rock larger than 18 inches in dimension shall be placed in fill. Care shall be taken to fill all voids between large rock and to assure that fill materials are compacted such that [text missing from original ordinance] of the top six inches of cuts or fills shall be accomplished with pneumatic-tire rollers. 
Backfill around structures shall be of crushed stone or earth meeting the approval of the enforcing officer; and the fill shall be placed and compacted in eight inch lifts and brought up evenly on all sides of the structure. 
4.  Undercutting. This work shall consist of the removal and disposal of unsatisfactory materials below grade in cut sections or areas upon which embankments are to be placed. It shall also include undercutting for pipes and box culverts where required. 
Known areas to be undercut shall be designated on the materials approved by the enforcing officer. The backfill materials shall be placed in eight inch lifts and compacted as specified for fill construction. 
Disposal of unsatisfactory materials shall be approved by the enforcing officer. 
5.  Subgrade Construction and Preparation. The subgrade shall be prepared in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades as shown on the plans. 
Grading of subgrade shall be performed in such manner as to provide ready drainage of water. Ditches and drains shall be maintained to provide proper drainage during construction. 
Hauling over finished subgrade shall be limited to that which is essential for construction purposes, and all ruts or rough places that develop in a completed subgrade shall be smoothed and recompacted. Soft areas shall be removed and replaced with crushed stone or as directed by the enforcing officer. 
The subgrade shall be checked and approved by the enforcing officer for adherence to the plans before any base materials are placed. 
6.  Shoulders and Slopes. All shoulders and slopes shall be trimmed and shaped to conform with the cross sections shown on the plans and as specified in Section C-5, below. Rock cuts shall be sealed of all loose fragments, projecting points, etc., so as to leave a clean and neat appearance. Shoulders shall be completed where required as shown on the plans and shall be double bituminous surface treated, with care being taken to protect the surface and edges of pavement. Shoulder materials shall be placed in uniform layers and compacted by overlapped rolling of both base course and pavement. The finished shoulder shall be firm against the pavement. 
C.  Base and paving. 
1.  Base Stone. After the subbase has been inspected and approved by the City Engineer, a base shall be constructed of the width and thickness indicated in the selected roadway cross-section. 
The base course of stone shall be placed and compacted in layers or lifts upon the prepared subgrade to a finish thickness as described and shown on the plans. No single layer or lift shall exceed six inches in depth. 
The base course shall be a mix of mineral aggregate conforming to the technical specifications set forth in Section 303, Standard Specifications. 
The aggregate base shall not be spread on a subgrade that is frozen or that contains frost. The base shall be placed and spread in uniform layers or lifts without segregation of size; each layer shall be compacted to a thickness no greater than four inches. The stone shall be mixed with graders or other equipment until a uniform mixture is obtained. Each layer shall be compacted by rolling with alternate blading until a smooth, even, and uniformly compacted finish is obtained. 
The base stone shall be graded and rolled while it is still moist from the pugmill mix. If the enforcing officer determines that the mix is too dry, water shall be added with a distributor tank truck while the stone is being graded and rolled. Compaction shall be uniform for the entire width of the roadway until a density of 80 percent of the solid volume has been achieved. Placement and compaction of each layer shall be approved by the enforcing officer before materials for the next successive layer are placed. 
No pavement shall be placed until the stone base has been approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Prime Coat. After the base stone has been prepared as outlined above, a bituminous prime coat shall be applied uniformly over the surface of the base by the use of an approved bituminous distributor. The prime coat shall be applied at the rate of the three-tenths gallon per square yard, using Grade RC-70 or RC-250, or refined tar Grade RT-2, RT-3, or emulsified asphalt, Grade AE-P. If, after the bituminous materials have been applied, they fail to penetrate before the time that the roadway is to be used by traffic, dry cover materials shall be spread at a rate established by the enforcing officer, (between eight and 12 pounds per square yard) to prevent damage to the primed surface. An excess of cover materials shall be avoided. No succeeding state of construction shall be placed upon the prime coat until it has properly cured. Aggregate for cover materials shall be Size No. 78 or 8. 
In addition to these general requirements, unless otherwise stipulated, all materials and methods of installation shall conform to the technical specifications set forth in Section 402, Standard Specifications. 
3.  Tack Coat. A tack coat shall be applied to old or existing pavement surface or to a previously prepared base or surface to provide bond for an overlaid course. The tack coat shall be applied at the rate of one-tenth gallon per square yard using materials and methods of installation set forth in Section 403, Standard Specifications. 
4.  Asphalt Base Mix. Upon completion of the application of the prime coat, or tack coat, an asphaltic concrete (hot mix) base shall be applied. The base mix shall be the thickness shown on the detail sheet for that class street. All materials and methods of installation shall conform to the technical specifications set forth in Section 307 and Section 407, Standard Specifications. The base mix shall be constructed of Grade BM (B-modified) materials, described in Section 903.06, Standard Specifications. 
Suitably sized samples for the determination of thickness and density of the completed pavement may be removed and tested, as directed by the City Engineer. The contractor shall replace without cost where samples are removed. If the deficiency in composition, density and thickness exceeds the requirements specified, they shall be removed and replaced by the contractor. Only materials that have been demonstrated by test as satisfactory for the intended use will be accepted. 
5.  Asphaltic Wearing Surface. The final asphalt wearing surface shall not be placed until a minimum of 75 percent of the residences served by the street are complete, any potholes in the binder have been repaired, the binder has been leveled, and where curbs are provided, the backfill behind such placed and compacted. 
Upon approval of the City Engineer the final wearing surface may be applied. The wearing surface shall be the thickness shown on the detail sheet for that class street. All materials and methods of installation shall conform to the technical specifications set forth in Section 411, Standard Specifications, for asphaltic concrete surface. The wearing surface shall be constructed of Grade D or E materials, described in Section 903.11, Standard Specifications, and shall utilize asphaltic cement Grade RT-4 or 5, or TRCB-5 or 6, as set forth in Section 904, Standard Specifications. 
Suitably sized samples for the determination of thickness and density of the completed pavement may be removed and tested, as directed by the City Engineer. The contractor shall replace without cost where samples are removed. If the deficiency in composition, density and thickness exceeds the requirements specified, they shall be removed and replaced by the contractor. Only materials that have been demonstrated by test as satisfactory for the intended use will be accepted. 
6.  Shoulders. Shoulder construction shall be completed by blading, moistening as necessary, and by thoroughly compacting. The shoulders shall be the width and thickness shown on the typical section as required herein and covered with a double bituminous service treatment. The surface shall be prepared as directed in advance of the surface construction. Upon completion of the prime coat, a double bituminous surface treatment shall be applied with the first course being at a rate of between 0.38 and 0.42 gallons per square yard. If the width of application is wider than the distributor, each width of spread shall not be less than one-half the surface to be treated. Areas inaccessible to the distributor shall be treated either with hand sprays or pouring pots. Immediately after each application of bituminous materials has been made, it shall be covered uniformly with Size No. 6, mineral aggregate. The aggregate shall be allowed to cure for a length of time to be determined by the chief enforcing officer before the second application is begun. 
The second application of bituminous materials shall be applied in the same manner as the first application, at a uniform rate of between 0.30 and 0.35 gallons per square yard. Mineral aggregate, Size No. 7, shall then be spread in the same manner as for the first spread at a rate between 20 and 25 pounds per square yard. 
Immediately after each spread of cover aggregate, uniform coverage shall be achieved by hand brooming. Additional aggregate shall be placed by hand on thin or bare areas. 
Immediately after spreading and brooming the cover aggregate, the entire surface shall be rolled, beginning at the edges and progressing to the edge of the pavement. Rolling shall begin within 30 minutes after the aggregate had been spread. The same rolling and curing procedures required in making the first application shall be repeated in making the second application. 
D.  Drainage system design. 
1.  Ditching and Channelization. This work shall consist of the construction of ditches adjacent to roadway shoulders and feeding to and from culverts under or adjacent to the roadway. All drainage ditches shall be graded in their entirety during the time the roadways are being graded; such grading shall be completed prior to final inspection of the roadways. 
2.  Stabilization of Ditches. All open ditches shall be stabilized in accordance with the following requirements: 
Size of Nearest Culvert (Upstream) Seeding Required To Be Sod Required Concrete Lined 15" Grades 1.00%-3.00% Grades 3.00%-12.00% Grades Exceeding 12.00% 18" thru 24" Grades 1.00%-1.50% Grades 1.50%-7.00% Grades Exceeding 7.00% 30" thru 36" Grades 1.00%-1.50% Grades 1.00%-4.00% Grades Exceeding 4.00% 42" thru 72" Grades Grades 2.50% or Less Grades Exceeding 2.50%  
3.  Concrete Ditch Paving. Concrete ditch paving shall consist of the construction of paved ditches on a prepared subgrade. The subgrade shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface. All soft materials shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials and shall be compacted as directed by the enforcing officer. 
Concrete ditch pavement shall be four inches in thickness throughout and shall be backfilled immediately after the concrete has set and the forms have been removed. The backfilled materials shall be thoroughly compacted. Expansion joints shall be located as directed by the enforcing officer. 
4.  Culverts and Storm Drains. This work shall consist of the construction of pipe culverts and storm sewers as shown on the plans. No metal pipe shall be used without approval of the chief enforcing officer. Reinforced concrete pipes shall conform to minimum standards for Class III, Reinforced Pipes, A.S.T.M. C76. 
Bedding for pipe culverts shall be Class "B" material. Pipes shall be bedded on a six inch thickness of Class "B" material and backfilled to a depth of 30 percent of the diameter of the pipes. Recesses shall be dug in the bedding materials to accommodate the fill. Class "B" bedding shall be Size No. 7, as shown in Chart No. 903.23, of the Tennessee Department of Highways Standard Specifications. Culverts and storm drains in existing roadways' shall be backfilled to the depth of the cut. 
5.  Headwalls. Concrete headwalls shall be constructed at both ends of cross drains as shown and detailed on the standard drawings included herein. 
6.  Catch Basins. This work shall consist of constructing catch basins complete within inlets, outlets, and inverts. Tops and inlets shall be constructed to conform to roadway grade so that drainage can easily be caught and no ponding created. Catch basins shall be constructed as shown and detailed on the standard drawings contained herein. 
7.  Box Culverts and Bridges. Design of box culverts and bridges shall be submitted to the enforcing officer for approval before construction is permitted. These designs shall be stamped and signed by a licensed engineer in the State of Tennessee, before submittal to the County for approval. 
8.  Extruded Concrete Curb or Formed Curb with Gutter. Concrete curbs or curbs with gutters shall conform to the standard drawings as detailed herein. Concrete for curbs and gutters shall be Class "A", at 3,500 psi. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed to the lines and grades shown on the plans, or as designated by the enforcing officer. The final subgrade for curbs and gutters shall be carefully graded and compacted to an even density and shall be smooth and true to grade. 
Formed curbs with gutters shall be constructed in sections of uniform length of approximately ten feet, unless, otherwise, shown on the plans or directed by the chief enforcing officer. Expansion joints shall be formed at intervals of approximately 50 feet using three-fourths inch thick joint filler. 
The contractor shall backfill behind all curbs. Parallel ditches behind and adjacent to curbs and gutters will not be allowed. 
Concrete shall be tested in accordance with provisions set forth in A.A.S.H.O. T-22, by a private testing laboratory. the frequency of testing shall be two tests for each 50 cubic yards, and fraction thereof, placed in one day. Test specimens are to be made and cured in accordance with A.A.S.H.O. T-23. The, aforesaid, tests will be conducted at the expense of the developer and test results shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
E.  Final dressing, seeding, and sodding. 
1.  Final Dressing. This work shall consist of dressing all slopes and areas to within reasonable close conformity to the lines and grades indicated on the plans, or as directed by the enforcing officer. Final dressing shall be performed by hand or machine to produce a uniform finish to all parts of the roadway including embankments, ditches, etc. Rock cuts shall be cleaned of all loose fragments and side slopes shall be laid back to a three to one (3:1) [text missing from original ordinance] these specifications. 
The entire right-of-way shall be cleaned of all weeds and brush and all structures both old and new shall be cleared of all brush, rubbish, sediment, or other objectionable materials. 
2.  Seeding. In all areas damaged or disturbed by the construction operation where established ground cover was present before beginning of construction, the subdivider shall be responsible for restoring the ground cover after completion of construction, unless noted otherwise on drawings. All areas seeded shall be graded smooth prior to seeding and the subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance of the smooth finished grade until grass is established. 
After designated areas have been carefully hand graded, soil shall be prepared for fertilizing and seeding. Fertilizer shall be a standard commercial fertilizer Grade 15-15-15, or equivalent, and shall be applied at a rate of not less than ten pounds per 1,000 square feet. The fertilizer shall be lightly harrowed, raked, or otherwise incorporated into the soil for a depth of approximately one-half inch. The subdivider shall be responsible for any regrading or reseeding required to produce an acceptable grass cover. Rutting and washing shall be restored by reseeding and strawing; in areas of extreme erosion sodding may be required. The seed shall be as follows: 
Name Percent by Weight Lespedeza 20 Serices Lespedeza 15 Kentucky 31 Fescue 40 English Rye 15 White Dutch Clover 5 Weeping Love Grass 5 or Kentucky 31 Fescue 55 Redtop 15 English Rye 20 White Dutch Clover 5 Weeping Love Grass 5  
The seed shall be sown uniformly at the rate of one and one-half pounds per 1,000 square feet. 
3.  Sodding. Sodding shall consist of furnishing and placing sod at all locations shown on the plans, or as directed by the enforcing officer. Work shall include the furnishing and placing of new sod, consisting of live, dense, well-rooted growth of permanent grasses free from johnson grass and other obnoxious grasses or weeds, well suited for the soil on which it is placed. All sod shall be cleanly cut in strips having a uniform thickness of not less than two and one-half inches. Sod shall be set when the soil is moist and favorable to growth. No setting shall be done between October 1 and April 1, without permission of the enforcing officer. The area to be sodded shall be brought to the lines and grades shown on the plans, or as directed by the enforcing officer. 
The surface of the ground to be sodded shall be loosened to a depth of not less than one inch with a rake or other device. If necessary, it shall be sprinkled until saturated for a minimum depth of one inch and kept moist until the sod is placed. Immediately before placing the sod, fertilizer and lime shall be applied uniformly to the prepared surface of the ground. Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of eight pounds of Grade 15-15-15, or equivalent, per 1,000 square feet. 
(Res. of 3-17-2016) 
















(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 



(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Res. of 3-17-2016) 


(Res. of 3-17-2016) 


(Res. of 3-17-2016) 








(Res. of 3-17-2016) 

(Ord. No. 2004-36, app. B, 8-23-2004; Res. of 3-17-2016) 
APPENDIX C - STORMWATER DESIGN GUIDELINES[1] 
City of Mt. Juliet 

Updated - November 19, 2009 
Statement of Compliance 
    All activities under Chapter 1 through Chapter 5 of these Stormwater Design Guidelines shall be in compliance with the Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, MS4 Phase II NPDES Permit TNS075451 issued February 27, 2003 and effective July 7, 2003 as set forth in Parts 1 through 7 of said permit, included in appendix C.4 of this document. 
Table of Contents 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix is the Stormwater Design Guidelines for the City of Mt. Juliet, Ord. No. 2004-36, adopted Aug. 23, 2004; amended through [July 2, 2014]. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, expression of numbers, capitalization and catchlines similar to that in the Land Development Code has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY 

Sec. 1.1. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of these regulations are: 
1.  To protect human life, health, safety and welfare, MS4 permit compliance, receive no NOVs from TDEC, EPA and COE. 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
4.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to maximize beneficial use without increasing flood hazard potential or diminishing the quality of the natural stormwater resources. 
5.  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area and generally increase the public awareness of flooding potential. 
6.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
7.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in floodplains. 
8.  To ensure a functional stormwater quantity and quality management system that will not result in excessive maintenance costs. 
9.  To encourage the use of natural and aesthetically pleasing design that maximizes preservation of natural areas through: (a) the application of low impact design and development and (b) the utilization of site landscaping and vegetation to enhance stormwater management and treatment. 
10.  To guide the construction of stormwater management facilities. 
11.  To protect or enhance stormwater quality to a level of designated use and minimize the impacts from new development or areas of significant redevelopment. 
12.  To encourage preservation of floodplains, floodways and open spaces to protect and benefit the quality of life and natural resources of the community. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.2. - Policy statements. 
    To implement the objectives presented above, the following general policy statements shall apply: 
1.  Each project evaluation will determine the nature and extent of stormwater management practices that are necessary to adequately serve the property and limit impacts to downstream public and private properties. The presence of LID, [a] decentralized and a regional facility will be considered in determining the extent to which management practices will be necessary. 
2.  A system of uniform requirements shall be applied to each individual project site. In general, these uniform requirements will be based on the criterion that post-development stormwater peak runoff and water quality and volume impact shall not exceed predevelopment conditions. 
3.  No construction, whether by private or public action, shall be performed in a manner that will negatively impact stormwater quantity or quality in its vicinity or in other areas whether by flow restrictions, increased runoff, or by diminishing channel or overbank storage capacity. 
4.  New construction may not aggravate upstream or downstream flooding. Existing downstream or upstream problems may be required to be corrected in conjunction with new development. 
5.  Unwarranted acceleration of erosion due to various land development activities shall be controlled to the maximum extent possible and/or practical. 
6.  New construction shall not be permitted until temporary or permanent erosion prevention and sedimentation control management practices have been placed or constructed and are operational to the City of Mt. Juliet's satisfaction. Mt. Juliet reserves the right to stop construction on properties that do not have adequate erosion prevention and sedimentation control measures. The "Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook," most current edition, as published by the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, shall provide guidelines for minimum standards for site management of erosion and sedimentation and may be supplemented by policy of the City of Mt. Juliet. 
7.  New development will be required to minimize impact to stormwater quality by applying structural and/or nonstructural management practices selected to address site-specific conditions. 
8.  Mt. Juliet reserves the right to require more stringent erosion prevention and sedimentation control practices on properties within sensitive (or impaired) watersheds proximate to waters of the state or on sites that fail to mitigate ongoing issues. 
9.  Mt. Juliet reserves the rights to require maintenance or modification of stormwater management practices that are not operating properly, as determined by the department of public works. 
10.  For properties where stormwater management practices are not feasible or are not necessary due to the presence of regional stormwater management systems, proximity to a receiving stream, or other determining circumstances, Mt. Juliet reserves the right to require on-site controls for stormwater quality. 
11.  Redevelopment of properties with or without containing on-site stormwater management practices may be permitted by Mt. Juliet provided the property and downstream public and private properties, infrastructure or waters of the state are adequately protected by a regional facility from stormwater quantity or quality impacts. 
12.  Land disturbance activities shall not be permitted within the floodway. Construction in floodplains, if permitted, shall be done in a way that protects or enhances stormwater quality and promotes land and tree conservation, greenways, floodplains preservation and hazard mitigation. 
13.  Mt. Juliet reserves the right to require a TDEC level 1 certified erosion prevention and sediment control professional to be on-site for inspection and enforcement of proper construction and maintenance of erosion prevention and sediment control management practices at a specific construction site. 
14.  The minimum diameter for all storm drains shall be 15 inches. Cross drains and/or pipes within a public right-of-way, shall be a minimum of 18 inches. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.3. - Stormwater management systems. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, stormwater management systems are considered to comprise two parts, the major and minor systems. A brief description of these two parts is presented below. 
1.3.1 Minor systems. The minor system of a stormwater management network is sometimes termed the "initial system" and may consist of a variety of stormwater management appurtenances ranging from inlets, manholes, street gutters, roadside ditches and swales to small channels or pipes, rain gardens, bio-swales and other LID applications. This system collects and may treat the initial stormwater runoff and conveys it to the major system. 
1.3.2 Major systems. The major system primarily consists of natural waterways, waters of the state, large storm sewers, major culverts, bridges and large water impoundments, LID systems, manmade wetlands and cisterns, but it can also include less obvious flow paths such as overland relief swales and infrequent floodplain storage. The major system includes not only the trunk line conveyance that receives the water from the minor system, but also the natural flow path that functions in case of overflow from or failure of the minor system. Properly designed overflow relief shall not flood or damage homes, businesses, or other property. It must always be remembered that the major system is needed for small, medium, and large flood events. Eventually, it will fill with water and flow whether or not it has been planned and designed, and whether or not development is situated wisely with respect to it. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.4. - Stormwater quantity and quality management. 
    Increased urbanization within the City of Mt. Juliet has caused radical changes to the topography, ground cover, and minor stormwater management systems within each drainage basin. These changes have adverse effects on the environment, primarily through the subsequent increase in stormwater runoff quantity and nonpoint source pollution which impacts stormwater quality. In some areas, the combination of increased runoff and the location of property near a stream causes frequent flooding (often several times per year). In these areas, upstream control of frequent as well as large flows may not provide adequate flood protection for residents and property downstream. 
    To minimize adverse stormwater quantity and quality impacts, onsite volume management of stormwater is mandatory for all developments that are not served by an adequately sized regional stormwater management facility, subject to review by the City of Mt. Juliet. Because volume management in downstream areas of a large watershed can cause increase peak flows in downstream channels, the City of Mt. Juliet reserves the right to alter the volume management criteria and to prohibit it where it would cause adverse impacts. This decision shall be based on sound engineering judgment along with supporting data and studies. Nevertheless, in all cases where volume management facilities are required, the location and design must comply with any stormwater master plans that may have been adopted. Quality: Design Storm: First Flush Two-year, 15 minutes-15-minute storm per Metro Nashville Intensity Duration Curve. 
    This policy is primarily concerned with maintaining pre-development conditions, for stormwater quality, flood storage, flow volume, and velocity; it should also be applied under certain conditions for the purpose of maintaining adequate capacity of an existing outfall or combining public and private efforts to correct existing deficiencies for flooding, erosion and stormwater quality. In some cases controlling the total volume of runoff to predevelopment levels may also be required. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.5. - Stormwater quality management practices. 
    Increased pollutant concentrations and loads impact the ability of the major systems and waters of the state to meet designated use goals. In many cases, the designated use goal for creeks and streams in Mt. Juliet are fishability and swimability. To minimize these stormwater quality impacts, onsite stormwater quality management practices during construction and post construction are mandatory for all developments subject to review by the City of Mt. Juliet. The extent and type of management practices implemented must be proportionate to the land use, pollutant discharge potential. Mt. Juliet encourages that a series of best management practices be implemented that optimize the use of required green and open spaces, especially along buildings and within or along parking lots. The stormwater controls shall be designed to achieve removal of 80 percent of total suspended solids (TSS) and removal of oil and grease. 
    Best management practices(BMP's)shall include but not be limited to: 
• The use of on-site landscaping and vegetation to enhance water quality treatment. 
• The use of "proprietary devices" in combination with primary or secondary BMP's that provide at least 80 percent reduction in total suspended solids (TSS) and removal of oil and grease with no bypass at peak system volume/velocity. 
•  The use of low-impact development and design (LID) applications. 
    Acceptable reference documents include: 
• Volume 1- Regulations, Metropolitan Nashville-Davidson County Stormwater Management Manual. 
• Volume 4 - Best Management Practices; Metropolitan Nashville-Davidson County Stormwater Management Manual. 
• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Low-Impact Development (LID); at www.epa.gov/nps/lid/#guide. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.6. - Floodplains. 
    Development of property located within the floodplain is discouraged and, if considered for permitting shall comply with the guidelines established by the City of Mt. Juliet. Wise use of the floodplain is encouraged to minimize adverse effects on flood heights, flow velocities and stormwater quality, as well as maximize land conservation, greenways, floodplain preservation, and hazard mitigation. Buffers are required in and proximate to approved floodways and blue line streams. 
    Areas of the floodplain available for development must be protected through the use of compacted fill, elevated structures, dikes, or floodwalls. Any use of these measures must be in accordance with requirements contained herein. Other floodproofing measures are subject to the approval of the City of Mt. Juliet. (See also FEMA flood insurance guidelines.) 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 1.7. - Erosion and sediment control. 
    All development shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes soil erosion and resulting sedimentation. Under no circumstances is construction to allow sediments to leave a construction site in a way that would be a violation of the site or a violation of the requirements of the City of Mt. Juliet. Site-specific variables such as topography, soil erodibility, stormwater management features, and vegetation shall be considered when developing an erosion control plan. The exposed area of any disturbed land shall be limited to the smallest practical area for the shortest possible period of time. New developments and areas of significant redevelopment shall be required to fulfill the provision in section 5.10 of this volume. This includes the requirement that sediment detention traps shall be required at the fringes of clearing along with silt fences, berms or other equal and appropriate measures. The erosion and sediment controls shall be sized to control runoff and silt for the duration of the project. 
    All development shall comply with appropriate local, state and/or federal requirements for: 
• Approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) through TDEC (Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation). 
• Obtaining an aquatic resources alteration permit (ARAP) through the Corps of Engineers. 
• City of Mt. Juliet approval for a site grading and drainage plan. 
• City of Mt. Juliet approval for a mass grading plan. 
• City of Mt. Juliet Land Disturbance Permit Requirements. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2.1. - Enforcement. 
    2.1.1 Right of entry. The director of public works, the stormwater coordinator, or any of their duly authorized representatives may enter upon the premises of any land within the City of Mt. Juliet for the purposes of inspecting the site before, during, and after construction to determine compliance with these regulations. The director of public works or any of their duly authorized representatives may enter upon the premises of any land and enter facilities within the City of Mt. Juliet for the purposes of inspecting potential impacts of stormwater management or any activities that may violate the requirements herein set forth. 
    2.1.2 Revocation. The director of public works may revoke any approval or permit issued under the provisions of these regulations when informed of any false statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application of plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
    2.1.3 Corrective measures. Any nonpermitted stormwater management system, or construction, nonpermitted fill or nonpermitted fill located within a floodplain shall, upon written notice from the director of public works, shall be removed at the expense of the property owner. 
    2.1.4 Stop work order. When it is found that any provisions of this regulation are being violated, the director of public works or the stormwater coordinator may issue a stop work order. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner of the business or property violating the provision, the owner's duly authorized agent, or the person responsible for such work. 
    2.1.5 Notice of violation. The stop work order shall set forth the following: 
1.  The reasons why such work is being stopped; 
2.  The regulations which is being violated; 
3.  The conditions under which the order may be removed and the work resumed; 
4.  The right to an appeal before the issuing director. 
    A hearing to appeal the stop work order may be requested by anyone upon whom a stop work order has been served. An appeal must be requested in writing to the issuing director within ten days of service of the stop work order. The issuing director shall hold an appeal hearing within 15 days of receipt of the appeal. At this hearing the issuing director shall determine which provisions of the City of Mt. Juliet regulations is being violated and the condition under which the order may be removed and the work resumed. The hearing shall be informal; shall be scheduled by the issuing director, and may be continued only with their consent. A written decision shall be mailed to the owner of the business or property within five business days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing. The issuing director's decision shall be final. If no appeal is requested within ten days of service of the stop work order, the stop work order shall remain in effect until compliance with the appropriate regulation or code section can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the issuing director. A compliance hearing to demonstrate that the business or work is in compliance with the relevant regulation or codes section may be requested at any time after issuance of the stop work order. The issuing director shall schedule such a hearing ten business days of receiving the request. Compliance hearings shall be conducted in the same manner as appeal hearings. 
    2.1.6 Penalties and injunctions. Any violation of these regulations shall be punishable by an appropriate civil penalty. Each day that a violation is not corrected shall be a separate offense as provided by law. In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the City of Mt. Juliet shall have the right to injunctive relief for any violation of these regulations. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 2.2. - Inspections. 
    The City of Mt. Juliet shall make or cause to be made the inspections required by this section. The use of recognized inspection services shall be requested in writing to the stormwater coordinator prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. The approval of such a request shall be by the director of public works. Reports by inspectors employed by recognized inspection services may be accepted provided that, after investigation, their qualifications and reliability prove satisfactory. As a minimum, any such third party inspection shall possess a current Level 1 certification from TDEC. No certificate called for by any provision of these regulations shall be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
2.2.1 Permitting; land disturbance permit. Grading and/or excavating activities shall not start on a site until the following documents have been obtained by the developer: 
1.  Site grading and drainage drawings that have been approved by the City of Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission and reviewed and approved (stamped-signed-dated) by the director of public works or his designee. 
2.  Site development drawings that have been approved by the City of Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission and reviewed and approved (stamped-signed-dated) by the director of public works or his designee. 
3.  Mass grading plans that have been reviewed and approved (stamped-signed-dated) by the director of public works or his designee. 
4.  Payment of all applicable land disturbance permit fees. 
5.  Completion of a project pre-construction conference with the staff of the stormwater division of the department of public works. 
6.  Installation of all approved site erosion and sediment control devices for review and approval by the department of public works. 
2.2.2 Construction. The City of Mt. Juliet, acting through the department of public works shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or grading for which a land disturbance permit has been issued, and a final inspection or waiver thereof shall be made of the tract of land upon completion. Upon notification from the permittee or his agent, inspections of the tract of land shall be performed at the following times, as well as such other inspections as may be necessary. 
1.  Prior to the initiation of the project after temporary or permanent erosion prevention and sediment control practices have been installed. 
2.  After the completion of the rough grading and installation of stormwater management structures. 
3.  Prior to an anticipated rainfall event. 
4.  After a rainfall event. 
5.  Upon completion of the project. 
    The Mt. Juliet Department of Public Works shall either approve that portion of the construction or grading as completed or shall notify the permittee or his agent where violations are noted. Work shall not be done on any part of the tract of land beyond the point of indication in each successive inspection without first obtaining approval from the Mt. Juliet Department of Public Works. In particular, construction may not proceed until the site has been inspected to ensure that adequately sized temporary or permanent erosion prevention and sediment control practices have been installed and are operational for grading activities. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 2.3. - As-built certifications. 
    Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit for any structure in a development, a Tennessee registered engineer shall submit to the director of public works certification that the stormwater management system (both public and private) and the public road system is complete and functional in accordance with the approved plans. Any deviations from the approved plans shall be noted on as-built drawings. To ensure the adequacy of stormwater quantity management facilities and stormwater quality management practices, this certification shall, at a minimum include as-built drawings showing final topographic features of all these facilities. This shall include invert elevations of outlet control structures and State Plane Coordinates for each outlet control structure, each outlet point, and each proprietary water quality device. Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations shall be required for as-built conditions to confirm that the constructed facilities meet or exceed the approved design requirements. As-built documentation shall include two paper copies (24" × 36") and one digital copy in ".dwg" and "pdf" format. 
    Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit for any new or substantially improved structure that is subject to minimum floor elevation requirements, a registered engineer and/or registered land surveyor shall submit to the director of public works certification of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement); or if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed. This information must be provided on the most current FEMA elevation certificate form. To ensure that floodplain cut and fill balances have been achieved, as-built plans, cross sections, and related calculations must be submitted for all pre-approved floodplain manipulations. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
CHAPTER 3. - PERMITTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 3.1. - Overview. 
    This chapter explains the procedure for applying for land disturbance permits and the process by which the City of Mt. Juliet reviews permits. Responsibilities of the applicant for posting permits, maintaining compliance with regulations, meeting time limits, and obtaining other required federal and state permits are also discussed. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 3.2. - Application preparation. 
    3.2.1 Preapplication conference. All applicants are encouraged to schedule a preapplication conference with the director of public works to discuss their proposed project. While not mandatory, a preapplication conference is strongly encouraged to assure timely permit application preparation and review. This conference should be used to determine if a proposed project qualifies for exemption and to determine how technical guidelines and criteria should be applied. 
    3.2.2 Required information and checklist. Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by a certification that a notice of intent (NOI) has been submitted to TDEC for a Tennessee general stormwater permit or certification that a permit is not required. The review of the plans will proceed if the certification indicates that the applicant will submit the permit number at a later date. If the site requires, a Tennessee general stormwater permit the permit number shall be shown on the grading plans before a grading permit is issued. This certification is presented in appendix C.2. Each application for a land disturbance permit shall contain site preparation plans certified by an appropriate registered design professional. The plans shall indicate whether or not the tract will be developed in stages and timing schedules shall be included when appropriate. In particular, site development plans shall include grading, drainage, and erosion and sediment control plans with appropriate plan and profile sheets for proposed streets or roads and details of the proposed stormwater management systems. An application checklist is provided in appendix C.1, to assist the applicant in preparing a complete application package and thereby ensure a timely review. The applicant shall attach a signed copy of the checklist with the application to certify that a complete package is being submitted. The checklist includes a requirement that the applicant be aware that certain land disturbances activities that will impact waters of the state, wetlands and/or sinkholes may be required to meet additional local, state, and federal regulations. It is the responsibility of the applicant to seek out and obtain any applicable state and federal permits, prior to the initiation of any permit for land disturbance activities. Some requirements of the checklist may not be applicable to all projects, depending on the permit being requested. These should be checked as not applicable. Omissions of any required items shall render the plans incomplete, and they shall be returned to the applicant, or the design professional, for additional information. 
    3.2.3 Grading, drainage and erosion control plans. The grading, drainage, and erosion control plans shall be of quality suitable for reproduction by electronic scanning or microfilm, and shall include as a minimum all of the following: 
1.  A complete plan of the proposed development at a scale no less than one inch equals 100 feet. This plan is to include existing and proposed contours at intervals no greater than two feet (NGVD to be used exclusively). Contours shall extend to the centerline of all roads bordering the site. A drawing shall be provided that shows the extension of contours 300 feet beyond each site boundary. Information regarding the next two downstream drainage structure shall be shown on this drawing (size, type, condition, capacity, existing calculated flow into the structure etc.). Where a stormwater management system ultimately enters the groundwater via a sinkhole or drainage well, the sinkhole or drainage well tributary area shall be delineated. At a minimum, the tributary area shall be delineated on a USGS 1:24000 quadrangle map to show basin wide contours. Preferably, the City of Mt. Juliet basemap data will be used to delineate and present the tributary area. 
2.  Existing and proposed buildings on the property. 
3.  Existing and proposed impervious surfaces, and calculated areas of each. 
4.  Proposed and existing stormwater management structures, including inlets, catchbasins, junction boxes, drive pipes, culverts, cross drains, headwalls, stormwater infrastructure or devices and outlet facilities, with size, type, slope, invert elevations and quantity indicated. 
5.  Hydrologic, hydraulic and stormwater calculations for appropriate design conditions and facilities. 
6.  Stormwater management control structure details including multiple-stage components for stormwater quality. If the pond is overtopped by the 100-year storm, include details of the proposed emergency overflow. 
7.  Any proposed swales, ditches, or proposed modifications to existing ditches, with typical sections and limits of changes indicated. 
8.  Calculations and details for sizing stormwater management practices including, but not limited to water quality, detention, pretreatment swales and other appropriate practices. 
9.  Any high water or flood lines, either calculated or observed in the vicinity of the proposed development, and the source of said line or elevation indicated. 
10.  All fill areas indicated as such, with the limits and elevation indicated. 
11.  At least one benchmark located, with the proper elevation indicated (NGVD to be used exclusively). 
12.  The location, size, current condition, material and capacity of the two stormwater management structures immediately downstream of the proposed development in every direction that will receive runoff. This may be shown on a vicinity map with a scale no less than one inch equals 2,000 feet. 
13.  Arrows indicating the existing and proposed direction of runoff throughout the plan. 
14.  Invert and top of grate elevations on all catchbasins and inlets in addition to flow line elevations, stations, and percent grades of all cross drains and pipe between inlets and catchbasins. Inlets should be sized to match pipe capacity. 
15.  Floodplain areas require the following information: existing and proposed floodplain and floodway boundaries along with floodplain elevations, cut and fill cross sections and volume calculations and lowest floor elevations for buildings in or adjacent to the floodplain. 
16.  Temporary erosion and sediment control measures to be implemented during construction including but not limited to temporary sediment basins, outlet protection devices, temporary seeding, mulching, geotextiles, straw bales, silt fences, etc. 
17.  Final stabilization measures proposed for all disturbed areas on the property. Areas with slopes 3:1 or greater shall be stabilized with soil bioengineering techniques, "green" engineering techniques or by other methods approved by the director of public works. Riprap may be used provided calculations are presented to the director of public works that illustrate that soil bioengineering or "green" engineering techniques are either not cost-effective for the site or not feasible. Show stabilization for each ditch. 
18.  Plans shall include the maintenance activities and expected minimum frequency required for each type of temporary erosion prevention and sediment control management practice. The details shall present information to indicate when the management practices need to be maintained or replaced without the need to be notified by the stormwater coordinator. 
19.  Where special structures such as box culverts, bridges, or junction boxes are proposed detailed hydraulic calculations and detailed plans showing dimensions, reinforcement, spacing, sections, elevations, and other pertinent information shall be submitted. 
20.  Delineation of wetlands, stream buffer zones, or other environmentally sensitive areas. 
21.  All drawings and calculations shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate design professional. All plans requiring engineering calculations (e.g., stormwater management design) shall be signed and sealed by a registered engineer. 
    Omissions of any of the above requirements for detailed plans and calculations shall render the application incomplete, and it will be returned to the applicant or his engineer, for additional information. 
    3.2.4 Street plan and profile sheets. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the current edition of the City of Mt. Juliet subdivision regulations requirements [part A of the Land Development Code] and the details contained therein. 
    3.2.5 Karst feature. Karst features, including sinkholes shall not be utilized for on-site stormwater management. Sinkholes and sinkhole buffers shall be managed as conservation easement areas per the City of Mt. Juliet subdivision regulations [part A of the Land Development Code]. Proposed remediation of a sinkhole shall comply with all local, state, and federal requirements for stormwater management and permitting. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 3.3. - Application process. 
    Applications for site development plans requiring a land disturbance permit shall be submitted to the Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 
3.3.1 Initial receipt and resubmittals. Permit applications are logged in by date. A basic project information sheet and checklist must be completed in its entirety. Failure by the applicant to complete the basic information sheet and checklist on initial submission may result in a delay in the review of the proposed plans. The project information sheet is included in appendix C.1. The checklist is included in appendix C.1. 
3.3.2 Staff review. The public works staff first conducts a sufficiency review of the permit applications to determine if all basic information has been included. A sufficiency review checklist similar to the application checklist presented in appendix C.1 will be used for this purpose. Should the permit application be determined to be incomplete, the application will be returned to the applicant along with a request for any additional information. When all basic information has been supplied, the planning technician will log in the plans and conduct a technical evaluation of the permit application. This technical evaluation will be based on the technical criteria outlined in chapter 5 of this volume. 
3.3.3 Staff recommendation. If in the opinion of staff, the work described in the permit application, including drawings, conforms to the requirements of these regulations and other pertinent laws and ordinances, a positive recommendation for approval shall be submitted to the regional planning commission for consideration. However, if in the opinion of staff, the application, including the drawings, describes work that does not conform to the requirements of these regulations or other pertinent laws or ordinances, staff shall not recommend approval of the application. The plans shall be stamped "returned for correction," shall be accompanied by written reasons, and returned to the applicant. The opinion of the director of public works shall be based on the results of the sufficiency review and the technical evaluation. 
3.3.4 Revisions to approved plans. Should prior to or during construction, changes be anticipated that would constitute a revision of the plans already approved by the director of public works, the approved plans shall be revised and resubmitted in sufficient quantity by a registered engineer. The resubmission shall include a letter stating why such changes are believed necessary for the approved plans, the grading permit and the completed basic project information form presented in appendix C.1. The City of Mt. Juliet reserves the right to waive the requirement or to re-review the entire set of plans in the light of requested changes. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 3.4. - Construction procedures. 
    A person, firm, or corporation required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the City of Mt. Juliet in compliance with these regulations must do so prior to commencing any work pertaining to the permit. Corrective measures including but not limited to notice of violation, stop work orders, penalties, and injunctions may be taken as required to enforce the terms of this requirement. 
3.4.1 Posting of permit. Work requiring a land disturbance permit shall not be commenced until the requirements of section 2.2.1 permitting have been satisfied. The permit holder or his agent shall post the land disturbance permit in a conspicuous place on the construction site. The permit shall be protected from the weather and be placed to allow easy access for recording entries. The land disturbance permit shall remain posted by the permit holder until the city has issued a use and occupancy permit. 
3.4.2 Effect of permit. A land disturbance permit issued pursuant to this section shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the city, state or federal regulations; nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the City of Mt. Juliet, from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction or of violations of these regulations. 
3.4.3 Time limits of permit. Unless the work authorized by a land disturbance permit is commenced within six months after the date the permit was issued, the land disturbance permit shall become invalid and a new permit shall be required. If the work, authorized by such permit is not completed in accordance with approved timing schedules, or 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall be invalid. However, for just and reasonable cause, one or more extensions for periods not exceeding 90 days each may be allowed. Request for such extensions shall be submitted in writing to the City of Mt. Juliet Director of Public Works. Authorization shall also be in writing. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 3.5. - Federal and state permits. 
    Approval by the City of Mt. Juliet does not relieve the applicant of responsibility for obtaining any permits required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, Tennessee Division of Ground Water Protection, region IV of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or by any other federal or state agencies. 
    When any state or federal permit requires stream and/or wetlands mitigation, then any such fee required as a part of the mitigation shall be used 1) locally onsite, 2) locally on streams within the jurisdiction, 3) locally within the extended watershed, or 4) within a negotiated adjoining agency or watershed. If this mitigation process proves impractical within six months of completion of the permitting construction, the mitigation may be directed to the state stream bank or retained locally to support development of parks and greenways. 
3.5.1 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 prohibits the unauthorized obstruction or alteration of any navigable water of the United States unless the work has been previously authorized by the Department of Army (DA) permit. The construction of outfalls, stormwater management outlets, or other structures below ordinary high water of any navigable water will require a DA permit prior to construction. Section 301 of the Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States unless the work has been previously authorized by a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the same Act. Placements of dredged or fill material below ordinary high water of any water in conjunction with stormwater management improvements (e.g., channel realignments, concrete slope paving) will require a DA permit prior to construction. The placements of dredged or fill material or any grading activities within a wetland must also be in compliance with section 404. If a permit were required, approximately 90 days would normally be required for permit processing. Depending on the nature and location of the work, it is possible that the work has been previously approved under authority of the nationwide permit and individual procession would not be required. 
3.5.2 Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation; Division of Water Pollution Control. Any activity that alters the course or physical character of a stream as defined by a hydrologic determination (HD) by the Tennessee Department of Conservation and Environment or by a jurisdictional determination (JD) by the Corps of Engineers, requires an aquatic resources alteration permit (ARAP). This permit is required for activities such as stream channelization, stream enlargement, dredging and diversions in box culverts. Section 405 of the Water Quality Act of 1987 (WCA) added section 402(p) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) to require the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) to establish regulations setting forth National Pollutant Discharge Elimination (NPDES) permit application requirements. Projects must be designed with sensitivity to stormwater quality issues and must comply with Section 405 as administered by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
CHAPTER 4. - FLOODPLAIN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4.1. - Zoning ordinance. 
    Permitted activities within the floodplain shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of article VIII, section 8-300, floodplain districts, and article XII of the most current edition of the Mt. Juliet zoning ordinance [part B of the Land Development Code], and the most current edition of the City of Mt. Juliet subdivision regulations [part A of the Land Development Code]. The regulations and controls set forth shall be applied within the areas designed on the zoning map or on special overlays that are made a part of the zoning ordinance and may be viewed upon request at the office of the director of public works. However, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the application of the article VIII and article XII regulations to lands that can be demonstrated by competent engineering survey, using adopted profiles from which the flood protection elevation is derived, to lie within any floodplain. Conversely, any lands that can be demonstrated by competent engineering to lie beyond the floodplain shall not be subject to the article VIII and article XII regulations. Any lands within the areas designated as floodplains on the zoning map or special overlays shall be subject to the regulations on controls pertaining to floodplains as set forth in this manual. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.2. - Base flood and floodway data. 
    All applications for proposed projects within areas of special flood hazard shall provide base flood elevations and floodway data to establish floodplain easements and lowest floor and fill elevations. Areas of special flood hazard along with base flood elevation and floodway data for many streams in the city are available from the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and the City of Mt. Juliet files. All proposed developments near streams shown to be special flood hazard areas must be designed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
    If a project is located in an unnumbered A zone, the applicant shall provide base flood elevation and floodway data as documented in a flood study when the project is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. In addition, a flood study shall be required for areas outside unnumbered A zones, when the stream has a tributary area of one square mile or greater. 
    The flood study shall consist of plan and profile data and water surface elevation calculations. The plan view shall show the floodplain water surface limits, floodplain easement lines, base line, cross section stations, and adjacent boundaries. The profile should show stream invert, cross section stations, and computed water surface elevations. 
    The report should also show the topographic divides on the plan and the ultimate zoning categories used. Base flood elevation and floodway data submitted by the applicant for areas previously without such data or for areas not studied by FEMA, shall be reviewed by the director of public works, and if acceptable, shall be processed for adoption as part of the official floodplain management data for these regulations. When the base flood elevation and floodway data submitted by the applicant results in deviation from the data developed by FEMA, such deviation shall become official following review and approval by both the director of public works and FEMA. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.3. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following minimum provisions are required: 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in accordance to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
4.  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
5.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
6.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
8.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of these regulations shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in these regulations. 
9.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of these regulations shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.4. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, the provisions detailed below are required. It is the intent of the City of Mt. Juliet that all construction, whether within or adjacent to the delineated floodplains, shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations. As an example, all residential construction shall be elevated such that the lowest floor is not lower than four feet above the base flood elevation. Exceptions to this standard may be granted on appeal to the regional planning commission based on a demonstration that the regulatory elevation places an unreasonable burden upon the developers or property owners. 
4.4.1 Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvements of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards. 
4.4.2 Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles shall meet the following provisions: 
1.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
2.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade, support the manufactured home chassis. 
c.  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standard for elevation and anchoring listed above. 
3.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, that is, it must be on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures, or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring in items 1 and 2 above. 
4.4.3 Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure (including manufactured structures) shall have the lowest flood, including basement, at least two feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Structures located in A and AE zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered engineer or architect shall certify that these standards are satisfied. 
4.4.4 Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space. Design shall also allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a registered engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net of not less than one square inch shall be provided for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
3.  Openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation. Access to the enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
4.4.5 Floodways; conservation easement areas. Areas designated as floodways are located within areas of special flood hazard. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area because of the velocity of floodwaters, which can carry debris and potential projectiles and have erosion potential. Floodways are also used as a base in determining the width of the required stream buffer as described in section 4, paragraph 9. Thus, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments, including fill, excavation, clearing, new construction and other development, are prohibited within a designated floodway. 
2.  Areas within floodways shall be set aside as a conservation easement area in accordance with section 4.-101.401 of the subdivision regulations [part A of the Land Development Code]. 
3.  The placement of manufactured homes is prohibited within areas of special flood hazard. 
    The open space uses listed below shall be permitted within the floodway to the extent that they are not prohibited in a particular area by any base zoning ordinance and all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of these regulations are met. 
1.  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
2.  Public and private recreational uses not requiring permanent or temporary structures designed for human habitation; some examples are parks, greenways, swimming areas, golf courses, driving ranges, picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, game and skeet ranges, and hunting, fishing and hiking areas. 
3.  Utility facilities such as flowage areas, transmission lines, pipelines, water monitoring devices, roadways and bridges. 
4.4.6 Floodplain alterations. Floodplain alterations, approved by the City of Mt. Juliet, that result in the filling or elimination of floodplain storage shall provide compensating storage capacity by dredging out at least an equal amount of volume as occupied by fill. All dredged or cut materials shall be removed from the site before fill materials can be delivered; unless all fill material is generated onsite. Dredging or cut volumes below the elevation of the two-year storm event shall not be included in the compensating storage capacity calculation. Every effort shall be made to preserve natural flow lines and to avoid situations that encourage sediment deposition in slack water areas. All dredged or cut areas shall be stabilized immediately to prevent erosion. Areas to be filled must be cleared of standing trees, stumps, brush, down timber, and all objects including structures on and above the ground surface. Topsoil shall be removed and stockpiled, while other spoil materials must be disposed of offsite. Fill material obtained offsite shall not be stockpiled onsite before grading cuts are completed. Fill material shall be placed in compacted layers and the minimum distance from the perimeter of any proposed building to the top of the slope shall be either 25 feet or twice the depth of fill at that point, whichever is greater. The fill material must not have slopes equal to or greater than 3:1 unless stabilization measures approved by the city engineer are installed. All slopes shall be stabilized. No alterations can be made to the floodplain and stormwater management channels without the written approval of the director of public works. All applicable requirements of these regulations and the following specific conditions must be met before such approval will be granted: 
1.  The construction of a levee, earth fill, building, or other structure that alters a floodplain area shall be permitted based on a plan prepared by a registered engineer, showing existing and proposed elevations, existing and proposed stormwater management channels, and existing and proposed structures. The director of public works, certifying that the alteration and construction as proposed are in compliance with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of these regulations, shall approve the plan. 
2.  The same shall approve the proposed excavation, filling or change of alignment of any existing channel under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
3.  The Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission shall approve the plan. Any duly approved alteration of the floodplain will be so noted on the official zoning map as a matter of information. The director of public works will make this notation upon certification to the planning commission that such alteration has been completed in accordance with the approved plan. 
4.4.7 Floodproofing. Floodproofing measures such as those identified below are acceptable provided they are certified by a registered engineer or architect as being consistent with the base flood conditions for the particular area, and that floodproofing criteria for nonresidential construction in [sub]section 4.4.3 are met. 
1.  Anchoring to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
2.  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters. 
3.  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
4.  Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls. 
5.  Addition of mass or weight to structure to resist flotation. 
6.  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
7.  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems to prevent the entrance of floodwaters. 
8.  Pumping facilities for subsurface stormwater management systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement floor pressures. 
9.  Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or flotation debris. 
10.  Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity flow basement drains. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.5. - Standard for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway. 
    No encroachments, including fill material and structures, shall be located within an undisturbed stream buffer. The width of said undisturbed stream buffer shall be as determined in article IV, section 4-102.102 [subdivision regulations in part A of the Land Development Code]. 
    For proposed developments located near small streams but where no base flood data or floodways have been provided or required under the federal flood insurance program or by section 4.2 of these regulations, the following provisions apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill material and structures, shall be located within a minimum distance of 50 feet from the top of the stream bank on each side. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least four feet above the base flood elevation as determined by an appropriate approximate method. 
3.  New construction and substantial improvement of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.6. - Subdivision standards. 
    All subdivision projects shall meet the following provisions: 
1.  Design shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
2.  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
3.  Stormwater management facilities shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
4.  Base flood elevation and floodway data shall be provided as required in section 4.2. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.7. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The existing lawful use of a structure or premises that is not in conformity with the floodplain requirements of this manual may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No such use shall be expanded or enlarged except in conformity with the provisions of this manual. 
2.  No structural alterations, additions to, or repairs to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall exceed 50 percent of its assessed value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use unless permanently changed. 
3.  If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future used of the building and premises shall conform to the provisions of this manual. 
4.  Uses or adjuncts thereof, which are nuisances, shall not be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses. 
5.  Any alteration, addition to, or repair to any nonconforming structure permitted shall be protected by floodproofing measures pursuant to [sub]section 4.4.7. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.8. - Dikes and floodwalls. 
    The design of dikes and floodwalls for flood protection purposes should consider several factors, including alternate compensating storage, possible surcharge in flood heights, overtopping, and failure. 
    Dikes are generally earth embankments that can extend sections of a building. Fill material used in their construction should be dredged from the floodplain to aid in providing compensating storage. The fill material shall be placed on cleared ground, compacted in layers, and protected from seepage. Buildings shall have a minimum setback from the base of the dike of 25 feet or twice the height of the embankment whichever is greater. 
    Floodwalls are preferred for locations with limited space and can be constructed as cantilever I-type steel piles, cellular walls, buttress walls, or gravity walls. They shall be well founded with cutoffs installed to prevent seepage. Areas located behind a dike or floodwall should be drained by conduits installed with automatic flap gates to prevent backflow, or by manually operated valves that are closed during flooding, or by a combination of these methods. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 4.9. - Buffers. 
    New development and significant redevelopment in or adjacent to the floodplain and floodway shall include buffers in the proposed plans. The buffer along waterways will be an area where the surface is left in a natural state and is not disturbed by construction activity. 
4.9.1 Buffer areas defined. The buffer shall be as defined in article IV, section 4-102.102 [of the subdivision regulations in part A of the Land Development Code]. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
CHAPTER 5. - TECHNICAL GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA 

Sec. 5.1. - Adequate stormwater management systems. 
    Adequate stormwater management systems shall have the hydraulic capacity to accommodate the maximum expected stormwater discharge for a specified tributary area and precipitation duration and intensity. 
    Adequate stormwater management systems shall be designed to accomplish the following: 
1.  Account for both offsite and onsite stormwater. 
2.  Maintain natural topographic divides. 
3.  Convey stormwater to a stream, natural channel, or other existing facility. 
4.  Discharge stormwater into the natural channel by connecting the channel at natural elevations, or by discharging the stormwater into an existing facility of sufficient capacity to receive it. 
5.  Limit or control erosion and/or sediment leaving the site to predevelopment levels through the use of appropriate stormwater quality best management practices. 
    Determination of the size and capacity of an adequate stormwater management system shall take into account the future development in the watershed or affected portions thereof. The design must not adversely affect adjacent or neighboring properties. 
    It is the responsibility of the developer or property owner to pick up or acceptably handle the quantity of runoff as it flows onto their property from the watershed above, and conduct it through the property to an adequate outfall at the lower property line or beyond. The outfall must be sufficient to receive the runoff without deterioration of the downstream channel. 
    The stormwater management system for new developments shall be designed to enhance stormwater quality for runoff, or a portion thereof, entering the property from the above watershed. New developments and areas of significant redevelopment are required to control stormwater quality for runoff from their site per the requirements of section 1.5, Stormwater Quality Management Practices, to predevelopment levels through the use of best management practice. If it is not feasible to implement an on-site stormwater quality best management practices then the developer may, with approval from the director of public works, design a system that controls quality for an equivalent portion of runoff entering from the watershed above. 
    5.1.1 Minor systems. The design of pipes, inlets, and outfall structures the minor stormwater management system shall be based on a storm frequency of 25 years. This criterion shall be applied on both closed conduit and open channel systems. However, if the 25-year design flow for an open channel system is greater than 100 cubic feet per seconds (cfs), then the open or closed system shall be capable of passing the 100-year design flow within the drainage easement. In residential subdivision developments where the average lot size is less than 20,000 square feet, the following general guidelines shall be observed in the design of the minor system: 
1.  Site grading design shall minimize runoff across lots. Design priority shall be to direct runoff to the front or rear of lots along side lot lines. 
2.  Design surface runoff across lots shall not have erosive velocities. 
3.  Quantities of surface runoff greater than four cfs that flow through lots shall be collected and conveyed in a system of open channels, closed conduits, or a combination of both. 
4.  Lots should generally be graded in such a manner that surface runoff is collected in a system of open channels, closed conduits, or a combination of both. However, runoff will be permitted to cross more than one lot before it is collected if the system is designed to achieve stormwater quality benefit and does not pose a risk of erosion or other damage to public or private property. This may only be performed with approval from the director of public works. 
    Design flows may be determined by acceptable methods including the Rational Method, Soil Conservation Service (SCS) methodology, and the Unit Hydrograph Method. 
    5.1.2 Major systems. Wherever possible, natural waterways serving the major system should remain undisturbed, with proposed development situated accordingly. Detention may be required to avoid discharges that exceed the capacity of downstream natural waterways. Channelization and other related modifications to the natural waterways are discouraged. Improvements to natural open channels that are to function primarily as the major system shall be designed to pass the 100-year design flow without damage to the channel. Manmade channels designed to function, as the major system (trunk line system), shall be capable of carrying a 100-year design flow. Where manmade channels are necessary, the channels should be located as far away from buildings or structures as possible and preferably in established greenways or other conservation corridors. The on-site major stormwater management system for most developments is the natural backup system and consists of the less obvious drainageways. Ideally, this major system should provide relief such that no building will be flooded with a 100-year design flow even if the minor system capacity is exceeded. The 100-year frequency storm shall be used to compute runoff for the design of the onsite major stormwater management system. This system shall be designed to provide relief for flow in excess of the 25-year design flow. The following guidelines pertain to design of the onsite major stormwater management system: 
1.  Areas should be graded in such a manner or buildings located or constructed in such a manner that if the capacity of the minor system is exceeded; no building will be flooded by the design flow. 
2.  Critical areas to consider are sumps, relatively flat areas, and areas where buildings are located below streets or parking lots. 
3.  The 100-year frequency storm for the duration equivalent to the time of concentration shall be used to compute runoff for the major stormwater management system. 
4.  For the first trial, the same time of concentration values shall be used that were used in designing the minor stormwater management system and the minor system assumed to be completely inoperable. If no building will be flooded based on these assumptions, then the analysis can be considered complete. 
5.  If buildings will be flooded based on the assumptions used in the preceding item, more precise hydrologic and hydraulic computations are required. The minor system, overland relief swales, or surface storage should be designed so that flooding will damage no building. 
6.  In general, the minor stormwater management system should not be oversized as a basis for providing major system capacity. The major stormwater management system should be in the form of area grading or the location and construction of buildings in such a manner that overland relief swales or surface storage will provide adequate flood protection. 
    The major stormwater management system should be evident on the drainage plan, including overland relief swales and areas that may be affected by surface storage for a 100-year design storm. Calculations performed for major system design should be submitted with the drainage plan. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.2. - Open channels. 
    5.2.1 Channel capacity. Open channel capacity shall be determined by Manning's equation. 
    5.2.2 Lined channels. Open channels may be designed as hard-armored, geosynthetic or soil bioengineering lined channels. Acceptable lining material must be placed in accordance with manufacturers' requirements. Approval of lining materials is subject to review by the director of public works. Channel lining shall be required when the design velocity exceeds the allowable, nonerosive velocity for a given channel reach and no other erosion control measures provide adequate protection. 
    5.2.3 Grassed channels. The design of grassed channels shall consider the variable degree of retardant generated by different types of cover. Temporary erosion control shall be utilized during nongrowing seasons and during grass cover establishment. The engineer shall note on the drawings or in the specifications that "All grassed channels must be in a well-established condition and show no sign of erosion at the time of final acceptance by the Mt. Juliet, Department of Public Works." 
    5.2.4 Easement width. All open channels shall be located within the right-of-way of a public utility and drainage easement. Minimum easement width shall be determined from table 5-1. 
Table 5-1. Minimum Easement Width for Open Channels Top Width of Channel Easement Width Less than 5 feet 10 feet 5-20 feet 10 feet greater than top width, with minimum of 5 feet on one side Greater than 20 feet 15 feet greater than top width, with minimum of 5 feet on one side  
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.3. - Storm pipes and culverts. 
    5.3.1 Conduit capacity. Closed conduits shall be designed for the total flow intercepted by the inlets during the design storm event. 
    5.3.2 Pressure flow. Storm drain system should generally be designed as nonpressure systems. However, pressure flow systems, if coordinated with the director of public works during the preliminary design phase, may be allowed. The hydraulic gradient for pressure flow systems shall not exceed the following criteria: 
1.  An elevation greater than one foot below the established rim or inlet elevation. 
2.  More than five feet above the crown of the conduit. 
    5.3.3 Easement width. Minimum allowable easement width for stormwater pipes and culverts shall be determined from [the following] table 5-2: 
Table 5-2. Minimum Easement Width for Storm Drains Conduit Size Easement Width 15-18 inches 10 feet 21-33 inches 15 feet 36-48 inches 20 feet 54-72 inches 25 feet  
    5.3.4 Inlets. Inlets shall be designed to convey the 25-year frequency, time of concentration storm event. 
    5.3.5 Culverts. The design flow for culverts shall be based on the following return frequencies: 
1.  100-year for residential collector and commercial road crossings. 
2.  25-year for residential roads and crossings. 
    In addition, building elevations shall be checked for flooding caused by the 100-year, 24-hour storm. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.4. - Outlet protection. 
    The design discharge at the outlet of stormwater management systems shall not result in velocities that equal or exceed the erosive velocity of the receiving channel, unless energy dissipation and permanent erosion protection measures are placed at the outlet. Energy dissipation and erosion control devices shall have no overfall at the terminal end and shall discharge onto a stable section. The terminal section shall be considered stable if the terminal section design velocity is less than the erosive velocity. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.5. - Bridges. 
    All bridges shall be designed for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event. The design flow shall consider runoff from the total tributary area and will require stream channel routing, as appropriate. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.6. - Stormwater management (detention). 
    5.6.1 Release rate. The release rate from any detention facility should approximate that of the site prior to the proposed development for the two-year, ten-year and 25-year storms, with emergency overflow capable of handling at least the 100-year discharge. Detention systems must be constructed during the first phase of major developments to eliminate damage to adjacent properties during construction. In this regard, the detention systems shall be designed to function as sediment traps per the TDEC Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and cleaned out to proper volumes before completion. If siltation has occurred, detention systems must be restored to their design dimensions after construction is complete and certified as part of the as-built submittal (see section 2.3). 
    5.6.2 Stormwater detention. Stormwater detention systems shall be designed to address the following design criteria: 
1.  The detention system shall be designed to address the stormwater runoff from the 25-year, one hour storm with a minimum of one foot of freeboard between the 25-year water surface elevation and the lowest elevation of the basin wall, including any overflow weir or notch. 
2.  The stormwater runoff for the two-year, ten-year, twenty-five year and 100-year storm shall be routed through the basin. The outlet structure shall be designed to detain the excess runoff from the two-year, ten-year, and 25-year storm. Post development flows shall not exceed pre-development flow. 
3.  If the calculated runoff for the 100-year storm over tops the basin, then an emergency overflow weir shall be provided with the outlet from this weir being designed to prohibit erosion of the basin wall and shall be located offset from the basin discharge structure. 
    5.6.3 Drawdown. Detention storage volume shall be drained within 72 hours. This requirement includes that volume above any permanent pool. Drawdown may be accomplished by a V-notch weir, perforated standpipe, small orifice, or complex geometry weir. Calculations shall be provided for sizing the drawdown orifice or other application. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.7. - Stormwater management (water quality). 
    Stormwater quality management practices are to be applied to all new developments. 
    5.7.1 Stormwater criteria. On-site stormwater quality management shall address the first-flush flow from the developed site. The first flush flow can be calculated from the two-year, 15-minute storm for Metro Nashville. Acceptable stormwater quality management applications include: 
1.  Low impact development and design (LID). 
2.  Structural or proprietary devices. 
3.  Utilization of site landscaping. 
    Stormwater quality management applications shall be designed to remove 80 percent of the total suspended solids (TSS) from the first flush runoff in addition to removal of oils and grease. 
    5.7.2 Dry and wet detention design criteria. All stormwater management dry or wet detention facilities designs shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Bleed down or "live" storage volume of the first 0.5 to 1.0 inches of runoff and residence time to 24 to 72 hours for dry ponds and 24 to 60 hours for wet ponds. 
2.  Permanent pond volume hydraulic residence time of two to four weeks. 
3.  Sediment forebay, baffle boxes or equivalent pretreatment device with high flow (100-year storm frequency or greater) bypass. 
4.  Length to width ratio of at least 4:1. 
5.  Energy dissipating inlet structures. 
6.  Safe side slopes. 
7.  Oil and grease traps or floatable debris skimmers. 
8.  Maximum permanent pool depth of no more than 12 feet unless re-circulated with an aerator or fountain. 
9.  For wet ponds, a littoral zone of 10-30 percent pond coverage within three years of planting. 
10.  The City of Mt. Juliet strongly encourages that major stormwater management controls, especially detention facilities, be designed as off-line devices. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.8. - Stormwater infrastructure maintenance. 
    Care must be taken to ensure that any required stormwater management facilities do not become nuisances or health hazards. Stormwater quality management practices generally require more maintenance than stormwater quantity management practices. Detention facilities should be designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance responsibility must be clearly stated on the plans. Where flat grades or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate low flow stormwater management system may be required. Where the retention/detention facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond, or stormwater quality management practice with a permanent pool; water budget calculations shall be performed and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate pool is expected during dry summer months. 
    All stormwater management facilities shall be within a permanent drainage easement and shall be maintained by the appropriate homeowners' association, or property owner. Stormwater management facilities located in condominium developments, apartment or townhouse complexes, single family PUDs, industrial, commercial, or institutional developments shall be within a permanent drainage easement and maintained by the property owner or homeowners' association. A stormwater maintenance agreement shall be executed, recorded and listed by deed book and page on the site development drawings before the development plan is approved. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.9. - Stormwater pollution prevention protection plan (SWPPP). 
    A stormwater pollution prevention protection plan (SWPPP) shall identify the erosion control practices and sediment trapping facilities, which are appropriate for the actual site conditions. The SWPPP shall be submitted to TDEC for approval and issuance of an NOC Tracking number. In addition, the appropriate schedule of implementation shall be identified. Particular attention is required for concentrated stormwater flows. Either concentrated stormwater flows shall be avoided or the conveyance system shall be protected sufficiently to prevent significant erosion. Sediment trapping devices are required at all points where stormwater leaves a site laden with sediment. The plan shall identify provisions including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Erosion prevention on denuded areas. 
2.  Nonstructural management practices to be implemented. 
3.  Perimeter controls. 
4.  Permanent stormwater conveyance structures. 
5.  Final stabilized conditions of the site. 
6.  Provisions for removing temporary control measures. 
7.  Stabilization of the site where temporary measures are removed. 
8.  Maintenance requirements for temporary management practices including minimum inspection requirements. 
9.  Maintenance requirements for any permanent measures. 
    5.9.1 Stabilization of denuded areas and soil stockpiles. Permanent or temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization shall also be applied within 15 days to any portion of denuded areas, which may not be at final grade, but will remain dormant (undisturbed) for longer than 60 days. Soil stabilization refers to measures that protect soil from the erosive forces of raindrop impact and flowing water. Applicable practices include, but are not limited to, vegetative establishment, mulching, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved. Selected soil stabilization measures should be appropriate for the time of year, site conditions, and estimated duration of use. Soil stockpiles shall be stabilized if left undisturbed for 15 or more days. They shall be protected with sediment trapping measures that may include sediment traps or detention ponds to prevent soil loss from the project site throughout the life of the soil stockpiling practices. 
    5.9.2 Establishment of permanent vegetation. A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise permanently stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a ground cover is achieved which, in the opinion of the stormwater coordinator, is mature enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather conditions. 
    5.9.3 Protection of adjacent properties. Properties adjacent to the site of a land disturbance shall be protected from sediment deposition. This may be accomplished by preserving a well-vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land disturbance; by installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers, filters, diversion berms, or sediment basins; or by a combination of such measures. Vegetated buffer strips may be used alone only where runoffs in sheet flow if expected. Buffer strips should be at least 60 feet in width. If at any time it is found that a vegetated buffer strip alone is ineffective in stopping sediment movement onto adjacent property, additional perimeter controls shall be required. 
    5.9.4 Timing and stabilization of sediment trapping measures. Sediment basins and traps, perimeter berms, sediment, barriers, and other measures intended to trap sediment onsite shall be constructed as a first step in grading, and be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes place. All sediment control practices at hydraulic outlets from the site must be installed before additional construction may take place. See section 2.2.2 of this volume. Earthen structures such as dams, dikes, and diversions shall be seeded and mulched within 15 days of installation. 
    5.9.5 Sediment basins. Stormwater runoff from tributary areas with five acres or greater disturbed area shall pass through a sediment basin or other suitable sediment trapping facility. 
    5.9.6 Cut and fills slopes. Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed in a manner which will minimize erosion. Consideration must be given to the length and steepness of the slope, the soil type, upslope tributary area, groundwater conditions, and other applicable factors. As a minimum, all slopes at 3:1 or greater shall be stabilized with rock riprap, geosynthetic material, or other method approved by the stormwater coordinator. 
    5.9.7 Construction exits. A stabilized stone pad shall be placed at any point where traffic will be leaving a construction site to a public right-of-way, street, alley, sidewalk, or parking lot. Stone pads shall contain ASTM-1 stone, six inches thick, 20 feet wide, and be a minimum of 100 feet long. 
    5.9.8 Deficient performance. If at any time it is determined by the department of public works, the property owner or designated construction site inspector/manager that the erosion prevention and sediment control practices as originally designed are not capable of preventing sediment from leaving the site under storm conditions, then additional controls shall be implemented. Additional controls shall be implemented to a level and until a time in which the stormwater coordinator is satisfied that the controls are adequate. If Mt. Juliet, DPW inspectors determine that adequate inspections and maintenance procedures are not being implemented or the controls designed are not meeting performance objectives presented in this chapter then the Mt. Juliet, DPW may issue a notice of violation, a stop work order, rescind a land disturbance permit, or take other appropriate legal action. See section 2.1 of these regulations. 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
Sec. 5.10. - Gutter and inlet hydraulics. 
(a)  Synopsis. The level of service of facilities that provide drainage of roadway surfaces should be consistent with the level of service of the roadway. Guidelines are given for evaluating roadway features and design criteria as they relate to gutter and inlet hydraulics. Procedures for performing gutter flow calculations are based on a modification of Manning's equation. Inlet capacity calculations for grated and combination inlets are based on information contained in HEC-12 (USDOT, FHWA, 1984) City of Mt. Juliet specific design information is presented for typical details contained in the Standard Drawings of the City of Mt. Juliet Public Works Department. 
(b)  Design criteria. The following design criteria are typically important for gutter and inlet capacity calculations: 
(1)  Return period. 
(2)  Spread. 
(3)  Inlet types and spacing. 
(4)  Manning's n values. 
(5)  Grade. 
(6)  Cross slope. 
(7)  Curb and gutter sections. 
(8)  Roadside and median ditches. 
(9)  Bridge decks. 
(c)  Return period. The design storm return period for pavement drainage should be consistent with the frequency selected for other components of the drainage system. 
(d)  Spread. For multilaned curb and gutter or guttered roadways with no parking, it is not practical to avoid travel lane flooding when grades are flat (1.0) percent. However, flooding should never exceed the lane adjacent to the gutter (or shoulder) for design conditions. Standard practice in the city is to limit maximum stormwater spread to eight feet, measured from the face of the curb. Municipal bridges with curb and gutter should also use this criterion. For single-lane roadways, at least eight feet of roadway should remain unflooded for design conditions. 
(e)  Inlet types and spacing. Inlet types shall be selected from standard drawings DR-105, DR-110, and DR-115 of the city public works department standard drawings set forth in Appendix B. Inlets shall be located or spaced in such a manner that the design curb flow does not exceed the spread criterion of eight feet. No flow will be allowed to cross intersecting streets unless approved by the city department of public works. In addition, curb and gutter inlets should not be built in curb returns. 
(f)  Manning's n values. Manning's n values for various pavement surfaces are presented in the table in subsection (l) of this section. 
(g)  Grade. Curb and gutter grades that are equal to pavement slopes shall not exceed 13 percent or fall below one percent without approval from the city department of public works. A minimum longitudinal gradient is more important for curbed pavements, which are susceptible to stormwater spread. Flat gradients on uncurbed pavements can lead to a spread problem if vegetation is allowed to build up along the pavement edge. 
(h)  Cross slope. The design of pavement cross slope is often a compromise between the need for reasonably steep cross slopes for drainage and relatively flat cross slopes for driver comfort. In most city design situations, cross slopes will be defined by the standard pavement sections given on standard drawings ST-101, ST-102, ST-105, ST-106, ST-108, ST-109, ST-111, and ST-112 of the city public works department standard drawings for streets and roads set forth in Appendix B. The standard city cross slope is a four-inch crown over the edge of the pavement. When three or more lanes are inclined in the same direction on multilane pavements, it is desirable for each successive pair of lanes, or the portion thereof outward from the first two lanes from the crown line, to have an increased slope. The two lanes adjacent to the crown line should be pitched at the normal slope, and successive lane pairs, or portions thereof outward, should be increased by about 0.5 to 1.0 percent. Where three or more lanes are provided in each direction, the maximum pavement cross slope should be limited to four percent. 
(i)  Curbs and gutter sections. Curbing at the outside edge of pavements is normal practice for low-speed, urban highway facilities. Curb and curb and gutter details are presented in standard drawings ST-200, ST-202, ST-203, and ST-204 of the city public works department standard drawings set forth in Appendix B. Standard gutter width is as shown on the details. Gutters are on the same cross slope as the pavement on the high side and depressed with a steeper cross slope on the low side, usually one inch per foot. Typical practice is to place curbs at the outside edge of shoulders or parking lanes on low speed facilities. 
(j)  Roadside and median ditches. Roadside ditches are commonly used with uncurbed roadway sections to convey pavement runoff and up gradient area runoff that drains toward the pavement. Right-of-way limitations prevent use of roadside ditches in densely developed urban areas. They can be used in cut sections, depressed sections, and other locations where sufficient right-of-way is available and driveways or intersections are infrequent. Curbed highway sections are relatively inefficient at conveying water, and the area tributary to the gutter section should be kept to a minimum to reduce the hazard from water on the pavement. Where practicable, the flow from major areas draining toward curbed highway pavements should be intercepted by ditches as appropriate. It is preferable to slope median areas and inside shoulders to a center swale, to prevent drainage from the median areas from running across the pavement. This is particularly important for high-speed facilities and for facilities with more than two lanes of traffic in each direction. 
(k)  Bridge decks. Drainage of bridge decks is similar to other curbed roadway sections. It is often less efficient, because cross slopes are flatter, parapets collect large amounts of debris, and small drainage inlets on scuppers have a higher potential for clogging by debris. Bridge deck constructability usually requires a constant cross slope, so the guidelines in subsection (h) of this section do not apply. Because of the difficulties in providing and maintaining adequate deck drainage systems, gutter flow from roadways should be intercepted before it reaches a bridge. In many cases, deck drainage must be carried several spans to the bridge and for disposal. Zero gradients and sag vertical curves should be avoided on bridges. The minimum desirable grade for bridge deck drainage should be 1.0 percent. When bridges are placed at a vertical curve and the grade is less than 1.0 percent, the gutter spread should be checked to ensure a safe, reasonable design. Scuppers are the recommended method of deck drainage, because they can reduce the problems of transporting a relatively large concentration of runoff in an area of generally limited right-of-way. They also have a low initial cost and are relatively easy to maintain. However, the use of scuppers should be evaluated for site-specific concerns. Scuppers should not be located over embankments, slope pavements, slope protection, navigation channels, driving lanes, or railroad tracks. Runoff collected and transported to the end of the bridge should generally be collected by inlets and down drains, although sod flumes may be used for extremely minor flows in some areas. 
(l)  Gutter flow calculations. The following form of Manning's equation should be used to evaluate gutter flow hydraulics: 
Q = 0.56 S 5/3 S 1/2 T8/3 (5-1) N x Where: Q = Gutter flow rate, in cfs N = Manning's roughness coefficient S = Pavement cross slope, in feet X S = Grade, in feet/foot T = Width of flow or spread, in feet  
Nomographs for solving equation 5-1 are presented in other technical literature. 
Manning's n Values for Street and Pavement Gutters Type of Gutter or Pavement Manning's n Design value for the city 0.014 Concrete gutter, troweled finish 0.012 Asphalt pavement Smooth texture 0.013 Rough texture 0.016 Concrete gutter with asphalt pavement Smooth 0.013 Rough 0.015 Concrete pavement Float finish 0.014 Broom finish 0.016 For gutters where sediment may accumulate, increase values of n by 0.002  
Reference: USDOT, FHWA, HDS 0 3 (1961). 
(Amend. of [7-2-2014]) 
APPENDIX C.1. - STORMWATER DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST 
Stormwater Development Checklist (Plans submittal information forms will not be accepted for review without the form completed) Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Pre-conference meeting: Project name (as approved): OWNER Company name (including DBA): Legal owner: Address: Email: Phone: Cell: Fax: Designee/representative: Legal proof: Address: (w/POA or affidavit) Email: Phone: Cell: Fax: REPRESENTATIVE Corporate guidelines: Y / N USACE JD/HD: TDEC JD/HD: Preliminary Geo-Tech: ARAP: NOI: NOC: NPDES: DUE DILIGENCE Environmental impact: Tennessee General Stormwater Permit Certification (C.2): MAPS and DATA SET Drainage basin extended; current flood study; Karsts (GPS data); current/proposed contours; soils; environmental sensitive sites; two-foot contours; 1 inch equals 50-foot scale; existing stream and watercourse survey; 15-20 percent and 20 percent plus slopes; floodway; 100-year floodplain (cut and fill cross-sections and volume calculations); existing and proposed buildings and pavement; wetlands; buffers; benchmarks (minimum two state plane coordinates); next two downstream structures with size, type, slopes and insets in all directions of drainage discharge or bypass. SWPPP (as submitted to TDEC): Three current, interim, post construction/final Strewn or blown straw is not accepted except where properly crimped. Slopes up to 3:1 may use matting, slopes exceeding 3:1 require a method approved by stormwater/engineering. Calculations: Stormwater management system design calculations based on 25-year design storm for minor system and 100-year design for major system. Calculation should be for pipes and ditches as well as areas where the runoff sheet flows. Stormwater quantity detention designs calculations, for detaining the two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year storms and evaluates the effects of the 100-year storm. If a pond is overtopped by the 100-year storm, provide details of an emergency overflow device. SWPP One full size plans: Two 11 by 17: PDF/DWG: (Plans - Stamped/signed approved site plans by Marlin Keel) (ARC map shape files with minimum two state coordinates) Stormwater management maintenance 
agreement: Received: Recorded: Blasting license from state (photo I.D. and insurance): TDEC level one certificate: Received: Name: Address: Email: Phone: Cell: Fax: EPSC bid sheet and contract agreement (section 22-32(a) performance bonds) LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES Contractor's license (copy of certificate): Name: Address: Email: Phone: Cell: Fax: Retaining walls: Y / N Approved: Y / N Permit: Y / N Plans review: Fee amount: Conditions/comments: Land disturbance permit #: Fee amount: Conditions/comments: Erosion control permit #: Fee amount: C/O Conditions/comments: BMP verified/date: As-built survey and certificate letter (digital, PDF, hard copy and stamped letter): Final inspection/date: LOC: *******NOTE - IN ATTENDANCE AT THE PRECON MEETING MUST BE******* Owner or designee with legal proof Staff from city as indicated: Contractor (job project manager) Roads Erosion control firm designee Sewers Geo-tech or designee Planning and zoning Engineering/consultant Public works at large  
APPENDIX C.2. - TENNESSEE GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER PERMIT CERTIFICATION 
Tennessee General Construction Stormwater Permit Certification Mt. Juliet Department of Public Works Please fill out and sign/date one of the following two statements: 1. The project associated with these submitted plans is covered under Tennessee General Stormwater Permit TN ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . ____________ ____________ Signature Date Circle one: Developer Project Engineer Other ____________ (If an NOI has been submitted to the state for this project, its assigned permit number can be acquired by calling the Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control at 532-0667 or 532-0645.) Note: Plans may be submitted without the above permit number, however, no grading permit shall be released until the project's state general stormwater permit number is submitted. If you intend to submit the permit number at a later date, please check here. ____________ 2. I hereby certify that this project does not require coverage under a Tennessee general stormwater permit and is not part of a project over one acre or adjacent to a jurisdictional/hydrological determination watercourse. ____________ ____________ Signature Date Circle one: Developer Project Engineer Other ____________ Note: Projects of one or more acres require permit coverage, while projects of less than one acre may not require permit coverage when determined by stormwater per condition #2. Also, projects of less than five acres that are part of a total development project of five or more acres require permit coverage.  
Case Law reference- (If you are unsure whether your particular project requires coverage under a Tennessee general stormwater permit, please call the Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control at 650-7273). 
NPDES general permit 
    NPDES general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(a)  City's NPDES general permit is as follows: 
Tracking No. TNS075451 Under authority of the Tennessee Water Quality Control Act of 1977 (T.C.A. § 69-3-101 et seq.) and approval from the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the Water Quality Act of 1987, P.L. 100-4, the following operator of a small municipal separate storm sewer system is authorized to discharge stormwater runoff into the waters of the state in accordance with the various eligibility criteria, administrative procedures, program requirements, reporting requirements, etc., set forth in parts 1 through 7 of state small municipal separate storm sewer system NPDES general permit, issued February 27, 2003: Discharger: City of Mount Juliet Is authorized to discharge: stormwater runoff From the Mount Juliet separate storm sewer system located in:Wilson County To waters of the state, in accordance with the required program elements and other conditions set forth in the Tennessee small MS4 general permit: Coverage under this general permit shall become effective on: July 7, 2003 and shall expire on February 26, 2008. Notice of coverage issued: July 3, 2003 July 7, 2003 Mr. Rob Shearer City of Mount Juliet, City Manager 2425 N. Mt. Juliet Road Mt. Juliet, TN 37121 Subject: NPDES Permit Tracking No. TNS075451 Mount Juliet MS4 Dear Mr. Shearer: The Mount Juliet municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) is hereby covered under the Tennessee phase II MS4 general permit. Enclosed in this package should be a copy of your notice of coverage (NOC) and a complete copy of the permit (29 pages). We are issuing coverage under the permit in response to your notice of intent (NOI) received by us on March 27, 2003, and reviewed by our local office in Nashville and the permit section in Nashville.  
(b)  The permit requires that you begin implementing six stormwater management measures. You must submit annual reports each year, beginning September 30, 2004, reporting on implementation of these programs. We point out two items, which especially affect ordinances, staff training and budgeting: 
(1)  You must ensure that certain ordinances be in place by December 31, 2004; the persons involved in reviewing and approving ordinances will need education on these issues and need time to review the ordinances; and 
(2)  To implement the construction site runoff control program by December 31, 2005, your staff must be trained in review of erosion prevention and sediment control plans and inspection and enforcement protocol; you may need additional staff for this program. 
(c)  You may access the permit in electronic format and find links to various compliance assistance resources by visiting our web page at www.state.tn.us/environment/upc/stormh2o/MS4II.php. 
(d)  If you have questions, please contact the division of water pollution control at your local environmental assistance center at 1-888-891-TDEC; or, at this office, please contact Mr. Jim McAdoo at (615)532-0684 or by email at Jim.McAdoo@state.tn.us. 
(Ord. No. 2004-36, app. C.4, 8-23-2004) 
APPENDIX C.3 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT 
Stormwater Maintenance Agreement Map No: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Parcel No: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ THIS AGREEMENT, made to and entered into this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year, ____________ , by and between ____________ (hereinafter called the "land owner") and The City of Mt. Juliet, (hereinafter called the "city"). WITNESSETH, that: WHEREAS The City of Mt. Juliet has adopted and approved certain technical guidelines relating to the policy on management and treatment of stormwater in the City of Mt. Juliet; and WHEREAS, the land owner is the owner of certain real property, more particularly described as ____________ ____________ ____________ , as recorded by deed in the land records of Wilson County, Tennessee in Deed Book ____________ , Page ____________ , Facility No. 1 Out-Fall Structure GPS (NAD-88) Latitude: ____________ , Longitude: ____________ , Facility No. 2 Out-Fall Structure GPS(NAD-88) Latitude: ____________ , Longitude: ____________ (hereinafter called the "property"); and attach other structures longitude/latitude on a separate sheet. WHEREAS, the land owner is proceeding to build on and develop the property; and WHEREAS, the site plan/subdivision plan, ____________ , prepared by ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , on file at the City of Mt. Juliet (hereinafter called the "plan"), which is expressly made a part hereof, as approved or to be approved by the city, provides for management and/or treatment of stormwater within the confines of the property; and WHEREAS, the city and the land owner agree that the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Mt. Juliet require that onsite stormwater management and/or treatment facilities be constructed and maintained on the property; and WHEREAS, the city requires that onsite stormwater facilities as shown on Plan ____________ be constructed and adequately maintained by the land owner; NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows: 1. The land owner in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the plan shall construct the onsite stormwater management and/or treatment facilities. 2. The pand owner shall maintain the stormwater management and/or treatment facilities as shown on Plan ____________ in good working order acceptable to the city, and in accordance with the required program elements and other conditions set forth in the Tennessee small MS4 general permit effective July 7, 2003, and as provided by approval of a site development plan and/or subdivision plan or a condition of said approval by the City of Mt. Juliet Regional Planning Commission. 3. The land owner hereby grants permission to the city, its authorized agents, and employees to enter the property and to inspect the stormwater management and/or treatment facilities whenever it deems necessary. Whenever possible, the city shall notify the land owner prior to entering the property. 4. In the event, the land owner fails to maintain stormwater management and/or treatment facilities as shown on Plan ____________ in good working order acceptable to the city, the city may enter the property and take whatever steps it deems necessary to maintain said stormwater management and/or treatment facilities. This provision shall not be construed to allow the city to erect any structure of a permanent nature on the land of the land owner without first obtaining written approval of the land owner. It is expressly understood and agreed that the city is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the city. 5. In the event, the city, pursuant to this agreement, performs work of any nature, or expands any funds in the performance of said work for labor, use equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the land owner shall reimburse the city upon demand, within ten days of receipt thereof for all costs incurred by the city. 6. It is the intent of this agreement to insure the proper and timely maintenance of onsite stormwater management and/or treatment facilities by the land owner; provided, however, that this agreement shall not be deemed to create or affect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater management. 7. The land owner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and any other successors in interest, shall indemnify and hold the city and its agents and employees harmless for any and all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrence, or claims which might arise or be asserted against the city from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the stormwater management and or treatment facilities by the land owner or the city. 8. In the event a claim is asserted against the city, its agents, or employees, the city shall notify the land owner, and the land owner shall defend at his own expense any suit based on such claim. if the judgment or claims against the city, its agent, or employees shall be allowed, the land owner shall pay all costs and expenses in connection therewith. 9. This agreement shall be recorded among the land records of Wilson County, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding of the land owner, its administrators, executors, assigns, heirs, and any other successors in interest. 10. WITNESS the following signatures and seals: ____________ ____________ The City of Mt. Juliet Developer By: ____________ By: ____________ Director of Public Works Authorized Agent of Development ATTEST: ____________ Date: ____________ Prepared by: ____________ I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, whose commission expires on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ , do certify that ____________ whose names are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing the date of the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ , have acknowledged the same before me in my said county and state aforesaid. GIVEN under my hand this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ , Notary Public STATE OF TENNESSEE COUNTY OF WILSON I, ____________ , a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid, whose commission expires on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ , do certify that ____________ Director of Public Works, whose name is signed to the foregoing agreement bearing the date of ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ , has acknowledged the same before me in said county and state aforesaid. GIVEN under my hand this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , of the year ____________ . ____________ Notary Public  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Land Development Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  2-20-1997(Ord.) 1-101 Pt. A, § 1-101 1-102 Pt. A, § 1-102 1-103 Pt. A, § 1-103 1-104 Pt. A, § 1-104 1-105 Pt. A, § 1-105 1-106 Pt. A, § 1-106 1-107 Pt. A, § 1-107 1-108 Pt. A, § 1-108 1-109 Pt. A, § 1-109 1-110 Pt. A, § 1-110 1-111 Pt. A, § 1-111 1-112 Pt. A, § 1-112 1-113 Pt. A, § 1-113 1-114 Pt. A, § 1-114 2-101 Pt. A, § 2-101 2-102 Pt. A, § 2-102 2-103 Pt. A, § 2-103 2-104 Pt. A, § 2-104 2-105 Pt. A, § 2-105 2-106 Pt. A, § 2-106 3-101 Pt. A, § 3-101 3-102 Pt. A, § 3-102 3-103 Pt. A, § 3-103 3-104 Pt. A, § 3-104 3-105 Pt. A, § 3-105 3-106 Pt. A, § 3-106 3-107 Pt. A, § 3-107 4-101 Pt. A, § 4-101 4-102 Pt. A, § 4-102 4-103 Pt. A, § 4-103 4-104 Pt. A, § 4-104 4-105 Pt. A, § 4-105 4-106 Pt. A, § 4-106 4-107 Pt. A, § 4-107 4-108 Pt. A, § 4-108 4-109 Pt. A, § 4-109 4-110 Pt. A, § 4-110 4-111 Pt. A, § 4-111 4-112 Pt. A, § 4-112 4-113 Pt. A, § 4-113 5-101 Pt. A, § 5-101 5-102 Pt. A, § 5-102 5-103 Pt. A, § 5-103 5-104 Pt. A, § 5-104 5-105 Pt. A, § 5-105 6-101 Pt. A, § 6-101 6-102 Pt. A, § 6-102 2001-34 10-22-2001 Pt. B, § 3-106 Pt. B, § 4-101 Pt. B, § 4-105 Pt. B, §§ 5-101-5-104 Pt. B, § 8-207 2002-23  8-12-2002 Pt. B, §§ 8-203, 8-204 2003-40  9- 8-2003 Pt. B, § 2-103 Pt. B, § 3-104 Pt. B, § 5-104 Pt. B, § 6-103 2004-34  8- 9-2004 Pt. B, § 2-103 Pt. B, § 3-104 Pt. B, § 4-105 Pt. B, § 5-102 2005-05  3-14-2005 Pt. B, § 5-104 Pt. B, §§ 6-101-6-103 2005-09  4-25-2005 Pt. B, §§ 8-500-8-503 2005-35 12-12-2005 Pt. B, § 5-104 Pt. B, §§ 6-103, 6-104 2006-04  2- 6-2006 Pt. B, § 5-104 Pt. B, § 6-103 2007-21  5-29-2007 Pt. B, § 13-104 Pt. B, § 14-101 2007-22  5-29-2007 Pt. B, § 2-103 Pt. B, § 3-104 2007-32  8-13-2007 Pt. B, § 8-203 Pt. B, § 8-207 2008-59  9-22-2008 Pt. B, § 8-304 2009-01  1-12-2009 Pt. B, §§ 2-101-2-103 2009-13  1-26-2009 Pt. B, § 8-304 2009-07  2- 9-2009 Pt. B, § 3-104 2009-15  3- 9-2009 1(8-301)- 
1(8-305) Pt. B, §§ 8-301-8-305 2009-23  5-11-2009 Pt. B, § 13-104 Pt. B, § 14-103 2009-24  5-11-2009 Pt. B, § 8-304 2009-42  7-27-2009 1 Pt. A, § 4-108.2 10-23-2009(Ord.) 1-101-1-109 Pt. B, §§ 1-101-1-109 1-109 Pt. B, § 1-110 2-101, 2-102 Pt. B, §§ 2-101, 2-102 2-102 Pt. B, § 2-103 3-101-3-106 Pt. B, §§ 3-101-3-106 4-101-4-105 Pt. B, §§ 4-101-4-105 5-101, 5-102 Pt. B, §§ 5-101, 5-102 5-102 Pt. B, § 5-104 5-103 Pt. B, § 5-103 6-101-6-104 Pt. B, §§ 6-101-6-104 7-101.2 Pt. B, § 7-101 7-102-7-104 Pt. B, §§ 7-102-7-104 8-101 Pt. B, § 8-101 8-201-8-208 Pt. B, §§ 8-201-8-208 8-301-8-307 Pt. B, §§ 8-301-8-307 8-401 Pt. B, § 8-401 8-500-8-503 Pt. B, §§ 8-500-8-503 9-101-9-106 Pt. B, §§ 9-101-9-106 10-101- 
10-104 Pt. B, §§ 10-101-10-104 10-106 Pt. B, §§ 10-105, 10-106 10-107-10-115 Pt. B, §§ 10-107-10-115 2010-37  7-12-2010 1 Pt. B, § 3-103.3 2 Pt. B, § 3-104.7(4) 3 Pt. B, § 6-102 4 Pt. B, § 7-102 2010-41  8- 9-2012 1 Pt. B, § 2-103.3 2 Pt. B, § 3-104.7(4)c 3 Pt. B, § 3-104.7(4)d 4 Pt. B, § 6-102 2011-36  7-11-2011 1 Pt. B, § 6-103 2011-01(Res.)  4-21-2011 1       Added Pt. A, § 4-114 2 Pt. A, § 1-112 2011-19  4-25-2011 1 Pt. B, § 2-102 2 Pt. B, § 5-103.5 3.b Amend. of  7-21-2011 Pt. A, § 3-101.2 2011-70 12-12-2011 1 Pt. B, § 9-104.4 Amend. of 12-15-2011 Pt. A, § 5-104.3 2012-22  4- 9-2012 1 Pt. B, § 11-106.2(h)(2) 2012-35  6-11-2012 1       Added Pt. B, § 8-203.10.4 2012-44  7-23-2012 2 Pt. B, § 4-102.2 2012-45  7-23-2012 4 Pt. B, § 14-110 2012-59  9-24-2012 1, 2       Added Pt. B, § 3.106.H, I 3       Added Pt. B, § 11-106.1(m) Memo. of 12-20-2012 Pt. A, § 5-104.3 2013-3  1-14-2013 1 Pt., B, § 2-102.2 2 Pt., B, § 3-103.2(9)b 3       Added Pt., B, § 3-104.6(7)f 4 Pt., B, § 6-102.1 2013-04  1-14-2013 1       Added Pt., B, § 6-103.3.3 2013-14  2-11-2013 1       Added Pt., B, § 11-104.4 2013-17  2-11-2013 1 Pt., B, § 2-103.3 2 Pt., B, § 3-103.3.6 3       Added Pt., B, § 3-104.7(5)f 4 Pt., B, § 6-102 5 Pt., B, § 11-106.4.b.4 Memo. of  3-18-2013       Added Pt. A, § 1-113       Rnmb Pt. A, §§ 1-113, 1-114       as Pt. A, §§ 1-114, 1-115 2013-34  3-25-2013 1(Exh. A)       Dltd Pt. B, §§ 11-101-11-109       Added Pt. B, §§ 11-101-11-110 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Pt. A, § 2-103.9 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Pt. A, § 3-101.1, 3-101.2 Amend. of  5-16-2013 Pt. A, § 3-101.6 2013-26  2-25-2013 1 3-103.4.3.a 2013-27  2-25-2013 1 5-103.5.3.a 2013-49  6-10-2013 1 6-102 2013-53  7- 8-2013 1       Added 3-103.1.3 2 6-101.2.3, 6 3 6-102 4 6-104.1 2013-54  7- 8-2013 1(Exh. A) 3-106 2013-70 10-14-2013 1 2-102.2 2 2-103.3 3 3-102 4 3-103.3 5 3-104.7 6 7-102 7 8-401 2013-81 11-25-2013       Added Pt. C, §§ 1-11 2014-08  2-10-2014 1 2-102 2 6-101.2.3, 6 3 6-102 4 6-104.1 5 8-207 2014-9  2-10-2014 1(Att.)       Added Pt. C, § 12 2014-21  3-24-2014 1(Exh. A)       Dltd 11-101-11-110       Added 11-101-11-110 2014-24  4-14-2014 1 7-102 2014-31  4-14-2014 1 3-103.3 7-102 2014-38  5-12-2014 1 3-104.9.4 Amend. of  [7- 2-2014] App. C, §§ 1.1-5.10 2014-42  6- 9-2014 Pt. B, § 2-013 Pt. B, § 3-103.3 Pt. B, § 6-102 Pt. B, § 7-102 2014-43  6- 9-2014 1       Added Pt. B, § 6-103.7.c 2014-58  8-11-2014 1 3-104.6.8.c.v 2014-66 10-27-2014 1 Pt. B, § 8-207.5.4.c.iv 2014-67 10-27-2014 1       Added Pt. B, § 7-103.7 2014-68 10-27-2014 1       Added Pt. B, § 6-103.7.d 2015-4  1-12-2015 1 Pt. B, § 9-106.1 2015-23  6- 8-2015 1 Pt. B, § 7-102.5 2015-28  7-13-2015 1 Pt. B, § 3-104.6 2015-34  8-24-2015 1(Att.) Pt. A, § 4-114 Pt. B, § 5-104.4 2015-41  9-14-2015 1 Pt. B, § 3-103.3(1)(b) 2-102 2015-43 11-23-2015 1, 2 Pt. B, § 6-103.7 2015-44 11-23-2015 1       Added Pt. B, § 7-103.8 2       Added Pt. B, § 7-103.9 3       Dltd Pt. B, § 7-104.2.3.d 16-2286 10-15-2015 Pt. A, § 4-103.103 2016-5  2- 8-2016 1 Pt. B, § 6-102.1 Res. of  3-17-2016       Added § I-IV App. B, ST-102, App. B, ST-105, App. B, ST-108, App. B, ST-112, App. B, ST-200, App. B, ST-203, App. B, ST-204, App. B, ST-210, App. B, ST-212, App. B, ST-313, App. B, ST-314       Dltd App. B, ST-101A, App. B, ST-101B, App. B, ST-106, App. B, ST-109, App. B, ST-111       Added App. B, ST-115, App. B, ST-118, App. B, ST-130, App. B, ST-260 2016-13  3-28-2016 1 Pt. B, § 6-103.7.2 2016-24  4-25-2016 1 Pt. B, § 104.7.3 Pt. B, § 3-104.7.9-11 2 Pt. B, § 6-102.1 3 Pt. B, § 6-104.3.3.b 2016-28  5-23-2016 1 Pt. C, § 12 2016-30  6-13-2016 1(Exh. A)       Rpld Pt. B, §§ 11-101-11-110       Added Pt. B, §§ 11-101-11-110 2016-36  7-11-2016 1 Pt. B, § 3-103.3.9 2 Pt. B, § 6-102.1 2016-40  8- 8-2016 1 Pt. B, § 5-104.1.4.e 2 Pt. B, § 5-104.4 3 Pt. B, § 6-103.7 4       Added Pt. B, § 7-103.10 2017-01  1- 9-2017 1 Pt. B, § 11-106(b)(1) 2017-03  1- 9-2017 1 Pt. B, § 6-102.1 2017-21  3-27-2017 1 Pt. B, § 3-104.6.7.e 2017-27  5- 8-2017 1 Pt. B, § 6-103.3 2017-28  5- 8-2017 1, 2 Pt. B, § 9-103.2.3 2017-29  5- 8-2017 1 Pt. B, § 11-103.D.3 Pt. B, § 11-103.C 2017-34  6-12-2017 1 Pt. B, § 3-104.7.2 2017-43  7-10-2017 1 Pt. B, § 5-104.4 2017-61 10-23-2017 1 Pt. B, § 14-110.1(1) 2017-62 10-23-2017 1 Pt. B, § 7-103.9 2017-66 12-11-2017 1 Pt. B, § 6-102.1 2018-26  7- 9-2018 1 Pt. B, § 11-108.C.3 2018-28  8-13-2018 1 Pt. B, § 11-103.E.2  
